CHAPTER I

EARLY PROMISE

     God acts upon earth only by means of superior chosen men.
                          --HERDER: _Ideas Toward a History of Mankind_.


As life broadens with advancing culture, and people are able to
appropriate to themselves more of the various forms of art, the artist
himself attains to greater power, his abilities increase in direct ratio
with the progress in culture made by the people and their ability to
comprehend him. When one side or phase of an art comes to be received,
new and more difficult problems are invariably presented, the
elucidation of which can only be effected by a higher development of the
faculties. There is never an approach to equilibrium between the artist
and his public. As it advances in knowledge of his art, he maintains the
want of balance, the disproportion that always exists between the genius
and the ordinary man, by rising ever to greater heights.

If Bach is the mathematician of music, as has been asserted, Beethoven
is its philosopher. In his work the philosophic spirit comes to the
fore. To the genius of the musician is added in Beethoven a wide mental
grasp, an altruistic spirit, that seeks to help humanity on the upward
path. He addresses the intellect of mankind.

Up to Beethoven's time musicians in general (Bach is always an
exception) performed their work without the aid of an intellect for the
most part; they worked by intuition. In everything outside their art
they were like children. Beethoven was the first one having the
independence to think for himself--the first to have ideas on subjects
unconnected with his art. He it was who established the dignity of the
artist over that of the simply well-born. His entire life was a protest
against the pretensions of birth over mind. His predecessors, to a great
extent subjugated by their social superiors, sought only to please.
Nothing further was expected of them. This mental attitude is apparent
in their work. The language of the courtier is usually polished, but
will never have the virility that characterizes the speech of the free
man.

As with all valuable things, however, Beethoven's music is not to be
enjoyed for nothing. We must on our side contribute something to the
enterprise, something more than simply buying a ticket to the
performance. We must study his work in the right spirit, and place
ourselves in a receptive attitude when listening to it to understand his
message. Often metaphysical, particularly in the work of his later
years, his meaning will be revealed only when we devote to it earnest
and sympathetic study. No other composer demands so much of one; no
other rewards the student so richly for the effort required. The making
a fact the subject of thought vitalizes it. It is as if the master had
said to the aspirant: "I will admit you into the ranks of my disciples,
but you must first prove yourself worthy." An initiation is necessary;
somewhat of the intense mental activity which characterized Beethoven in
the composition of his works is required of the student also. There is a
tax imposed for the enjoyment of them.

Like Thoreau, Beethoven came on the world's stage "just in the nick of
time," and almost immediately had to begin hewing out a path for
himself. He was born in the workshop, as was Mozart, and learned music
simultaneously with speaking. Stirring times they were in which he first
saw the light, and so indeed continued with ever-increasing intensity,
like a good drama, until nearly his end. The American Revolution became
an accomplished fact during his boyhood. Nearer home, events were fast
coming to a focus, which culminated in the French Revolution. The magic
words, Liberty, Equality, Fraternity, and the ideas for which they
stood, were everywhere in the minds of the people. The age called for
enlightenment, spiritual growth.

On reaching manhood, he found a world in transition; he realized that he
was on the threshold of a new order of things, and with ready prescience
took advantage of such as could be utilized in his art. Through
Beethoven the resources of the orchestra were increased, an added range
was given the keyboard of the piano, the human voice was given tasks
that at the time seemed impossible of achievement. He established the
precedent, which Wagner acted on later, of employing the human voice as
a tool, an instrument, to be used in the exigencies of his art, as if it
were a part of the orchestra.

Beethoven's birthplace, Bonn, no doubt proved a favorable soil for the
propagation of the new ideas. The unrest pervading all classes, an
outcome of the Revolution, showed itself among the more serious-minded
in increased intellectuality, and a reaching after higher things. This
_Zeitgeist_ is clearly reflected in his compositions, in particular the
symphonies and sonatas. "Under the lead of Italian vocalism," said
Wagner, speaking of the period just preceding the time of which we
write, "music had become an art of sheer agreeableness." The beautiful
in music had been sufficiently exploited by Mozart and Haydn. Beethoven
demonstrated that music has a higher function than that of mere beauty,
or the simple act of giving pleasure. The beautiful in literature is not
its best part. To the earnest thinker, the seeker after truth, the
student who looks for illumination on life's problem, beauty in itself
is insufficient. It is the best office of art, of Beethoven's art in
particular, that it leads ever onward and upward; that it acts not only
on the esthetic and moral sense, but develops the mental faculties as
well, enabling the individual to find a purpose and meaning in life.

       *       *       *       *       *

Ludwig van Beethoven was born at Bonn, December 16, 1770. He came of a
musical family. His father and grandfather were both musicians at Bonn,
at the Court of the Elector of Cologne. The family originally came from
Louvain, and settled in Antwerp in 1650, from which place they moved to
Bonn.

This old city on the Rhine, frequently mentioned by Tacitus, older than
Christianity, the scene of innumerable battles from Roman times up to
the beginning of the nineteenth century, has much that is interesting
about it, but is distinguished chiefly on account of having been
Beethoven's birthplace. It was for five centuries (from 1268 to 1794) in
the possession of the Electors of Cologne. The last one of all, Max
Franz, who succeeded to the Electorate when Beethoven was fourteen years
of age, and who befriended him in various ways was, in common with the
entire Imperial family, a highly cultivated person, especially in music.
He was the youngest son of Maria Therese, Empress of Austria, herself a
fine singer and well versed in the music of the time. The Elector played
the viola and his chief interest in life seems to have been music. In
Beethoven's time and long before, the aristocracy led lives of easy,
complacent enjoyment, dabbling in art, patronizing music and the
composers, seemingly with no prevision that the musicians whom they
attached to their train, and who in the cases of Mozart and Haydn were
at times treated but little better than lackeys, were destined by the
irony of fate to occupy places in the temple of fame, which would be
denied themselves.

Ludwig van Beethoven, the grandfather of the composer, received his
appointment as Kapellmeister at Bonn in March of 1733, then twenty-one
years of age. A little more than a century afterward a statue was
erected there in the Münster Platz to his illustrious grandson, Liszt
being the moving spirit in the matter. The grandfather was in every way
a worthy man, but he died when our composer was three years of age, and
from that time poverty and hardship of all kinds was the portion of the
family. Beethoven's father was careless and improvident. His salary of
300 florins, about $145, was all they had upon which to live. The
mother was the daughter of a cook and the widow of a _valet de chambre_
to one of the Electors. She was kind-hearted, of pleasant temper and
lovable disposition, and the affection between mother and son was deep
and lasting. The father was stern, and a strict disciplinarian, as so
often happens in such cases. He was determined that the son should do
better than himself, being willing to furnish the precept, if not the
example.

Reared in this school of adversity the boy had a hard life. His father
was his first teacher, teaching him both violin and clavier. He began
with him as early as his fourth year; he seems to have been aware of the
boy's ability, but had no consideration, and was a hard taskmaster.
Before he was nine years of age, however, the boy's progress was so
great that the father had no more to teach him.

In those times the musical life centered about the Court. Beethoven
studied the organ under the court organist, Van den Eeden, an old friend
of his grandfather's. Van den Eeden was succeeded shortly after by
Christian Neefe, and Beethoven, then eleven years of age, was
transferred to him. Neefe had an important bearing on Beethoven's life.
He was in his best years, thirty-three, when he began teaching him, and
was a thorough musician, who had had a varied experience before assuming
this post. He was a university man as well, and it was fortunate for
Beethoven in every way that he was brought in childhood under the
influence of so cultivated and enthusiastic a musician. Neefe saw the
boy's talent and became his friend. On one occasion the Elector took his
musicians to Münster where he had a palace, Neefe's duties requiring
that he go with them. Beethoven, then under twelve years of age, was
left behind as organist. Frimmel states that Neefe, on assuming the
position, reserved the privilege of absenting himself frequently from
his post, on condition that he provide a substitute. After the Münster
episode, the twelve-year-old Beethoven became the regular substitute.
When we consider the important rôle that church music played in those
times, such precocity is remarkable. This connection with church music
bore good fruit in later years.

Neefe was soon after promoted, the Elector giving him charge of the
secular as well as the sacred music of the Court, upon which Beethoven
received his first appointment, that of cembalist of the orchestra. The
duty of the cembalist is to preside at the piano. Only a good musician
would be capable of filling such a position, as all the accompaniments
were played from the score. He held this for two years, afterward
playing viol in the orchestra for several years more. This work in the
orchestra was later of the greatest possible benefit to him in
composing. There was no salary at first, but the post had an important
bearing on his life, as he was obliged to attend all the rehearsals as
well as the performances of the opera, always taking an active part.
Before he reached the age of fifteen he was appointed second court
organist. During this year he studied the violin with Franz Ries, which
enabled him a few years later to play in the band.

It was in Beethoven's fifteenth year that he played the organ every
morning at the six o'clock mass in the Minorite church. For some years
before and during this period he was busy trying his hand at musical
composition, but nothing which he composed during his youth amounts to
much. He could improvise in a marvelous manner and he attracted much
attention by the exercise of this talent, becoming famous in this
connection long before he was known as a composer.

His creative talent unfolded itself slowly. He had high ideals and
worked faithfully toward their attainment. Failure to reach the level of
his aspirations did not dishearten him; rather it spurred him on to
greater effort.

The discerning intellect is always in advance of the creative. His
delight in Bach was great; he studied him to such purpose that, at
twelve years, he was able to play the greater part of the Well-tempered
Clavichord. His wonderful interpretation of Bach, later, on his arrival
in Vienna, immediately placed him in the front rank of _virtuosi_,
according to Hüttenbrenner, Schubert's friend.

As a boy he was docile, shy and reserved, caring nothing for the
ordinary games of boys, or at least not participating in them to any
extent. At an age when other boys begin learning their games, he began
in composition, being forced to it, no doubt, by his father. He is said
to have written a cantata at the age of ten to the memory of an English
friend of the family, who died early in the year 1781. Some variations
on a march in C minor bear the following statement: _Composées par un
jeune amateur L v B age de dix ans_.

From year to year he kept on in musical composition, feeling his way,
not discouraged by his inability to produce anything great, although
Mozart's precocity and genius were no doubt frequently held up to him by
others as an example to profit by. When he was seventeen he went to
Vienna, the funds for the trip probably being furnished by the Elector.
Here he met Mozart, then at the height of his fame, whose operas were
frequently produced in Bonn and throughout Germany. He probably had some
lessons from him. Mozart was very much occupied with the approaching
production of Don Giovanni, which took place in Prague shortly after the
young man's arrival. As Beethoven's visit terminated in three months, it
is not likely that he derived much benefit from these lessons. On his
first meeting with the master he extemporized for him on a subject given
him by Mozart. That this was a momentous occasion to the impressionable
Beethoven is certain. The emotions called up by the meeting enabled him
to play with such effect that when he had finished, the well-known
remark was elicited from Mozart: "Pay attention to him. He will make a
noise in the world some day."

Beethoven, however, was compelled to return to Bonn, owing to the
serious illness of his mother, who died of consumption July 17, 1787. He
now took charge of the family and had a hard life from almost every
point of view, his one enjoyment probably being in the exercise of his
art. The affection between mother and son was one of the few bright
spots in a boyhood of toil and privation. The father's harshness served
to accentuate the kindness of the mother, and he felt her death keenly.
He gave a few lessons, most unwillingly, the money from which, together
with his salary as assistant organist and a portion of the father's
salary, kept the family together, affording them some degree of comfort.

His return, no doubt, retarded his artistic development. The musical
atmosphere of Vienna would have been much better for him, especially at
this period, when he was entering manhood and eager to get at the works
of contemporary composers. In those times only a small amount of the
music that was written, was published. Many of the lesser works were
composed merely to grace some social function, with but little thought
given them as to their ultimate fate. It was customary to play from
manuscript, copies of which were not readily attainable. In a city like
Vienna new music was constantly being produced, occasionally at public
concerts, but most often at social gatherings. The freemasonry existing
among musicians and the wealthy amateurs was such that a musician of any
talent was sure to be received, and put on a friendly footing. No other
city in Europe afforded such opportunities for musical culture as did
Vienna. It was the home of Mozart and Haydn and a host of lesser
composers, as well as instrumentalists and singers. Music in one form or
another was the chief diversion of the better classes, the wealthier of
whom maintained their private orchestra. Many of these latter were fine
performers, taking part regularly in the concerts given by their
orchestras.

The next year we find Beethoven taking his meals at the Zehrgarten,
where artists, professors from the university, and other notable people
congregated. It was at this period that he made the acquaintance of
Count Ferdinand Waldstein, the first of the aristocratic circle of
friends which surrounded him all his life. Count Waldstein at
twenty-four, on coming of age, entered the Germanic order, passing the
year of his novitiate at the Court of the Elector at Bonn. The senior by
eight years, his influence over Beethoven was considerable, as is
evidenced in many ways. The Count was an enthusiastic amateur, visiting
him frequently. He gave him a piano, and was useful to him in many ways.
The social position of Count Waldstein was such that his friendly
attitude toward Beethoven at once attracted the attention of others to
the young musician. From this time on he was able to choose his friends
from among the best people of his native city. The young man
commemorated the friendship by taking an air of the Count's, who was
somewhat of a composer, and composing twelve variations for four hands
for the piano from it. Later, in 1805, after the Eroica Symphony and
Fidelio, when the master had become famous, he composed the great
Waldstein Sonata, opus 58, and dedicated it to him. The Waldstein family
became extinct with Ferdinand, but the name will live for centuries
through these compositions.

About the time of his first meeting with Count Waldstein, Beethoven made
another acquaintance, which had an important bearing on his subsequent
life. This was Von Breuning. He and Beethoven took violin lessons of
Franz Ries. Stephen von Breuning liked Beethoven from the start and
introduced him at his mother's house. The Breunings were in good
circumstances, cultivated, good-natured and hospitable. They delighted
in having him about, and treated him with the utmost consideration.
Madame von Breuning formed a sincere, motherly affection for him; he was
soon on a footing in their house almost equal to that of a member of the
family. He went with them about this time on a visit to some of their
relations in another city. They were instrumental in shaping his
destiny in various ways, and their friendship was of great moment to him
throughout life. Beethoven, then in his eighteenth year, gave lessons to
the daughter Eleonore, as well as to the youngest son, Lenz. Eleonore
afterward married Dr. Wegeler, who was in the same circle. Many years
later he collaborated with Ries's son Ferdinand in writing reminiscences
of the master.

The names of Count Waldstein and the Von Breunings are indelibly
associated with Beethoven's name as friends from the beginning. When we
consider how every circumstance of Beethoven's family and mode of life
tended against his forming desirable friendships, how rough in exterior
and careless of his appearance he was, we can ascribe it only to the
force of his character that he should have the friendship of such
people. He had done nothing as yet to lead people to believe that he
would ever become a great composer. As has been stated, however, he was
a pianist of great originality, with a remarkable talent for
improvising, which, no doubt, had much to do in making him a welcome
guest wherever he went.

Madame von Breuning, with her woman's tact, and the fine intuitive
perceptions that were characteristic of her, looked after his
intellectual development, and was helpful to him in various ways,
encouraging him as well in his musical studies. But Beethoven was by no
means an easy person to get along with, as she soon found out. He was
fiery and headstrong, disliking all restraint, being especially
impatient of anything that savored of patronage. She seems to have known
that in Beethoven she had before her that rarest product of humanity, a
man of genius, and had infinite patience with him. His dislike for
teaching was pronounced, then, as in after years, and she was often at
her wits' end to get him to keep his engagements in this respect. She,
in short, did for Beethoven what Madame Boehme did for Goethe many years
before, when the poet left his native Frankfort and came to Leipsic. He
was but sixteen, and found in her a friend, counsellor, almost a mother,
who not only instructed him about dress and deportment, which soon
enabled him to obliterate his provincialism, but showed a motherly
solicitude for him, which must have been of great help to him in many
ways.

Madame von Breuning interested Beethoven in the classics, as well as in
contemporary philosophical literature. Lessing, Goethe and Schiller
became favorite authors with him. A much-thumbed translation of
Shakespeare was a valued part of his small library in after years. He
devoted much study to Homer and to Plato. Beethoven left school at the
age of thirteen, and could not have given much time to his studies even
when at school, as so much was required of him in his music. He learned
a little--a very little, of French, also some Latin and Italian, and
made up for his deficiencies by studying at home. Intellectual gifts
were valued by the Von Breunings; to the youth, in his formative period,
association with people like these was an education in itself.

About this time the Elector enlarged the sphere of his musical
operations by establishing a national opera at Bonn, modeled after the
one maintained by his imperial brother at Vienna. The works were
produced on a good scale, and some excellent singers were engaged.
Beethoven was appointed to play the viola, and this connection with the
orchestra was of inestimable value to him in many ways. It not only gave
him a knowledge of orchestration; it also made him familiar with the
noted operas, which must have been greatly enjoyed by him. Mozart's
operas were given a prominent place in the _répertoire_, and many others
that were noteworthy were introduced. But it was not opera alone which
was being performed; the drama was also represented, and his connection
with the orchestra gave him an intimate acquaintance with the
masterpieces of literature, which greatly influenced his subsequent
career. The tragedies of Shakespeare were occasionally produced, special
prominence, however, being given to the works of the great Germans,
Lessing, Schiller and other philosophers and poets of the Fatherland,
the exalted sentiments and pure intellectuality of which are unmatched
by any people. This early acquaintance with the best literature of his
time gave him an intellectual bias which served him well all his life.
It is fortunate that his opportunity came so early in life, when the
activity of the brain is at its highest and when lasting impressions are
produced. The mental pictures called up by the portrayal of these
tragedies came to the surface again in after years sublimated, refined,
in symphony and sonata, in mass and opera. Every one of his works has
its own story to tell; sometimes it is just the record of the events of
a day as in the Pastoral Symphony, but told with a glamour of poetry and
romance, that for the time gives us back our own youth in listening to
it; sometimes it is a tragedy which is unfolded, as in the Appassionata
Sonata or the Fifth Symphony; or it will be a Coriolanus Overture, that
seething, boiling ferment of emotion and passion, the most diverse,
contradictory, unlike, that can be imagined. From these impressions,
acquired in the ardor of youth, when the intellect grasps at knowledge
and experience with avidity, when its capacity is at its greatest, and
the whole world is laid under contribution, came a rich harvest which
untold generations may enjoy. No one of the many that made up the
audiences night after night, probably ever formed a guess at what was
going on in the brain of this quiet reserved youth during the progress
of these plays. The keen discriminating intelligence which was always
sifting and sorting these pictures and stowing them away for use in
after years,--the flashes of enthusiasm,--the intuitive discernment of
intellectual subtleties that brought him into _rapport_ with the author
and gave him the perception of being on an equality with the great ones
of the earth, here were forces already in operation which were destined
to influence the world for generations to come. To fall from this ideal
world of the intellect and the emotions, at the cue of the conductor,
back to the cognitions of ordinary life, and a realization of its
limitations, must have been as tragic an experience to this youth, who
said of himself: "I live only in my art," as any he had seen depicted on
the stage. Mental processes like these write their lines deeply on the
faces of gifted people.

Of the thirty-one members of the orchestra some had already attained
fame, and others achieved it in after years. In this collection of
geniuses the attrition of mind on mind must have been of benefit to
each. The conductor, Joseph Reicha, had a nephew, Anton Reicha, whom he
adopted, who played the flute in the orchestra. He and Beethoven were
intimate, and the prominence which Beethoven gives to the flute in his
orchestral works may in part be explained by this intimacy. Reicha
afterward joined Beethoven at Vienna, remaining there until 1808, when
he took up his residence in Paris. He was a prolific composer and the
author of numerous theoretical works. Many of his operas were produced
in Paris during his lifetime. He taught at the Paris Conservatoire, and
was a member of the Institute. Then there was Bernhard Romberg, and his
cousin Andreas Romberg. The latter was a musical prodigy, having played
the violin in concerts as early as his seventh year. At seventeen, his
virtuosity was such that he was engaged for the Concerts Spirituels at
Paris. Some years later he journeyed to Bonn to be near his cousin
Bernhard, with whom he was intimate, and accepted a position in the
Elector's orchestra as violinist. He later went to Vienna, then Hamburg,
and afterward became Kapellmeister at Gotha. He composed all kinds of
music, instrumental and vocal, symphonies, operas, etc. His setting of
Schiller's "Song of the Bell" is well known at the present day, as well
as the oratorio, "The Transient and the Eternal." He was made Doctor of
Music by Kiel University. Bernhard Romberg was a distinguished
violoncellist. When his connection with the Elector's orchestra ceased,
he made a professional tour to Italy and Spain with his more famous
cousin Andreas and was very successful. In 1796 they came to Vienna and
gave a concert at which Beethoven assisted. Bernhard afterward was a
professor in the Paris Conservatoire and later became Kapellmeister at
Berlin. He was a composer of operas, concertos, etc. While he and
Beethoven were not in accord on the subject of musical composition, each
disliking the other's works, there is no question but that his
proximity to him at Bonn, was one of the forces that had much to do with
Beethoven's artistic development.

Then there was Franz Ries, pupil of Salomon, the distinguished
violinist. Ries had already achieved fame in Vienna as soloist, and had
been before the public since childhood. He was Beethoven's teacher, as
stated. We must not forget Neefe, Beethoven's former teacher, who was
pianist, or Simrock, all of whom formed a galaxy of _virtuosi_ and
composers unequalled by any similar organization. Beethoven greatly
profited by his association with these chosen spirits, assimilating
their experiences and endeavoring to emulate them.

Thus passed a few years pleasantly enough during this formative period
at Bonn, music in one form or another taking up most of his waking
moments. He fell in love a few times, first with a Mlle. de Honrath of
Cologne, who visited the Von Breunings frequently and was their intimate
friend. She had a bright, lively disposition, and like a true daughter
of Eve, took great pleasure in bantering him. There was also a Miss
Westerhold who made a deep impression on him. Both were the subject of
conversation by him in after years.

The visit of Haydn, who with Salomon made a short sojourn at Bonn, on
their return from London to Vienna in July of 1792, gave Beethoven an
opportunity for an interview with the great master, which had an
important bearing on the young man's career. Salomon was acquainted with
the Beethovens as he was a native of Bonn. The fame of the young
musician had reached his ears, and he brought about the meeting with
Haydn. Beethoven at twenty-two, had, unlike so many promising children,
fulfilled the promise of his youth. He was not only a distinguished
performer: his compositions were also attracting attention in his
circle. In honor of the distinguished guests, a breakfast was arranged
at Godesburg, a resort near Bonn, at which some compositions of
Beethoven's were performed by the Elector's orchestra. Some of this
music had been submitted to the master previously. Haydn, who was in
holiday humor, seems to have been specially attracted to it, and
encouraged Beethoven to continue.

Some of the sketch-books of the Bonn period are in the British Museum,
and an examination of them is of interest as it shows his method of
composing. Beethoven all through life was a hard worker and a hard
taskmaster to himself. He elaborated and worked over his first
inspiration, polishing, cutting down, altering, making additions, never
satisfied, always aiming after the attainment of his highest ideals,
never considering himself, always placing his art first and personal
comfort and convenience afterward. This is apparent in the sketch-books
of this early date. His industry was extraordinary, although his work
grew but slowly. It was elaborated bit by bit in much the same way in
which Nathaniel Hawthorne built up his romances.

Haydn's approbation was an important link in the chain of circumstances
that was soon to enable Beethoven to leave for Vienna. Count Waldstein
was the moving spirit in this matter, the Elector furnishing the funds.
He knew that the artistic atmosphere of Vienna would be of incalculable
benefit to Beethoven and encouraged him in the project. Accordingly we
find him setting out for Vienna in 1792, leaving Bonn never to return to
it even for a visit.
