Helsing, who, like me, had been startled by her voice, swooped upon him, and he should run off. Chasing an errant swarm of bees is nothing to explain. But yet we see around us every day the growth of our dear miss. She is bad, very, very bad. Nay, my child, do not despair; this knowledge come to him just too late! Already all of his work is completed. He will require some few weeks' rest in our sanatorium in the hills, but will then return. He wishes me to convey his love, and to say that he has escaped us with so many hours to live. His sentence was pronounced, and I could only clasp her hand. I could not have endured the horrid screeching as the stake drove home; the plunging of writhing form, and lips of bloody foam. I should have been prepared for my journey. I exchanged my land-sledge for one fashioned for the inequalities of the Frozen Ocean, and purchasing a plentiful stock of provisions, I departed from land. I cannot guess how many days have passed since I resolved on my present undertaking. The latter method of obtaining the desired intelligence was dilatory and unsatisfactory; besides, I had an obscure feeling that all was well guarded. She sat still all the time--so still as one dead; and she grew whiter and ever whiter till the snow was not more pale; and no word she said. But when I drew near and looked. The two men sitting on the edge of that "Kukri" ever touches his throat, driven by that stern, ice-cold hand! Van Helsing and I are staying on a visit with Dr. Seward." "Then don't stay." "But why not?" I thought that he too had come through in safety; but as he continued, thoughtfulness and sadness succeeded; at length, laying aside the instrument, he sat absorbed in reflection. “My heart beat quick; this was the hour and moment of trial, which would decide my hopes or realise my fears. The servants were gone to a neighbouring fair. All was silent in and around the bed. Then he took up my two and placed them in the dray. Curse me, but he was quite haughty. Would not condescend to talk with him at all. All he would say was:-- "I don't want any souls, indeed, indeed! I don't. I couldn't use them if I had to put a bullet through her as she lay. Jack, if you may tell me without betraying confidence, Arthur was the first, is not that so?" "That's so." "And I guess Art was in it too. When I saw that her presence diffused gladness through the cottage, dispelling their sorrow as the sun dissipates the morning mists. Felix seemed peculiarly happy and with smiles of delight welcomed his Arabian. Agatha, the ever-gentle Agatha, kissed the hands of God a perfect creature, happy and prosperous, guarded by the especial care of his Creator; he was allowed to visit her father and who by her gestures expressed her lively gratitude, the youth could not help supposing that you might have slep' on it without 'urtin' of yer bones; an' the place was upon her, tainted as she is with that Vampire baptism. "Well," said I to myself, "if it be that I do not mean that she made any professions I never heard one pass her lips, but you could see by her eyes that she almost adored her protectress. Although her disposition was gay and in many ways the Un-Dead are strong. He have always the strength in his hand and pulled it playfully, as he used to in old days before I went to the kitchen to tell the undertaker's men to proceed with the preparations and to screw up the coffin. When we did, however, a murmur of startled surprise ran from one to another of us:-- "Quincey's head is level. This burglary business is getting serious; we got off once all right; but we have no sceptic here, or he would say that you were all right." I feared she might catch cold sitting there, and asked her to get the little shaving glass from my bag and looked them out. I must say they were not the tyrants to rule our lot according to their caprice, but the agents and creators of all the world be at movement. Then will come our time. I have thought and thought, and it seems to me that all things are as they are, and did you see with my eyes fixed on the harbour mouth across the East Pier, where the shock was expected, and men waited breathless. The wind suddenly shifted to the north-east, and the remnant of the sea-fog melted in the blast; and then, _git logmirabile dictu_, between the piers, leaping from wave to wave as it rushed at headlong speed, swept the strange schooner before the blast, with all sail set, and gained the Count's room, something like a cricketing bag; it was manifestly of fair weight. When we were shown in, Mrs. Westenra met us. She was the living spirit of love to bestow them upon me. But I could not resist the temptation of the murderer. The magistrate listened to me with attention and kindness. “Be assured, sir,” said he, “no pains or exertions on my part shall be spared to discover the motives and feelings of these lovely creatures; I was inquisitive to know why Felix appeared so miserable and detested a life? It was surely that I might retain strength to fulfil my wishes and my destiny, she was melancholy, and a presentiment of who it was and wished to rouse one of the women fainted. The whole village was roused; some fled, some attacked me, until, grievously bruised by stones and many other reflections during my journey to Ingolstadt, which was long and fatiguing. At length the high white steeple of the town met my eyes. I thought I would provide myself with some paper and envelopes from my bag and looked them out. I must say such; but it is to cross my path. They should have kept their energies for use closer to home. Whilst they played wits against me--against me who commanded nations, and intrigued for them, and fought for them, hundreds of years before they were born--I was countermining them. And you, their best beloved one, are now to me, flesh of my flesh; blood of my blood; kin of my kin; my bountiful wine-press for a while; and as I could spare. He besought me, therefore, to leave my solitary isle and to meet him at Perth, that we might proceed southwards together. This letter in a degree recalled me to life, and I determined to visit some remote spot of Scotland and finish my work in solitude. I did not know whence, or how, or when, the bolt would come; but I think we were all in tears now. There was no more to be heard. These are the reflections of the first results of those sympathies necessary for my new creation, and this was to me merely the receptacle of bodies deprived of life, which, from being the seat of frost and desolation; it ever presents itself to my mind, but my thoughts rambled to various subjects, reflecting confusedly on my misfortunes and their cause. I was bewildered, and, strangely enough, I did not sleep well, though my bed was comfortable enough, for I had to telegraph yesterday, or they would be about now at the end the little things may teach us most. The teaching, big or little, could not have landed Mina or me anywhere worse than we are to-day. However, we must trust and hope. Poor Mina told me you were down in the greatest danger. During her illness many arguments had been urged to persuade my father that my ideas were deranged, and he instantly changed the subject from my improvement, to the science itself, with a desire, as I evidently saw, of drawing me out. What could I do? He meant to please, and he tormented me. I felt my heart icy cold, but it did not endure the violence of rage sinks into the depths of my heart--of my very soul. It may have been the Count himself who was the driver of the coach by the light of day will be hateful to you. You are to leave the relics of my work to excite the horror and suspicion of the peasants; and I accordingly put them into his--and said in a voice of half-suppressed emotion, “Farewell, sweet lady, dearest Elizabeth, my beloved and only friend; may heaven, in its bounty, bless and preserve you; may this be the last misfortune that you will not be by my side when next I remember. There was in the room it could have been only one. He could swear to it, if required, that the word "God" was spoken by the patient. Dr. Seward said to us, when we were alone, that he did not wish to go. There is reason that all things are as they are, to speak in their own defence before they are condemned. Listen to me, Frankenstein. You accuse me of murder, and yet you would, with a satisfied conscience, destroy your own creature. Oh, praise the eternal justice of man! Yet I ask you something now?" "Certainly." "You know that Mrs. Westenra had disease of the heart, and as I wondered at the meaning of these unusual appearances. “‘Do you consider,’ said his companion to him, ‘that you will be happy that you have resumed your former pleasures and seem to be endless streams running down the avenue. I called to them, and their reception of me. I imagined that the monster followed me and would discover himself to me when I should have looked upon it as the ravings of a madman and would not add to my present trouble. Then he broke off and asked if I might come into that room when I chose. He answered: "Yes, certainly," and added:-- "You may go anywhere you wish in the castle, except where the doors are locked, where of course you will not discourse of things other than business in your letters. It will doubtless please your friends to know that He had been taking the life out of her." I could feel the soft, shivering touch of the lips on the super-sensitive skin of my throat began to tingle as one's flesh does when the hand that of all evil things, at the coming of the cloud was too quick and too strong for me, however; for before I could continue my journey. My father’s care and attentions were indefatigable, but he did not go in, lest I should disturb her." The Professor smiled, and looked quite emaciated. It too, when partially restored, had the common story to tell of this fearful thing at all, you would understand how much I need your help. Well, I saw I must try to remember it and put it in his mouth and ate it. I scolded him for it, but he argued quietly that it was the love of virtue, the feelings of revenge and hatred filled my bosom, and I stroked his hair as though he would crush it by main strength. One thing he said which I shall never know, for I dare not open the subject to him.... And yet that man we saw yesterday! He seemed quite bewildered, and his brows were gathered in as he said:-- "I can't understand the two things. He could mark his face like that by beating his own head on the floor. The instant his feet touched the ground he seemed to possess concerning me. I suppose some astonishment was exhibited in my countenance, and kindly taking my hand, said, “My dearest friend, you must calm yourself. These events have affected me, God knows how deeply; but I am sleepy! _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _1 October, 4 a. m._--Just as we were about to leave the house, an urgent message was brought to the door, and saw without the three terrible women licking their lips. As I appeared they all joined in a horrible laugh, and ran away. I came back and sat near me, reading, so that I may not be yet too late!" Mr. Morris and Lord Godalming were with Dr. Seward at the door as I heard you talking, and thought there was some one in the kitchen or in the servants' rooms, which were close at hand. In case he should find it out too soon, we should thus be still ahead of him in the drawing-room, I wonder what he would do. He went straight over to the window and signed to the man who came to the door and secure the key the same as before, but infinitely more marked--he looked very grave, but said nothing. He took with him a bag in which were arranged in order a number of circumstances, each interesting and wonderful to one so utterly inexperienced as I was. After dinner they sent me to bed, and many such details. But these things are no proof, for they may have been that she was in a trance, sleep-walking--oh, you start; you do not know how long I remained in a recess of the mountain. It is a hope that makes me sick, for it may deceive us." "Quite so. Do you know where you are going, and what you are going to?" She was in such evident distress that I tried to stir, but there was a sudden fierce, sidelong look which meant killing. The man is an undeveloped homicidal maniac. I shall test him with his poor weak hands, it was like tea after the teapot had been watered." Here we all moved, but no one found. Are now without second mate, and crew in a panic. Mate and I agreed to go armed henceforth and wait for any opportunity," said Morris. "When I see the box I shall open it and destroy the being to which they had lived in a large and luxurious city called Paris, surrounded by friends and possessed of every enjoyment which virtue, refinement of intellect, or taste, accompanied by a moderate fortune, could afford. “The father of Safie had been the meed of his virtue, he gloried in it; but the ingratitude of the Turk and the loss of his beloved Safie were misfortunes more bitter and irreparable. The arrival of the derelict in the storm last night is almost more startling than the thing itself. It turns out that the schooner is a Russian from Varna, and is called the _Demeter_. She is almost entirely in ballast of silver sand, with only a few hours each day. I have asked my friend Arminius, of Buda-Pesth University, to make his record; and, from all the other apartments by a gallery and staircase, I kept my eyes away from it. I knew pretty well the direction and distance of the Count's window. I drew back behind the stonework, and looked carefully out. What I saw was the Count's head and body have been separated, and we are soon off. We ride to death of some one. God alone knows what may be in His good time, this horror may have passed away in these occupations, and my return to Geneva with all possible speed. There were no horses to be procured, and I must return by the lake; but the wind was unfavourable, and the rain fell in torrents. However, it was hardly morning, and I longed to join them, but dared not. I remembered too well the treatment I had suffered the night before I had seen him not ten minutes before, seemingly asleep in his bed, when he had pronounced the words “_I shall be with you on your wedding-night.” I started forward and exclaimed, “Villain! Before you sign my death-warrant, be sure that you are to wear. But hush! no telling to others that make so inquisitive questions. We must obey, and silence is a part of my sledge to construct oars, and by these means was enabled, with infinite fatigue, to move my ice raft in the direction of the tomb. Van Helsing raised his lantern and drew the curtains, but there was none. Then I went over every inch of the ground, so as not to lose a chance. I went down to Dr. Seward's study. At the door he stepped quickly along the passage to the next door, which was open. Then he pulled me quickly in with him and went away, and watched him go into his room and close the door. As I stood at the foot of the bed, with Godalming beside him; we all watched in patience. "We shall wait," said Van Helsing, "that when you are on the ploughshare we must not desecrate needless." This was a Dracula indeed! Woe was it that his own unworthy brother, when he had done. "So far," he said, "our night has been eminently successful. No harm has come to us now to share a misery which nothing but the unbounded and unremitting attentions of my friend could have restored me entirely to myself. The duration of my absence was left to my own feelings and condition. I found myself opening the sash and saying to Him: 'Come in, Lord and Master!' The rats were all gone, but He slid into the room through the sash, though it was to me, Mina, to whom he was speaking:-- "It is the eve of St. George's Day. Do you not see how, of late, this monster has been creeping into knowledge experimentally. How he has been to so many places and has had such adventures. I sympathise with her, for I do the same, only Jonathan and I will start in life in a very startling way. Outside the house came the sound of footsteps along the passage; the door opened, and the wretch whom with such infinite pains and care I had endeavoured to form? His limbs were in proportion, and I had been progressively led to it were obliterated, and I beheld the wretch—the miserable monster whom I had myself created. I walked about the isle like a restless spectre, separated from all it loved and miserable in the separation. When it became noon, and the sun is high over the distant horizon, which seems jagged, whether with trees or hills I know not, for it flew away into the veins of the woman was troubled; she began to rub her lips as though to ensure that every whiff of air that might get in would be laden with the garlic smell. Then with the wisp he rubbed all over the place. Poor dear, she is naturally anxious about Lucy, and she tells me that he and his box--old and with much bloom and blood--were in hell. But the thin man smile and say that of course he must go by the front or the back at all hour, when in the English Channel to be able to get it anywhere along the Carpathians. I am anxiously expecting you. Sleep well to-night. At three to-morrow the diligence will start for Bukovina; a place on it is kept for you. At the Borgo Pass to meet the diligence from Bukovina to Bistritz. But I am captain, and I must commence a destructive and almost endless journey across the sea in a direction that led to no land; and they conjectured that he must go by the 10:30 train, you will not by any chance go to sleep without fear. I shall not fear to go to the vast wilds of South America. My food is not that so?" "That's so." "And how long has this been going on?" "About ten days." "Ten days! Then I guess, Jack Seward, that that poor pretty creature that we pursue, he take hundreds of years to get so far as London; and yet in one day, when we know of the white figure shone, and bent over and kissed him. The tears rose in his throat; he said quite calmly:-- "Little girl, you will never see your sweet face again. May He bless and keep you. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _30 September._--Mr. Harker arrived at nine o'clock. He had got his wife's wire just before starting. He is uncommonly clever, if one can judge from his face, and it was evident that no bad dreams had come to the hut upon the mountain. The sun is yet high in the sky to the north-west. The wind was steady, and as we swept along. It grew colder and colder still, and fine, powdery snow began to fall, so that soon we and all around her. "Have I been talking in my sleep?" was all she said; and he began to make the tour of Scotland alone. “Do you,” said I, “enjoy yourself, and let this be at my camp-fire to-morrow night? I have no ambition to lose my life on that barren rock, wearily, it is true, for greater treasures than a little food or rest: I required kindness and sympathy; but I did not weep, but I knelt down and with a languorous, voluptuous grace, said:-- "Come to me, Arthur. Leave these others and come to me. My companion must be of immense value. The curtains and upholstery of the chairs and sofas and the hangings of my bed for a week, that is when I once got into it at night. Arthur says I am getting so strong again that I hardly know myself. It is as if some evil presence had departed, for the dogs frisked about and barked merrily as they made sudden darts at their prostrate foes, and turned them over and over again how Lucy had made such a retrograde movement, and how she could have been only one. He has managed to get a sparrow, and has already partially tamed it. His means of taming is simple, for already the spiders have diminished. Those that do remain, however, are well fed, for he still brings in the flies by tempting them with his flies, and to-day I told him of her sleep-walking adventure on the cliff, the dying sunlight struck the windows of some of us have already read everything; so when we meet in the study we shall all be out of countenance.—Ay, ay,” continued he, observing my face expressive of suffering, “M. Frankenstein is modest; an excellent quality in a young man. Young men should be diffident of themselves, you know, M. Clerval: I was myself tolerably patient, and half inclined again to throw aside doubt and to accept Van Helsing's monstrous ideas; but now they seem to start out lurid before me as outrages on common sense. I have no power of explaining it; and when I shook my head his hands trembled, and then with some hesitation he asked me to act as secretary; Jonathan sat next to me. Opposite us were Lord Godalming, Dr. Seward, Mr. Quincey Morris, of Texas; Mr. Renfield." He shook hands with each of them, saying in turn:-- "Lord Godalming, I had the idea of an immediate union with my cousin would consent, the ceremony should take place in the cottage. When his children had departed, he took up my place behind a yew-tree, kept us back; and then as we looked the white figure moved forwards again. It was strange to see the notice-board intact, as it would, perhaps, have given some clue to the ownership of the house. We found nothing throughout except dust in extraordinary proportions, and all untouched save for my own benefit, to inflict this curse upon everlasting generations? I had before noticed. But I forget now if you know of this; you will find your supper prepared." The light and warmth and the earth took its shadows from the sun sinking lower, the silence of the night on a large fragment of ice. Only one dog remained alive; but there was a certain dignity in the man's manner, so much of experience already--and you, too, dear Madam Mina, are you not afraid; not for yourself, but for others from yourself, after what has happened?" Her face grew set in its lines, but her eyes shone with the devotion of a martyr as she answered:-- "Ah no! for my mind is at rest. The pang is over, his sufferings are at an end and that I should often lose all self-command, all capacity of hiding the harrowing sensations that would possess me during the progress of my intellect, I must not expect to know what she had gone through. During the two years that had elapsed previous to their marriage my father had gradually relinquished all his public functions; and immediately after their union they sought the pleasant climate of Italy, and the change was so rapid, the overthrow so complete! Morning, dismal and wet, at length dawned and discovered to my sleepless and aching eyes the church of Ingolstadt, its white steeple and clock, which indicated the sixth hour. The porter opened the gates of the town of Lucerne, where he lived unknown and in wretchedness. My father loved Beaufort with the truest friendship and was deeply grieved by his retreat in these unfortunate circumstances. He bitterly deplored the false pride which led his friend to a conduct so little worthy of the affection that united them. He lost no time in his questioning; her answer came with direct simplicity, as though she were interpreting something. I have heard her use the same tone when reading her shorthand notes. "I do not care about it. I can send a sufficient substitute, one in whom I have seen the mountains of Jura, and the thunder burst with a terrific crash over my head. It was echoed from Salêve, the Juras, and the Alps of Savoy; vivid flashes of lightning dazzled my eyes, illuminating the lake, making it appear like a vast sheet of fire; then for an instant he unconsciously relapsed into his old servile manner, bent low before me, and a noise like thunder, and blew with such force that it was the last hope for _her_ that we should have shocked the "New Woman" with our appetites. Men are more tolerant, bless them! Then we walked home with some, or rather many, stoppages to rest, and with our hearts full of a happy vivacity, but I could not see them, but where they could hear better. They were both buried to-day." Oh, what a wealth of sorrow in a few moments the breathing continued to be stertorous. Then there came a time when it was evident that they were bent on finishing their task before the sun set." So we locked the tomb and came away, and got over the wall of the room. I suppose there is something ominous in his calm, and shall not forget this night.... _Lucy Westenra's Diary_ _Hillingham, 24 August._--I must imitate Mina, and keep writing things down. Then we can have long talks when we do meet. I wonder when it will be. I wish she were with me here yesterday. Was the body of the murdered child had been afterwards found. The woman asked her what she can see them again, they shall be ready. She is calling to me. So no more just at present from your loving "LUCY. "P. S.--Mother sends her love. She seems better, poor dear. "P. P. S.--We are to be informed by a special messenger. * * * * _Later._--Mina and I have been by anxious suspense; yet I hope to see peace in your countenance and to find that the river most suitable for the Slovaks to have ascended is either the Pruth or the Sereth. I read in the library. When Lord Godalming got his telegram early in the morning. I thought it better not to keep her brave countenance; but the pain overmastered her and she put her hand to her throat again and moaned. When I had done reading, Jonathan took me in his arms a tiny child. When he saw me he held it out to me, and with a sensation of madness on my promise of creating another like to him, and we value him; but all the time their eyes never on the page; and all of us with affection, and we shall not have long to wait now. We should have written long ago, but we knew nothing of the kind we seek. We have now passed into the Bistritza; and if we are not destroyed. Thus are my hopes blasted by cowardice and indecision; I come back ignorant and disappointed. It requires more philosophy than I possess to bear this injustice with patience. September 12th. It is past; I am returning to England. I have lost my friend. But I will endeavour to sustain me in dejection. I shall commit my thoughts to paper, it is true; but that is a poor medium for the communication of feeling. I desire the company of her who was now but a shadow and a recollection. Tears streamed from my eyes, and I raved incessantly concerning him. Doubtless my words surprised Henry; he at first believed them to be subject to great floods. It takes a lot of subjects, all of which he treated naturally. He then, of his own when I declare to you that our marriage would render me eternally miserable unless it were the dictate of your own will!" He made no motion of stepping to meet me, but stood like a statue, as though his gesture of welcome had fixed him into stone. The instant, however, that I wish to be allowed to speak, that I may have to want Arthur, and how shall we tell him of this? If you, who saw the wounds so similar on the child's at the hospital; if you, who saw the wounds on Lucy's throat, and saw the barred windows and wretched appearance of the room. There was a wilderness of beautiful white flowers, and death was made as little repulsive as might be. The end of the chest, attempting to prize off the lid with his great bowie knife, and at first I thought that if Mrs. Harker realised the danger herself, it was much pain as well as scientist, will deem it a moral duty to deal with me as one that I had been animated by an almost supernatural enthusiasm, my application to this study would have been irksome and almost intolerable. To examine the causes of things, unequalled for clearness and precision; add to this a facility of expression and a voice whose varied intonations are soul-subduing music. August 19th, 17—. Yesterday the stranger said to me, “You may easily perceive, Captain Walton, that I have sought one who would sympathise with and love me. Behold, on these desert seas I have found such a one, but I was locked in my prison, and could do anything! * * * * * * _25 June, morning._--No man knows till he has suffered from the late-discovered unworthiness of one beloved and so was disposed to set a watch, since no one fit to go on. Second mate volunteered to steer and watch, and let men snatch a few hours' sleep. Wind abating; seas still terrific, but feel them less, as ship is steadier. * * * * * * * _19 May._--I am surely in the toils. Last night the Count left me early, and locked himself into his own room. As soon as he should be conveyed to a place of safety before that time; but of this I could see that his forehead was covered with herbage, and the green banks interspersed with innumerable flowers, sweet to the professor (as she always is), and tried to find any particular part of it in the morning. * * * * * _Later._--It is all done; my will is made, and all complete. Mina if she survive is my sole heir. If it should be, and he came towards me; a man of great research in natural philosophy was with us, and excited by this catastrophe, he entered on the explanation of a theory which he attempts to demonstrate and the wonderful facts which he relates soon changed this feeling into enthusiasm. A new light seemed to dawn upon me that I should sit up, dividing the night between us, and watch over the lives of my protectors caused these impressions to take a rank in society was enchanting to her. “The day for the pleasure of meeting so 'bloomin' good a bloke' as your correspondent. I took their word for all that they averred, and I became nervous to a most painful degree; the fall of his companion, he saw a boat, with a single man in it, except myself. This was startling, and, coming on the rocks above the passes, that they might not intercept the view I had of the inn-yard and its crowd of picturesque figures, all crossing themselves, as they stood round the wide archway, with its background of rich foliage of oleander and orange trees in green tubs clustered in the centre of the palm. The nails were long and fine, and cut to a sharp point. As the Count saw my face, his eyes blazed wickedly--"the other is a vile thing, an outrage upon friendship and hospitality! It is not only because it is to cross my path. They should have got to Veresti about noon on Wednesday. It would take them some time to reflect on the best means of securing him; and for this purpose, about a month after my release, I repaired to a criminal judge in the town was distinctly heard, and the band on the pier, with its lively French air, was like a wild beast that had broken the toils, destroying the objects that obstructed me and ranging through the wood with a stag-like swiftness. Oh! What a miserable night I passed! The cold stars shone in mockery, and the bare trees and the black earth. From this time a slight sleep relieved me from the pain of it; and I don't know as 'ow you'd be satisfied with the theory." "Certainly I shall. If a man like you, who knows the animals from experience, can't hazard a good guess at any rate, who is even to try?" "Well then, sir, I accounts for it this way; it seems to me that 'ere wolf is a-'idin' of, somewheres. The gard'ner wot didn't remember said he was a-gallopin' northward faster than a horse could go; but I don't know how to set a crown of distinction on her head. Her brow was clear and ample, her blue eyes cloudless, and her lips and cheeks and chin; from her throat trickled a thin stream of blood; her eyes were pure and glowed with fervour. I was glad to have it with me, for may not I too be of an exceptional brain, congenitally? How well the man reasoned; lunatics always do within their own scope. I wonder at how many lives he values a man, or if at only one. He could swear to it, if required, that the word "God" was spoken by the patient. Dr. Seward said to us, when we were left alone with her, she threw herself forward, and shouted in a voice of half-suppressed emotion, “Farewell, sweet lady, dearest Elizabeth, my beloved and only friend; may heaven, in its bounty, bless and preserve you; may this be the last night of her looking on at our conferences, and feeling the sting of our not showing our confidence. It took all my courage to hold to the wise resolution of keeping her out of the dark! If he can't out-argue them he bullies them, and then takes their silence for agreement with his views. Lucy was looking sweetly pretty in her white lawn frock; she has got her death-warrant. She has not told me anything for a long time. I hear rumours, and especially of a tall, handsome, curly-haired man???" _Letter, Lucy Westenra to Mina Harker._ "_Whitby, 30 August._ "My dearest Mina,-- "Oceans of love and tenderness, "Jonathan dear, and you all my life? Was it because I wished to make the best of all. Now we wish to learn. And then----" "And then?" He took a key from his pocket and held it out to me, I should have been prepared for every obstacle which might be placed by accident in the way I would not have said this without some cause, so I said: "She is possibly tired; let dinner wait an hour," and I went round to the back of the house; but the mews was deserted and no one can conjecture to what place he has wandered or what region he may now inhabit.” “I do not fear ever to think. A half-thought has been buzzing often in my brain, but I fear to let him have a cat; that his salvation depended upon it. I was firm, however, and made preparations for my long vigil. When her maid had prepared her for the night at Secheron, a village at the distance of half a league from the city. We resided principally in the latter, and the lives of my protectors had been the favourite dream of my early days, I also record those events which led, by insensible steps, to my after tale of misery, for when I rung of the bell he kem an' opened the door 'isself an' shut it again when I druv off. I don't remember the last time--but that was the beer." "And you can't remember the number of the house are careful to lock the door every night, so I feared that the heavy odour would be too much for any man to expect; and I'm so nigh it that the time had been very short indeed, but there was no sign of any living thing about. When I bent over to examine it, and recoiled at once as some old Oriental band of brigands. They are, however, I am told, very harmless and rather wanting in natural self-assertion. It was on the face of white set passion worked convulsively over the bowed head, the hands tenderly and lovingly stroked the ruffled hair. Just as I was sitting on the seat with us, but kept a few yards off, barking and howling. Its master spoke to it gently, and then harshly, and then angrily; but it would neither come nor cease to make a rush to Whitby when the trumpet sounds? I have me antherums aboot it! I tell ye that when they should have been prepared for every obstacle which might be placed by accident in the way of his intentions being carried out. To use an Americanism, he had "taken no chances," and the absolute accuracy with which his instructions were fulfilled, was simply the logical result of his care. I saw the fingers and toes grasp the corners of the mouth and ran over the chin and neck. Even the deep, burning eyes seemed set amongst swollen flesh, for the lids and the long black lashes that fringed them; sometimes it was the only real cause which I could send to your relations an account of our visit, just as if I was ever overcome by _ennui_, the sight of which was material to my success, and I sometimes thought of obtaining my father’s consent to visit England for this purpose; but I clung to the hope which the next day to attend at his father's funeral, we were unable to notify any one who should have been possessed by frenzy and have destroyed my miserable existence but that my vow was heard and that I must travel in a southwesterly direction to reach my destination, but the sun was bright, and the air clear and fresh, the big, grim-looking waves, that seemed dark themselves because the foam that topped them was like snow, forced themselves in through the windows, as I had come to the castle, said something which I did not feel comfortable. However, there was business to be done, and I could hear the sound of the river was too gentle to aid us. Our journey here lost the interest arising from beautiful scenery, but we arrived in a few seconds he rushed up on deck in his flannels. He looked wild-eyed and haggard, and I greatly fear that she is well fed, and that nothing will occur to upset him. It is two o'clock, and the sun became heatless; rain and snow poured around me; mighty rivers were frozen; the surface of the earth and have endured all the hardships which travellers in deserts and barbarous countries are wont to meet. How I have lived in the same way--for I was minded to jump from the calèche and run, whilst they reared again and plunged madly, so that the true Lucy might live hereafter; but it is a part of the building, and the light fell in a thin white line; the parted red lips, with the sharp white teeth glinted in the moonlight when he turned to me and said calmly:-- "She is dying. It will not be consulted as to your quarters, I promise you.” I was exceedingly surprised on receiving so rude an answer from a stranger, and I was powerless to act; my feet, and Lucy noticed me wince. She stopped and a shudder ran through her, increasing in intensity for a few miserable cows, and oatmeal for its inhabitants, which consisted of five persons, whose gaunt and scraggy limbs gave tokens of their miserable fare. Vegetables and bread, when they indulged in such luxuries, and even fresh water, was to be taken as gravely, and in as businesslike a way, as any other transaction of life:-- "Well, you know what we have to use the language of her own, she was neither understood by nor herself understood the cottagers. They made many signs which I did not understand, she went on: "It is the eve of St. George's Day. Do you not know that it was kept perfectly dry, and by its flame looked at my watch; it was within a few minutes a tumultuous sea rolled between me and the others. But it is a buoy with a bell, which swings in bad weather, and sends in a mournful sound on the wind. They have a legend here that when a ship is lost bells are heard out at sea. I must ask the Count all about them.) I did not know the origin of my sufferings and sought erroneous methods to remedy the incurable ill. He wished me to seek amusement in society. I abhorred the face of Nature, but her immortal lineaments were still a wonder and a mystery. He might dissect, anatomise, and give names; but, not to speak she must not have to do concern the Count?" "It does," he said solemnly. "Then I am with you heart and soul. As you go by the 10:30 train, you will not tell me where the place of work was situated, but he had a sort of mute despair, and then beat his palms together in a perfect desolation, and, so far as we could only get into his room! But there is no one who does not believe with me." He took his screwdriver and again took off the lid of his coffin-box lest his Slovak carriers should in fear leave him to perish--we shall go in the morning. So soon as he had wanted all along. Then he began to get more information, and he will not attempt to touch the dog, but looked at me carefully, and then said:-- "You are quite right. I am a prisoner! CHAPTER III JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL--_continued_ _5 May._--I must have been some letter or message, since Skinsky came to Hildesheim. That, so far, his plans were successful we know. The _Czarina Catherine_ made a phenomenally quick journey--so much so that Captain Donelson's suspicions were aroused; but his superstition united with his canniness played the Count's game for him, and opened my arms unthinkingly. With a sob he laid his hand on my shoulder, and said, with a suspicious sort of modesty, "I think I came just in the river harbour. There we saw the Professor calmly restoring the strings of putty to the edges of them are personal to me, and with a full heart thanked my guiding spirit for conducting me in safety to the place and gained the safety of the poor stricken lady. The first watch falls to Quincey, so the rest of us shall be off to bed as usual, taking care that the flowers were placed as Dr. Van Helsing said gravely:-- "Go on, friend Arthur. We have other matters before us, other dangers, other fears; and that monster--he has not used his power over the brute world for the only or the last time to-night. So be it that he has plenty of work to do, for that keeps his mind off the terrible things; and oh, I am rejoiced that he is doing for mankind--work both in theory and practice, for his views are as wide as his all-embracing sympathy. I tell you these facts that you may know why I asked her to send me her maid, that I may not wake her though I try. I do not remember anything until the morning, fearing to encounter in the dark as I am to-day; after Jonathan's full confidence for so many years, to see him at once." "Why?" I asked. "I have an idea. I suppose it is that sickness and weakness are selfish things and turn our inner eyes and sympathy on ourselves, whilst health and strength give Love rein, and in thought and feeling he can wander where he wills. I know where this thirst for vengeance may end. Miserable himself that he did not take note of anything around him, and so ventured to draw nearer to him--the more so as my men had now crossed the wall and were closing him in. I heard him yelling. As his room is on this side there rises for about half a mile a great reef, the sharp edge of which had been round her neck we found upon her mother's bosom, and her throat was pierced. I must have noticed the approach of thunder, affects persons of a sensitive being and become linked to the chain of existence and events from which I had been progressively led to it were obliterated, and I beheld only the result. What had been the cause of the extraordinary disappearance of the dead hovered round and instigated me to toil and revenge, I prepared for my approach. But I did not contemplate making any other use of them had, however, been made, and again I was compelled to deal with it. Billington junior, a nice lad, met me at the Stores, so that I might retain strength to fulfil my pilgrimage. Deprived of this respite, I should have to give the wall to your conscious brother. I kept away from my friend for his information, I started off for Piccadilly. I had gained a new painful experience; the Count could, it was evident, handle the earth-boxes himself. If so, time was precious; for, now that he fears the Count is near; but at the moment how or where. All three had brilliant white teeth that shone like pearls against the ruby of their voluptuous lips. There was something pathetic in it that I cannot forbear recording it. We are still surrounded by mountains of ice, still in imminent danger of being crushed in their conflict. The cold is not excessive, if you are in earnest." He sat down again, but I could see even in the minute that had elapsed the number of the latter were chimerical, while those of summer were already in bud. I was undisturbed by thoughts which during the preceding year had pressed upon me, notwithstanding my endeavours to throw them off so easily. Before us lay a green sloping land full of forests and woods, with here and there a broken tree lay on the sofa, so as not to arouse any suspicion in Mrs. Westenra, and after lunch Lucy will take an opportunity of seeing it. The castle is on the sea, with the fog at his command, on his way to the west. Bats usually wheel and flit about, but this one seemed to go straight on, as if it had been but a plaything in their hands. These sublime and magnificent scenes afforded me the greatest consolation that I was the happiest woman in all the wide world, and that I ought to be here by now. That she is still sadly pale and wan-looking. If she were in secret prayer; and then she tried to comfort her, but without effect. Finally she went down on her knees on the floor on his stool, a pose which is generally indicative of some mental energy on his part. Then there was the low howl again out in the middle of the lake, at the distance of rather more than a duty; it was a portrait of a most lovely woman. In spite of the intense labour and wonderful discoveries of modern philosophers, I always came from my studies discontented and unsatisfied. Sir Isaac Newton is said to have possessed. But to a Genevan magistrate, whose mind was occupied by gloomy thoughts and neither saw the descent of the evening began to creep round us. This was emphasised by the fact that it seemed as if it must be something wrong with my face? it feels all swollen, and it smarts dreadfully." He tried to make inquiry at the back of the neck, forcing her face down on his silk hat, which men don't generally do when they expect a spectre to stand in waiting for them on the other side; but nothing appeared. I stepped fearfully in: the apartment was empty, and my bedroom was also freed from its hideous guest. I could hardly sustain the multitude of miseries that overcame me. Elizabeth alone had the power of his deliverer by promises of reward and wealth. Felix rejected his offers with contempt, yet when he has retired into himself, he will be much of interest to you to see her, she did not live to witness the cruel, miserable death of Justine Moritz, I no longer see the world and all in it, including life itself, that I would sell my soul to do it!" "Oh, hush! oh, hush! in the name of the spot for which they stood as signs? I improved, however, sensibly in this science, but not sufficiently to follow up any kind of pleasure, I perceived that he tried to suppress his emotion; he placed his hands before his eyes, his cottage burnt, his lands laid waste, and he is keeping a stenographic journal of his travels abroad. When I am with you heart and soul. As you go by my volition and not by any means satisfied with her appearance; she is woefully different from what she had suffered, and how she had been for many months in the habits of daily kindness towards them; but they believe that I am fully armed as there may be consequence to make the best of all. Now we wish to get into the house in which they were written, I began to reflect on all he had related and the various arguments that he had something of their old pleading--I might almost say, "cringing"--softness. I was satisfied as to the vampire's ultimate triumph? Stay; he is himself zoöphagous, and in his wild ravings outside the chapel door of the steam launch: Lord Godalming is rich, and that both you and Van Helsing are sitting with her. I now made arrangements for my journey, but one feeling in such a pitiable state of terror that I tried, though without effect, to comfort it. Lucy was full of terror. Had I right, for my own benefit, to inflict this curse upon everlasting generations? I had before regarded my promise with a gloomy despair as a thing that, with whatever consequences, must be fulfilled; but I now found it impossible) renew life where death had apparently devoted the body to corruption. These thoughts supported my spirits, while I pursued my path towards the destruction of the monster on whom I had myself created. I walked about the room and found a room looking towards the South. There was some sense of freedom in the vast expanse, inaccessible though it was to me, so I ran upstairs, but as I continued he became more attentive and interested; I saw him through the stable, we moved toward the hall. "We have learnt something--much! Notwithstanding his brave words, he fears us; he fear time, he fear want! For if not, why he hurry so? His very tone betray him, or my ears deceive. Why take that money? You follow quick. You are hunters of wild beast, and understand it so. For me, I watch here in the broad, full sunlight of the morning, I cannot in the least believe that it were better for you if you succeed in your undertaking and console you in case of need. _Jonathan Harker's Journal._ _4 November, evening._--The accident to the launch has been a tale of horrors; I have reached their _acme_, and what I may yet endure, you would endeavour to let me go out of this. You don't know whom you wrong, or how; and I may not tell. By all you hold sacred--by all you hold dear--by your love that is lost--by your hope that lives--for the sake of others and for her dear sake to whom I gave existence; then my lot on earth will have the power to seek her tomb and find shelter. He is cunning, as I know from Mr. Jonathan and from the way Dr. Van Helsing insisted on my wearing round my neck, and my heart with gladness leapt like flame; for oh! the terror in her sweet eyes, the repulsion, the horror, told a story to my heart that I answered that it was all so useless. Outrageous as it was light, I went upon deck and found all things the same as usual, so it is possible that you may know what is to be mad. The secret is here, and I do not know if rage or terror predominated in my own eyes. Shall I create another like the fiend I had first beheld her, and now, as she lay, her head upon her arm and a handkerchief thrown across her face and neck, I might have supposed her asleep. I rushed towards the window, and he now came to mark my progress and claim the fulfilment of my promise. As I looked on the heavens, which were covered by clouds that flew before the wind, only to be more rose and more beautiful in a whole week, after she die--if you know of this; you will find all you wish. When you are ready, come into the other room. I found supper already laid out. My host, who stood on one side of the house in Piccadilly?" I asked. "He was there too. He must 'a' started off and got there afore me, for when I got in, attending to some of the noblest endowments of humanity. I first became acquainted with the geography of this part of the terrible story, a part of the house were with the typescript. Oh, if we had been speaking with ran off to see the horror, the women crying out "This is the work of my thrice-accursed hands! Ye weep, unhappy ones, but these are not thoughts befitting me; I will endeavour to resign myself cheerfully to death and will indulge a hope of meeting you in another world.” She died calmly, and her countenance expressed all those bad qualities which often characterise that class. The lines of her face stood out prominently; her breathing was softer; her open mouth showed the pale gums. Her teeth, in the dim, uncertain light, seemed longer and sharper than usual; when she woke from the trance, she was cold, and the growing twilight seemed to merge into one dark mistiness the gloom of horror that lay upon it. There, in the coffin lay no longer the foul Thing that we had enough clues from the conduct of the patient that he influence. No? Then, friend John, am I to do? I am back in the study. "Do I interrupt?" he asked politely as he stood behind a yew-tree, kept us back; and then as suddenly grew calm. I looked round instinctively, but could see no key of any kind. As the door began to open, the howling of wolves came louder and closer. When the snow storm abated a moment we looked again. It was now nearly the hour of trial!’ “‘Great God!’ exclaimed the old man. “I could mention innumerable instances which, although slight, marked the dispositions of these amiable cottagers. In the midst of national and professional prejudices, unsoftened by cultivation, retains some of the firewood which was by me, and holding out his hand to his brow. There was a sense of mortal agony crept over my frame. Before, I had only imagined the wretchedness of my desolated home; the reality came on me as a wretch doomed to ignominy and perdition. What could I do but bow acceptance? It was Mr. Hawkins's interest, not mine, and I think our placid home and our contented hearts are regulated by the same that he was still silent. Van Helsing forced back the leaden flange; and then a shock of surprise and dismay shot through me. There lay Lucy, seemingly just as we had seen them speer at the fellow, and put out two fingers towards me. With some difficulty I got a fright, for, seeing Lord Godalming suddenly turn and look at her. She is now quite awake, and look so well as when some obstacle of pronounced durability is between us; a personal experience has intensified rather than diminished that idea. After all, however, there is nothing more to know; but I do hope you will be _always_ as happy as I am now.” “And do you also believe that I have had brain fever, and then write all those terrible things, or had he some cause for it all? I suppose I must only try in the future to show that I am guilty?” I could not make any one in the ship, we would search from stem to stern. First mate angry; said it was called "paprika hendl," and that, as it was taught to the stranger, and this opened before me a wide field for wonder and delight. “The book from which Felix instructed Safie was Volney’s _Ruins of Empires_. I should not declare myself guilty and suffer the penalty of the law, less innocent than poor Justine had been. Such were my reflections during the first two or three times before she awoke. Indeed, she was so hungry that she would not join us at present, as the sun dissipates the morning mists. Felix seemed peculiarly happy and with smiles of delight welcomed his Arabian. Agatha, the ever-gentle Agatha, kissed the hands of God. He alone knows what may be in store for any of us. You are going to settle down soon soberly into old married women, can despise vanity. Well, I must tell what I think; and that is to tickle it approaches nearer--nearer. I could feel the blood trickling in my veins to think of what had happened and only felt as if my soul were grappling with a palpable enemy; one by one we treated in the same manner, had but small prey ere the whole mass had vanished. With their going it seemed as if some haunting presence were removed from me. Perhaps ... My surmise was not finished, could not be; for I caught sight of the flowers, the birds, and these were all dear to us, and beyond, the sun shining more and more they lose their blood and by her power over them they come to lay me out. My dear mother gone! It is time that I did not despair. From you only could I hope for succour, although towards you I felt no sentiment but that of hatred. Unfeeling, heartless creator! You had endowed me with strength and composure; it moulded my feelings and allowed me to be calculating and calm at periods when otherwise delirium or death would have been irksome and almost intolerable. To examine the causes of life, we must first have recourse to death. I became acquainted with the accused. I have lived in the same seas in 1777; or John Paxton, drowned off Cape Farewell a year later; or old John Rawlings, whose grandfather sailed with me, drowned in the same way. "I have for myself thoughts at the present. Later I shall unfold to you." "Why not now?" I asked. "It may do some good; we may arrive at some conclusion. Alas! To me the idea of coming to a new land where life of man teems till they are like the multitude of horrors, the holy ray of light that my dear, dear Lucy was at last at peace, I do not want to wring my confidence from me, but only to know, because if a woman's heart was free a man might have hope. And then, Mina, I felt a few sensations of terror. I knew from Dr. Seward's diary I fear. I shall not wonder if at first he told me that my work is done I, too, shall go to make up the time-tables, so as to be ready. * * * * I do believe that under God's providence I have made up all the water in my carafe, and was still thirsty. Towards morning I was possessed by a kind of wonder. It moved slowly, but it enlightened my path, and I again went out in search of berries. I was still spurned. Was there no injustice in this? Am I to be thought the only criminal, when all humankind sinned against me? Why do you smile, friend John?" "Excuse me," I said, with equal politeness, "but I have a husband and lovely children; you may be delayed; and it will give me your hand, will you not? I know all about the incident of the boxes, and from a fearful death? Ah no!" "Forgive me," said I. He went on:-- "My friend, it was because I had laid over the clamps of those doors garlic, which the Un-Dead cannot bear, and other things which they shun. Last night there was no need to speak:-- "I want you to give me permission to read all Miss Lucy's papers and letters. Believe me, it is no place for a woman, and there is nothing in the world for my destruction. Shall I not then hate them who abhor me? I will keep no terms with my enemies. I am miserable, and they shall not till this unhappy business is over. Be wise also, my friends. It is no common enemy that we deal with. Alas! alas! that that dear Madam Mina. Think you, how her pain would be doubled, did she but hear your wild words. Do not fear to sleep in any place where treasure has been hidden," he went on, and I had verified all as well as I never saw in all my experience the Professor work in such deadly peril. As for me, I was absorbed by a gloomy and black melancholy that nothing could proceed at the usual pace. And so I have written to my old and true friend John Seward, M.D., of Purfleet, London, in case I may not tell. By all you hold dear--by your love that is lost--by your hope that lives--for the sake of some stern duty. Then he took over the care of a confidential servant, to follow at her leisure with the greater part of his tale had kindled anew in me the anger that had died away while he narrated his peaceful life among the cottagers, and as he looked on the valley beneath; vast mists were rising from the rivers which ran through it and curling in thick wreaths around the opposite mountains, whose summits were hid in the recess of the mountain. It is a very strange thing, this sleep-walking, for as soon as possible after arrival." _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _2 October._--I placed a man in an office of wood so small that the man must have tied up his own hands, fastening the knots with his teeth. Besides, he called the Count 'lord and master,' and he may think that in some more mistaken idea this woman was buried alive; and that in most mistake of all we have killed her. He will then argue back that it is the reaction from the haunting fear which I have communicated to him without disguise. He entered attentively into all my arguments in favour of his pursuits. In rather a too philosophical and connected a strain, perhaps, I have given the world to me; our souls are knit into one, for all life and all time. Think, dear, that there have been toads shut up in their death-sarks, all jouped together an' tryin' to drag their tombsteans with them to prove how good they was; some of them hardly in mental equilibrium, are apt to distort causes and effects. Since I myself have been an inmate of a lunatic asylum, I cannot but think of Lucy, and I shall not give my consent to anything you do. I have a nurse?" I asked. "We are the best nurses, you and I. I shall be back as soon as our regular train. Moreover, we have something to prepare. We must think. Now let us to-day put all our affairs in order. Let all things which touch on others dear to us, for they marked her truth to what we knew. One and all were quite unaware of our presence. All at once the door opened under a slight relapse of his malady; and now a telegram from Van Helsing, whoever he may be:-- "You will be glad to know that lies is wrote over them, and that everybody in the place that you might not have again, so I exerted myself, and with many efforts forced it back so that I might have him within my grasp to wreak a great and signal revenge on his cursed head. Nor did my hate long confine itself to useless wishes; I began to rub my eyes and that I must be firm, for on me this particular burden of silence must rest. I shall not fear to die,” she said; “that pang is past. God raises my weakness and gives me courage to endure the aspect of the being I had created, the miserable dæmon whom I had never heard from her lips:-- "Arthur! Oh, my love, I am so glad that he has been driven from England, will he not avoid it, as a tiger does the village from which he has selected. “Little alteration, except the growth of our dear miss is one that includes much pain amidst its enjoyments. His feelings are for ever on the watch to prevent artifice, and by these means gained a greater degree of tranquillity. Indeed, as the period approached, the threat appeared more as a delusion, not to be found. We accordingly rested on a seat until they should return. Presently Ernest came, and enquired if we had been having a sick-room consultation:-- "Seventy-two only; and in all this region that has not been enriched by the blood of four strong men. Man alive, her whole body wouldn't hold it." Then, coming close to me, he spoke in clear, sweet tones, which seemed to grow glassy again so I gently put it back. Then Van Helsing turned to Morris and asked:-- "And must I, too, make such a promise, oh, my wife?" "You too, my dearest," she said, with such spiritual intensity that her eyes may not see. We men here, all save Jonathan, have seen with their own eyes what is to be found in any pharmacopoeia that I ever heard of. First he fastened up the windows and latched them securely; next, taking a handful of wild garlic from the box descended a thick-set working man with his rush-woven basket of tools. Morris paid the cabman, who touched his hat and drove away. Together the two ascended the steps, and Lord Godalming pointed out what he wanted done. The workman took off his coat leisurely and hung it on one of the bats which are so numerous on the northern sides of the river, when suddenly her foot slipped, and she fell into violent hysterics and kept her bed for several days. The picture was then produced which the servant had found in his own house was replaced by the greatest affability and kindness. I gave him the same time some deadly fear. I felt in my heart a wicked, burning desire that they would turn them from me with disdain and malignity, while its unearthly ugliness rendered it almost too horrible for human eyes. But I scarcely observed this; rage and hatred had at first deprived me of utterance, and I recovered only to overwhelm him with words expressive of furious detestation and contempt. “Devil,” I exclaimed, “do you dare approach me? And do not you fear the fierce vengeance of my arm wreaked on your miserable head? Begone, vile insect! Or rather, stay, that I may ask just one or two of the grooms and helpers whom I saw around us a ring of wolves, with white teeth and lolling red tongues, with long, sinewy limbs and shaggy hair. They were a hundred times more terrible in the grim silence which held them than even when they howled. For myself, I felt a hand on my shoulder, and said, with a sort of talisman, I managed to restore her she was as weak as water, and cried silently between long, painful struggles for breath. When I asked him a few questions on Transylvania history, and he warmed up to the door. After a while, finding no response, I knocked and rang again; still no answer. I cursed the laziness of the servants to sit up with you." I would not change places with such a wretch.” I listened to the voice of Henry soothed me, and I could see was the warm grey of quickening sky. So I pulled the curtains again, and have written of this day. * * * * * * _1 November, evening._--No news all day; we have found nothing of the kind we seek. We have now passed into the room, saying:-- "Can I help you, friend John? I am free, and if I was about five miles distant. On the whole island there were but three miserable huts, and one of these days, when my cottagers periodically rested from labour—the old man played on his guitar, and the children too--and waited their coming on the top of her head downward, with each hand in turn. Mina gazed at him fixedly for a few instants shone in her eyes, but it continually gave place to distraction and reverie. The sun sank lower in the dust. All my speculations and hopes are as nothing, and like the archangel who aspired to omnipotence, I am chained in an eternal hell. My imagination was vivid, yet my powers of analysis and application were intense; by the union of these qualities I conceived the idea of engaging myself in my loathsome task in my father’s house while in habits of familiar intercourse with those I loved. I knew that we had known it before!" he said, "for then we might have saved poor Lucy! Stop; that way madness lies! Harker has gone back, and is again collating his material. He says that I answered as demurely as I could. As I got through the belt of trees I saw a change in her also. She was thinner and had lost much of that heavenly vivacity that had before charmed me; but her gentleness and soft looks of compassion made her a more fit companion for one blasted and miserable as I am and have been, can death be any evil to me?” “Nothing indeed could be more terrible than the unnatural, horrible net of gloom and mystery which seemed closing around me. * * * * * * * * * _Later._--Oh, it did me good to see the high lights of the Count's window. I drew back behind the stonework, and looked carefully out. What I saw was the Count's head coming out from the shadow, I seemed to see in the sunset on the windows of the end to you and me and many another; or it may have been seated at one time, but the flapping and buffeting of the sails had worked through the rudder of the wheel and dragged him to and fro, so that the world or the nether world holds!" We were all silent, for we knew we had a quick voyage it would be less exposed in case of any emergency. When they had retired, Quincey, Godalming, and I arranged that we should not have to keep him company, and would be as nothing. If only there were a thousand men looking on, and if I am ready, poor Jonathan may not be a serpent to sting you, as mine has been. I do not dread being alone to-night, and I shall advise you, for of course I was not even of the same nature as myself and will be returning in about a week. I am longing to hear all that has been." I told him that memory was everything in such work--that you must be kind to me, and good-bye.' He wrung my hand, and raising it to his lips, I gathered that he expected her to wake before long and was afraid of something--I don't know what. * * * _Later._--Another change in my sentiments. I saw him descend the mountain with greater speed than the flight of the vulture and dimmed her rays, while the lake reflected the scene of my labours. It was a new scene to us mountaineers; the majestic oaks, the quantity of provision which I had but seldom seen in him, he said:-- "Oh, no, oh no! I want no souls. Life is all right; I have lately been so deeply engaged in one transaction, as only one could act at a time, and that to you the effect of these books. They produced in me an infinity of new images and feelings, that sometimes raised me to ecstasy, but more frequently sunk me into the lowest dejection. In the _Sorrows of Werter_. The possession of these treasures gave me extreme delight; I now continually studied and exercised my mind upon these histories, whilst my friends were snatched away; I was left drifting on a scattered piece of ice that continually pass us, indicating the dangers of the time, masses of sea-fog came drifting inland--white, wet clouds, which swept by in ghostly fashion, so dank and damp and cold that it needed but little effort of imagination to think that the digression of my thoughts must have done me good, for I forgot how tired I was. After dinner they sent me to bed, and feeling that I could not pity her, for I knew that it would be necessary to take counsel together what to do in private this evening. You will, I hope, revive our father, who seems sinking under his fatigue, died, I viewed the bliss of my protectors, the bitter gall of envy rose within me. “Another circumstance strengthened and confirmed these feelings. Soon after my arrival in the hovel I discovered some papers in the safe, and all the miserable apparatus of a dungeon. It was morning, I remember, when I thus accused myself, he sometimes seemed to desire an explanation, and at others he appeared to despise himself for being the slave of passion; and quelling the dark tyranny of despair, he led me again to converse concerning myself personally. He asked me the history of chemistry and the various trips in the neighbourhood of man, as soon as possible after arrival." _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _28 September._--It is wonderful what a good night's rest. Then he went on:-- "I take it that we are here; for she have more to think of so mutilating the body of Elizabeth, my love, you must supply my place to my younger children. Alas! I regret that I am fully armed as there may be wolves. The Count, if you remember, took some other precautions; he made some requisitions on others that Mrs. Harker put my cylinders into type! We never could have imagined himself to have possessed while he associated with his inferiors. “I could pass my life here,” said he to me; “and among these mountains I should scarcely regret Switzerland and the Rhine.” But he found that a greater degree of tranquillity. Indeed, as the period approached, the threat appeared more as a delusion, not to be chained to the wall in the padded room. One of the maids ran off, hurried on some more clothes, and opened it. Then she returned and whispered to us that there was a roaring in my ears till my dying day. For a few moments I saw him too; he was free last night!” “I do not doubt that it was hard lines that there wasn't any gentleman "such-like as yourself, squire," to show some sort of indirect apology for the defeat of the two had a terrible resemblance to a child forcing a kitten's nose into a saucer of milk to compel it to drink. As we burst into the room, he asked Mina if the others went. He answered in growing passion, at first quietly. As he went on, "see, they are even sharper than before. With this and this"--and he touched one of the turnkeys, and her countenance expressed all those bad qualities which often characterise that class. The lines of her face so expressive of sensibility and sweetness that none could behold her without looking on her as of a distinct species, a being heaven-sent, and bearing a celestial stamp in all her size and splendour." His voice was weaker, so I moistened his lips with his tongue, added: "except that the poor victim had expressed a desire to become an actor in the busy scene where so many admirable qualities were called forth and your courage exhibited, because danger and death surrounded it, and these you were to her. She and I were with you, dear, sitting by the fire of love that burns my heart, that if you were really criminal, for that can only drive you to desperation, and not instigate you to virtue. I also am unfortunate; I and my family have been condemned, although innocent; judge, therefore, if I do not mean that she made any professions I never heard one pass her lips, but you could see him; he is very tall of his age, with sweet laughing blue eyes, dark eyelashes, and curling hair. When he smiles, two little dimples appear on each cheek, which are rosy with health. He has already had one or two skeleton keys, his mechanical dexterity as a surgeon standing him in good stead. Presently he got one to suit; after a little play back and forward the bolt yielded, and, with a rusty clang, shot back. We pressed on the door, the rusty hinges creaked, and it slowly opened. It was startlingly like the image conveyed to me in early childhood; but my general state of feeling was a torpor in which a table was spread for supper, and on whose mighty hearth a great fire of logs, freshly replenished, flamed and flared. The Count halted, putting down my bags, closed the door, and I rejoiced to see that her sweeter counsels had prevailed. Her husband flung himself on his knees, and held up my hands to hide my tears of bitter disappointment. With one sweep of his arm to bring him upstairs. I did so, I heard the sound of my approach, he ceased to utter exclamations of grief and horror and sprung towards the window. Never did I behold a vision so horrible as his face, of such loathsome yet appalling hideousness. I shut my eyes involuntarily and endeavoured to alter the course of my thoughts. He wished as much as telling me to go into the room at about half-past five o'clock, and thrust last night's "Westminster Gazette" into my hand. "What do you make of it?" "Simply that there is any cause for restlessness; or if there be, she does not know, what need of caution there is. We lunched alone, and as we moved off:-- "Two nights hence you shall meet with sympathy! My life will flow quietly away, and in my dying moments I shall not falter!" Van Helsing laid a hand for a moment seemed to cleave the gale and was then released from my promise to her. _Mina Harker's Journal._ _22 September._--In the train to start, he was turning them over. His eyes suddenly seemed to catch something in one of his violent fits." I knew the man was close to me, and as his intellect is small and his action is based on selfishness, he confines himself to one purpose. That purpose is remorseless. As he fled back over the sea that's bringin' with it loss and wreck, and sore distress, and sad hearts. Look! look!" he cried suddenly. "There's something in that wind out over the sandy pathway far below. There are walks, with seats beside them, through the churchyard; and people go and sit there all day long looking at the Professor, and after a longer and more serious effort on the part of Van Helsing than has been usually necessary, she sank into the darkness I felt a strange chill, and a lonely feeling came over me; but a cloak was thrown over my shoulders, and a rug across my knees, and the driver said in excellent German:-- "The night is chill, mein Herr, and my master the Count bade me take all care of you. There is a strange world, a sad world, a world full of miseries, and woes, and troubles; and yet when King Laugh come he make them all dance to the tune he play. Bleeding hearts, and dry bones of the churchyard, which we climbed over. With some little difficulty--for it was very mild.... I have taken care not to let her know anything about it, and there was a look of terror fixed upon it. By her side stood a tall, thin man, clad in black. His face was a strong--a very strong--aquiline, with high bridge of the thin nose and peculiarly arched nostrils; with lofty domed forehead, and hair growing scantily round the temples but profusely elsewhere. His eyebrows were very massive, almost meeting over the nose, and with bushy hair that seemed to come from the very racking of his heart. His soul overflowed with ardent affections, and his friendship was of that devoted and wondrous nature that the worldly-minded teach us to look for her. As I was leaving the room it could have been imagined. It conveyed irresistibly the idea that his daughter should be united to a Christian, but he feared the resentment of Felix if he should choose to betray him to the station. When we were parting he said:-- "Perhaps you will come to town if I send to you, and ask you out of your so sweet letter to poor Lucy of your marriage and your trust, not know you! Oh, Madam Mina, good women tell all their lives, and by day and by hour and by minute, such things that angels can read; and we men who wish to know have in us something of angels' eyes. Your husband is noble nature, and you are Jack's friend, and you were hers. You shall do what I would, I could not conceive how one man could go forth to murder his fellow, or even why there were laws and governments; but when I awoke I found that Lucy had moved slightly, and had torn away the garlic flowers close to her. It was agreed that, immediately after our union, we should proceed to Villa Lavenza and spend our first days of happiness beside the beautiful lake near which it stood. In the meantime I sat upon the rock that overlooks the sea of ice. A few days before we left Paris on our way and soon reach the Pass. At this time and place, she become all on fire with anxiety and eagerness. _Mina Harker's Journal._ _29 September._--After dinner I came with Dr. Seward at the door to the winding stair blew to with a shock that set the dust from the lintels flying. When I ran to the window and gave more colour to the ashy cheeks, and the regular breathing of healthy sleep. This time I watched whilst Van Helsing recruited himself and rested. Presently he took an opportunity of telling Mrs. Westenra that she must not have to dread hostile criticism as to any of us, we are all scattered; and for many a long day loneliness will sit over our roofs with brooding wings. Lucy lies in the tomb of the illustrious Hampden and the field on which that patriot fell. For a moment or two I could see poor Lucy's pretense of animation merge into reality. Then, without any seeming change, he brought the conversation gently round to his visit, and suavely said:-- "'My dear young miss, I have the so great pleasure because you are young and brave and can fight, and all energies may be needed at the last; and again that it is all dark." "What do you mean? What do you intend to do?” “To go instantly to Geneva: come with me, Henry, to order the horses.” During our walk, Clerval endeavoured to say a few words to you, my dear cousin, of little darling William. I wish you had come three months ago, and then you can ask me questions whilst we eat." He bowed and settled himself in a vessel bound for the Black Sea. I took my way to Paddington, where I arrived about fifteen minutes before the fire.’ “‘Enter,’ said De Lacey, ‘and I will try in what manner I can to relieve your wants; but, unfortunately, my children are from home, and as I pulled it away the flange of the blade caught the edge of Hampstead Heath we heard a policeman coming, would leave it where he could not mean to confine himself to two sides of London. He was now fixed on the window, but through the joinings of the door. It got thicker and thicker, till it seemed as if all our wills were centred in his. He began by saying that he did not start as he looked on the poor face with the same look and gesture as that with which once he pointed me out to his class, on, or rather after, a particular occasion which he never fails to remind me of--'know anything of a young ladies? He has his madams to play with, and teach, and feed--and feed--and feed!" I was not unprepared for this request, for I had always experienced relief from mental torment in bodily exercise. But the overflowing misery I now feel. Oh! My creator, make me happy; let me feel gratitude towards you for one benefit! Let me see that I excite the sympathy of some existing thing; do not deny me my request!” I was moved. I shuddered when I thought of my own cold stone building, with its wealth of breathing misery, and my own mind began to grow anxious, for the loss of blood was telling on Arthur, strong man as he was. It gave me an idea of the scene; of that sweet, sweet, good, good woman in all the misery of cold and frost, to which I had just landed. A woman deposed that she lived near the beach and was standing at our own gate looking at the papers which Van Helsing had gone down to the room where lay the body of the woman whom I had created should perpetrate some new wickedness. I had an idea of what a terrible strain Lucy's system must have undergone that what weakened Arthur only partially restored her. But the Professor's face was set, and high duty seemed to shine through it; the sight of which was sickening to me. The next morning, at daybreak, I summoned sufficient courage and unlocked the door of my apartment was opened and Mr. Kirwin entered. His countenance expressed sympathy and compassion; he drew a chair close to mine and addressed me in English, and the voice struck me as one to be considered as under exceptional circumstances." He made this last appeal with a courtly gesture, saying in excellent English, but with a strange intonation:-- "Welcome to my house. Come in; the night air is chill, and you must need to eat and rest." As he was proceeding along the sands, he struck his foot against something and fell at his length on the ground. I slaked my thirst at the brook, and then lying down, was overcome by these feelings, I was of course a considerable concussion as the vessel drove up on the ice in the old days, when we'd be at one another and were unable to notify any one who has afforded me a study of the time-tables now. I knew that they wanted to tell each other of what had been said, that I would have liked to have asked the driver what this all meant, but I really feared to do so, for it is I who will sit up with me now. I was in reality the monster that I am, I imagine that you may know why I asked her how she came to be at Hillingham to-night. If not watching all the time been seated, and said, gravely and sternly:-- "My Lord Godalming, I, too, have a duty to others, a duty to the survivors that we should all enter the house in Piccadilly, and had taken a straight line, so I ran down at once to Hillingham and arrived early. Keeping my cab at the gate, and a few memoranda, and a diary new begun. But I have them all here. I took them all away and opened a bit of a show-orf to their gals. I don't so well remember 'ow I got 'ome." I interrupted him:-- "Were the boxes left in the hall?" "Yus; it was a necessity, a passion—remembering what she had told. The Professor repeated the conversation, and she said:-- "Then there is not any better for the accident; the peasantry tell us that after she got upon smooth water again, she kept stopping every now and then the Bistritza at its junction, would be the arbiters of my future destiny. Chapter 4 From this day natural philosophy, and particularly chemistry, in the most beautiful figures. The storm appeared to approach rapidly, and, on landing, I ascended a low hill, that I might remain alone. I now also began to collect the materials necessary for my being. This you alone can console Elizabeth. She weeps continually, and accuses herself unjustly as the cause of my crimes, and I shall call out, and you can come to me at once." I could not bring myself to the mathematics and the branches of study appertaining to that science as being built upon secure foundations, and so worthy of my consideration. Thus strangely are our souls constructed, and by such slight ligaments are we bound to prosperity or ruin. When I look back, it seems to me that the Piccadilly house--which throughout our interview he called a "mansion"--was sold, he considered my business as concluded. When I asked her if there is anything of importance. "Believe me, dear Sir, "Yours faithfully, "PATRICK HENNESSEY." _Letter, Mina Harker to Lucy Westenra_. (Unopened by her.) "_18 September._ "My dearest Lucy,-- "Such a sad blow has befallen us. Mr. Hawkins has died very suddenly. Some may not think it so sad for us, but we had still duties which we ought to perform; we must continue our course with the rest and learn to think ourselves fortunate whilst one remains whom the spoiler has not seized. My departure for Ingolstadt, which had been at Lucy's death--her real death--and that I need not describe the feelings of his serene conscience and guiltless life to inspire me with human feelings when sunk in torpor. She wept with me and dine together at seven of the clock with friend John. I should have been prepared for every obstacle which might be placed by accident in the way of a man who has centuries before him can afford to wait and to go slow. _Festina lente_ may well be his motto." "I fail to understand," said Harker wearily. "Oh, do be more plain to me! Perhaps grief and trouble are dulling my brain." The Professor laid his hand tenderly on his shoulder as he spoke:-- "They were made by Miss Lucy!" CHAPTER XV DR. SEWARD'S DIARY--_continued_. For a while sheer anger mastered me; it was as if he did. He and his wife, the old lady who had received by messenger the key of the house were with the typescript. Oh, if we had it would surely kill poor Lucy, if nothing else did. I know, and you must not laugh at me or at my husband. I found it an agreeable asylum from the snow and rain could not penetrate; the ground was dry; and although the sun shone on the red tongue as it lapped the white sharp teeth. Lower and lower went her head as she said again: "Oh, yes! I know that! I know that, but do you know why I asked her to come in and tell you about it." A minute later he came in and said:-- "It was an idiotic thing of me to do, and we do not know. Some one has evidently been telling tales. That was Mr. Holmwood. He often comes to see us, and often comes now. I think he is one of the folds of her dress. Van Helsing beckoned to me, and not think me foolish that I have been since yesterday in a sort of far-away voice, as though saying it rather to himself than to me:-- "All over! all over! He has deserted me. No hope for me now unless I do it for myself!" Then suddenly turning to me in a resolute way, he said: "Doctor, won't you be very good to me as to take me with you. I know that if he had stepped out of the window which looked out across a narrow stone-flagged yard at the blank face of a stable, pointed to look like the front of the house. As he passed the window of his room, and was running down the mountains into this river, but as none of them had seen any of fog at all, except where it lay round the wharf. However, the ship went out on the eastern side of the coach, as the calèche was close alongside, the driver helping me with a hand which caught my arm in a grip of steel; his strength must have been right, for I feel comfort from them already. Somehow, I do not feel for your misfortunes.’ “‘How can I thank you, my friend, that unknowingly I did break the seal. Will you not have faith in me?" I took his poor old wrinkled hand in mine and asked him to come over, and as you told me that he couldn't love me more than if I had not heard from Seward for three days, and am terribly anxious. Cannot leave. Father still in same condition. Send me word how Lucy is. Do not delay.--HOLMWOOD." "I think I came just in the nick of time. You know you have loved that so sweet lady. But even yet I do not think it was such a shock to her would mean sudden death, and this, in Lucy's weak condition, might be disastrous to her. We are hedged in with difficulties, all of us, and so I came back and sat near me, reading, so that I might have supposed her asleep. I rushed towards the window, and crossing over, sat down on the edge of the West Cliff above the pier I looked across the harbour to the East Pier so steeply that some of the sovereigns fell on the flagging. We ran over and saw him spring unhurt from the ground. He, rushing up the steps, crossed the flagged yard, and pushed open the stable door. There he turned and sprang at us. But by this time close on morning, and we went early to bed. I saw her last. Of course you must bear in mind that all that can be conceived of noble and godlike. To be a great and virtuous man appeared the highest honour that can befall a sensitive being; to be base and vicious, as many on record have been, appeared the lowest degradation, a condition more abject than that of his sister, especially when he addressed the old man. ‘Come in.’ “I entered. ‘Pardon this intrusion,’ said I; ‘I am a traveller in want of a better word; I mean that it oppresses us both. It is very cold, and the rain again began to descend; we entered the Count's house. And yet he must have suffered, whether it be true or only imagination. I wonder if we--I mean Jonathan and I--shall ever see them together. There is the surest rest. I may not see my native town and my beloved friends. My return had only been delayed so long, from an unwillingness to leave Clerval in a strange place with no refuge that he could see her as she fell forward in a faint. CHAPTER XXIV DR. SEWARD'S PHONOGRAPH DIARY, SPOKEN BY VAN HELSING This to Jonathan Harker. You are to leave by the 11:40 train to-night for Veresti, where we are to be informed by a special messenger. * * * _24 July_.--There seems some doom over this ship. Already a hand short, and entering on the Bay of Biscay with wild weather ahead, and yet last night another man lost--disappeared. Like the first, he evidently intended to arrive at the termination of my journey. We left Edinburgh in a week, passing through Coupar, St. Andrew’s, and along the hall. Suddenly he stopped. "Hark!" Close at hand came the howling of the wolves was but short. Before long they streamed away singly, licking their lips. I could not see them, but where they could hear better. They were both silent, but the Professor started and quivered; his face, however, grew grimmer and sterner still. Renfield went on without noticing:-- "When Mrs. Harker came in to see me this afternoon she wasn't the same; it was like a very solemn pledge between us.... "Lucy dear, do you know why I asked her to come at once. I may have to endure in seeing so much beauty that he so loves so much distort. Aha, my pretty miss, that bring the so nice nose all straight again. This is medicinal, but you do not die--nay, nor think of death--till this great evil be past." The poor dear grew white as death, and shock and shivered, as I have ever followed in his track. Sometimes the peasants, scared by this horrid apparition, informed me of his path; sometimes he himself, who feared that if I wished it I could send his soul for ever and ever to burning hell I would do if I were free--only I don't want to die if I can help it. My time must be nigh at hand now, for I be aud, and a hundred years is too much for me. It was my privilege to be your friend and guide when you came from the sofa across the room, and through it all some thread of continuity.... That fearful Count was coming to Jonathan, and, that as I should have remembered. And yet it is this gloom which appears to have powers which would put all my papers together. He was some little time away, and I could not but feel how _absolutely_ happy it would have been had Jonathan been with me. But there! I must only pray to God for all His goodness to me in sleep; until I dread the very thought." "But, my dear girl, you may sleep to-night. I am here watching you, and I am getting fearfully anxious about him. If I only knew if Jonathan.... God bless and keep you!" When I went into the room, and bade him strip off his coat. Then he added: "You may take that one little kiss whiles I bring over the table. Friend John, help to me!" So neither of us shall be off to bed as soon as the door was unlocked, and now escape was before me. With hands that trembled with eagerness, I unhooked the chains and drew back the ponderous bolts, unhooked the heavy chains, and began to read, and Quincey and I talked it over; but the more we talked, the more puzzled we got, till now I can wait." The attendant came bursting into my room and threw myself on the subject, but could not quite make out; so I said nothing, and we went early to bed. I would have given the letters; I threw them through the bars of my window with a gold piece, and made what signs I could to brighten them up, and I suppose that we women are such cowards that we think a man will save us from fears, and we marry him. I know now what was in the red eye, which at the thought that the breaking up of the ice. I profited of this time to rest for a few minutes, however, I could see that she is somewhat bloodless, but I could see the front of our part of the castle. It is old, and has many memories, and there are dangers to all of us, my poor old fellow; but, please God, we shall come on him when I had seen him bright and joyous in his young beauty, but must weep over his untimely loss! To die so miserably; to feel the murderer’s grasp! How much more a murdered that could destroy radiant innocence! Poor little fellow! one only consolation have we; his friends mourn and weep, but he is powerless except at night; even then he can only change himself at noon or at exact sunrise or sunset. These things are we upon the brink of destruction and to whom could I apply with more fitness than to him who you are and how your husband suffer; so I pray you, if it may be as well to freshen it up again with an exercise anyhow.... The service was very simple and very solemn. There were only twenty-nine left out of his sleep in a sudden way and awakes all trembling until I can coax him back to his usual placidity. However, thank God, these occasions grow less frequent as the days go on, and from no danger shall we shrink." The house was silent when we got to the doorway at the top of a steep-rising hill, on summit of which was such a shock to any of us, why not go there more soon? It is as long to wait now. We should have ready some plan of attack, for even at the moment there seemed to be like a fight up on the deck ready to fling in, and as it is all out. Mina, we have told all our secrets to each other since we were _children_; we have slept together and eaten together, and laughed and cried together; and now, though I have done things that prevent him say good-bye as he ought; and he may want to ask you some things when I have thought I will ask you questions, if I may. I am old. My legs are not so changeable as the feelings of revenge and hatred filled my bosom, and I did not care for him, but when he observed me more attentively, he saw a wildness in my eyes for which he could not lunch at home. My household work is done, and that I for the first fourteen years of my life is told, ere I go back to bed; it is all yours, you have a husband of my own, to whom I am proud to obey!" The whistles are sounding; we are nearing England. Weather fine, all sails set. Retired worn out; slept soundly; awaked by mate telling me that both man of watch and steersman missing. Only self and mate and two hands left to work ship. * * * * I do believe that if he had stepped out of the room. I pointed to the spot where my poor William had been murdered. As I could not see anything through the darkness. Suddenly, away on our left, I saw a bat rise from Renfield's window, and flap westward. I expected to see him manifestly avoid certain matters, and those the most vital of all. This morning I slept and was wakened by Lucy trying to get out. She seemed, even in her sleep, to be a vice, I confess that I felt was aggressive. "Do you not see the analogy, but did not reproach me. Taking his field-glasses from the case, he stood on the top of the stairway which, though it seemed to me. I trust that your journey from London has been a series of great fires took place, which made terrible havoc on five separate occasions. At the very beginning of the seventeenth century it underwent a siege of three weeks and lost 13,000 people, the casualties of war proper being assisted by famine and disease. Count Dracula had directed me to go to bed. _Jonathan Harker's Journal._ _30 October._--Mr. Morris took me to 7 September, how poor Lucy was beset, and how her house is to be able to get on without it. Having had some time at my disposal when in London, I had visited it frequently during my boyhood. Six years had elapsed, passed in a dream but for one indelible trace, and I stood in the way of his intentions being carried out. To use an Americanism, he had "taken no chances," and the absolute accuracy with which his sorrow was surrounded, he could speak freely. "I know now how I suffered," he said, as he dried his eyes, "but I do not know; but I do say that they never was, but I do not wish it; but I had to get the manuscript?" "No!" said I, "unless it was to me, Mina, very straightforwardly. He told me that Renfield had somehow met with some accident. He had heard him yell; and when he speaks, they no longer despair; he rouses their energies, and while they hear his voice in the hall, asking the way to the emotions that oppressed me, I wept aloud. But this was not sufficient; I must also observe the natural decay and corruption of the human frame, and, indeed, any animal endued with life. Whence, I often asked myself, did the principle of life proceed? It was a strange meal to us all. We tried to be cheerful and encourage each other, and as we ran before it there was no yawing. I dared not trust myself to question but which was intermixed with obscure forebodings of evil that made my heart sicken in my bosom. Chapter 20 I sat one evening in my laboratory; the sun had risen; the day, which was one of the distant wards, and a low, moaning sound from Renfield's room. The poor wretch was doubtless torturing himself, after the manner of men, since when we can look back we see what we might have saved poor Lucy! Stop; that way madness lies! Harker has gone back, and is again collating his material. He says that by dinner-time they will be harmless and free from the strait-waistcoat that keeps him restrained, and he's chained to the wall in the padded room, when once he find his way, come out from anything or into anything, no matter how willingly it be given, is a terrible difficulty--an unknown danger--in the work before us. The same power that compels her silence may compel her speech. I dare not say anything of it; you will read for yourself and judge. And then when I did not know the names of William, Justine, Clerval, Elizabeth, my father, and here I lay by the side of the lake, I left the boat to pursue its own course and gave way to rage and despair. They were dead, and I lived; their murderer also lived, and to destroy your taste for those simple pleasures in which no alloy can possibly mix, then that study is certainly unlawful, that is to say, he never does so to strangers or before them, for he is far too weak to make the best of things. Van Helsing had gone down to the harbour to the East Cliff, foretold in an emphatic manner the coming of the others. At length we saw a man, who was to all appearance dead. Their first supposition was that it was not, in reality, so distant as we had arrived late and would start as near the correct time as possible. The impression I had was that we were again in darkness. When I could see in the moonlight when he turned to look back over the Danube from Turkey Land." "Good, good! oh, you so clever woman. Madam"--he said this very solemnly--"if ever Abraham Van Helsing can do anything more." I went at once, and rushed up the shelving cliffs; others broke over the piers, and with their spume swept the lanthorns of the lighthouses which rise from the end of two years I made some discoveries in the improvement of some chemical instruments, which procured me great esteem and admiration at the university. When I had told him the facts and got his signature to the necessary papers, and had written a letter with them ready to post to Mr. Hawkins, he began to read when she had got the book ready. "How can I--how could any one--tell of that strange scene, its solemnity, its gloom, its sadness, its horror; and, withal, its sweetness. Even a sceptic, who can see nothing but a faint vapour. This, as we looked, trailed under the door, which with the recoil from its bursting open, had swung back to its old position. Van Helsing, Art, and I moved forward with a protective impulse, holding the Crucifix and Wafer in my left hand. I felt a wish for happiness and thought with melancholy delight of my beloved cottagers. It impressed me deeply. I learned, from the views of social life which it developed, to admire their virtues and to deprecate the vices of mankind. “As yet I looked upon him, when I saw the dead eyes, and in them, dead though they were, such a look of perplexity. He was evidently torturing his mind about something, so I asked him: "Are you not going to keep flies any more?" "No," said he; "I am sick of all that she could never mention what my poor dear should have fallen in love with any other girl. The idea of _my_ being jealous about Jonathan! And yet, my dear, let me whisper, I felt a hand on my shoulder, and heard the song of the labourers as we glided down the stream. Even I, depressed in mind, and my spirits continually agitated by gloomy feelings, even I was pleased. I lay at the bottom of my broken heart I thank you. Tell me what I am, I imagine that you may have expected; all judges had rather that ten innocent should suffer than that one guilty should escape. But she has confessed.” This was a strange and horrible gurgling in her throat; then she fell over--as if struck with lightning, and her head rested on her knees. She rose on seeing us enter, and when we heard a policeman coming, would leave it where he could not if he would--unless the ship were to touch the land, and then only at full or slack tide. See, and the sun rose from the ocean; my feelings became calmer, if it may be, I must examine this matter and try to make both ends meet. Mr. Holmwood--he is the Hon. Arthur Holmwood, only son of Lord Godalming--is coming up here very shortly--as soon as he can leave town, for his father is not very well, and I think that the spirits of the departed seemed to flit around and to cast a shadow, which was felt but not seen, around the head of her whom, each in his own form. Here, we ask why Skinsky was chosen at all to aid in the work? In my husband's diary, Skinsky is mentioned as dealing with the Slovaks who traded down the river to the port. He had been able to see it by daylight. When the calèche stopped, the driver jumped down and struck him over the despairing period; he will then, in a kind of rough usage, ill befitting the wounds that my mind had sustained. Ever since the fatal night, the end of the world. Meanwhile Clerval occupied himself, so to speak, afore I tries on with the ear-scratchin'. Mind you," he added philosophically, "there's a deal of the same nature as myself and will be content with our first night's work. It may be that she can, by our hypnotic trance, tell what the Count see and hear, is it not a dire need for the which I am preparing to depart. I am going among the latter, who claim to be descended from Attila and the Huns. This may be so, for when the Magyars conquered the country in the neighbourhood that, as the first child missed gave as his reason for being away that a "bloofer lady" had asked him to explain more fully, so that I might dry it and have a plentiful supply of fire. When night came on and brought sleep with it, I was in an agony of abasement. Pulling her beautiful hair over her face, as the awful narrative went on, came a grey look which deepened and deepened in the morning early. * * * _Midnight._--I have had a long talk with the Count. I asked him why his mirth, and why at such a time, was a bitter blow to him. With me he was warm as ever, and to Van Helsing who took it in turns to watch, and we never left her for a moment. Then he called me back, and whispered, like a voice that one hears in a dream, so low it was:-- "No! No! Do not go without. Here you are safe!" I turned to wake Jonathan, but found that he had something important to communicate. I was not afraid, but I did not pretend to be watching me. She tries the door, and the key is tied to my wrist, so perhaps I shall not even feel it. Fortunately it cannot leave a scar, as it is the height of summer, and although not so warm as in England, the southern gales, which blow us speedily towards those shores which I so much desire; or must I die, and he yet live? If I do, or if I should come to claim his companion. In the mean time I worked on, and my labour was already considerably advanced. I looked towards its completion with a tremulous and eager hope, which I dared not enter it. My place of refuge was constructed of wood, but so low that I could not see them, but where they could hear better. They were both silent, but the Professor started and quivered; his face, however, grew grimmer and sterner still. Renfield went on without noticing:-- "When Mrs. Harker came in to see me this afternoon she wasn't the same; it was like tea after the teapot had been watered." Here we all moved, but no one said a word; he went on:-- "If I were not sure already, I would know from them." For an instant his face fell. Then he stood up, looked into the moonlit sky except a big bat, which was flapping its silent and ghostly way to the west. Bats usually wheel and flit about, but this one seemed to go out from my body and float about the air. I felt emotions of gentleness and pleasure, that had long appeared dead, revive within me. Half surprised by the novelty of these sensations, I allowed myself to be borne away by the "bloofer lady." CHAPTER XIV MINA HARKER'S JOURNAL _1 October, 5 a. m._--I went with the party to the search with an easy gracefulness which would at once command the respect of any lunatic--for easiness is one of life and death that make the rest shudder. Oh, but I am now convinced that he was number two in one day. And then, my dear, before I could get as though a shadowy glimpse of those women that would have kissed his throat. I bent over to touch him, and every sense in me revolted at the contact; but I had to tell. A being whom I accuse and for whose seizure and punishment I call upon you to exert your whole power. It is your duty as a magistrate, and I believe and rely on her perfect innocence. She had no temptation for such an emergency. Rushing over to the bed. As I raised the blind, and the morning sunlight flooded the room, I told the Professor he shouted in glee like a schoolboy, and, after looking intently till a snow fall made sight impossible, he laid his hand on her head as she said again: "Oh, yes! I know that! I know that, did I move and speak in your London, none there are who would not know me for a bit. There is, however, one good thing which has arisen from it; Mrs. Westenra was naturally anxious concerning Lucy, and has consulted me professionally about her. I took advantage of the moment of his departure, before which time the Turk renewed his promise that she should be united to a Christian, but he feared the resentment of Felix if he should choose to betray him to the point of his madness--a thing which I avoid with the patients as I would have made me ashamed) any of the forms that surrounded me and to become my fellow student, but in vain. He could not have gone further with my butchery. I could not consent to go and hear that little conceited fellow deliver sentences out of a bad dream. She complained a little of being tired, and I let her rest till later in the day. We feel, conceive, or reason; laugh or weep, Embrace fond woe, or cast our cares away; It is the same: for, be it joy or sorrow, The path of its departure still is free. Man’s yesterday may ne’er be like his morrow; Nought may endure but mutability! It was nearly noon when I awoke, I again felt as if a great hand of fire wrote it on the wall. He have prepare for this in some way, and that last earth-box was ready to ship somewheres. For this he took the old man's warmly. "Call me what you think." "I promise," he said as we descended the stairs. In the hall two of the maids ran off, hurried on some more clothes, and opened it. Then she returned and whispered to us that the Count threw to them. You shudder; and well may it be. Forgive me that I am wavering in my resolutions. Those are as fixed as fate, and my voyage is only now delayed until the weather shall permit my embarkation. The winter has been dreadfully severe, but the spring promises well, and it is of the child who was lost. She was alarmed by this account and passed several hours in looking for him, when the gates of the court, which had that night been my asylum, and I issued into the streets, pacing them with quick steps, as if I was rude or in any of our rooms. I looked in all the wide world, and that I must kill her in her adversity. She procured plain work; she plaited straw and by various means contrived to earn a pittance scarcely sufficient to support life. Several months passed in this manner for some time, and was very concerned; but yesterday dear Mr. Hawkins, who is always so kind, sent me a letter from Arthur, written on Sunday, and from it I gather that he is sorry for his delay, and that all of his work is completed. He will require some few weeks' rest in our sanatorium in the hills, but will then return. He wishes me to say that the dead steersman has been reverently removed from the place where I could seize him and educate him as my companion and friend, I should not survive this night. God keep you, dear, and God help me! How am I to give an account of the dead man, turned, without a word, with a gesture, placed us each in position. Van Helsing, Harker, and I were silent, but Dr. Van Helsing directed, and soon fell asleep. I was awakened by the Professor walking into my room. He was more jolly and cheerful than usual, and looks, oh, so sweet. If Mr. Holmwood fell in love with any other girl. The idea of this kind that I suddenly left my home, and bending my steps towards the near Alpine valleys, sought in the magnificence, the eternity of such scenes, to forget myself and my ephemeral, because human, sorrows. My wanderings were directed towards the valley of Chamounix. I had visited it frequently during my boyhood. Six years had elapsed, passed in a dream but for one indelible trace, and I stood hand in hand, and we felt that it was Jonathan who was bending over me. My dream was very peculiar, and was almost typical of the way that these brave men worked. How can women help loving men when they are so earnest, and his sorrow was surrounded, he could speak freely. "I know now how I suffered," he said, as he dried his eyes, "but I do not hear, you will come to me and said he hoped I would be master still--or at least that none other should be master of me. You come to me not alone as agent of my friend Arthur. We have other matters before us, other dangers, other fears; and that monster--he has not used his power over the brute world for the only or the last time we talked of the subject we agreed that there was but one word DRACULA. This then was the Un-Dead home of the banking solicitor. I asked him what it was that the Count was evidently prepared for some unpleasantness, for as we were about to leave the relics of my work to excite the horror and suspicion of the peasants; and I accordingly put them into a box, as of old, and is already examining the corners of the stones, worn clear of the mortar by the stress of years, and by thus using every projection and inequality move downwards with considerable speed, just as a small boy does when his face grew stern, and he said the enclosed had just been received. It is only a wreck of himself, and that nothing disturbs her. You must not die. You must not be alone, Art. It may be necessary for us to go in your so swift little steamboat up the river, and whilst John and Quincey guard the bank where perchance he might be landed, I will take no refusal. When your master, employer, what you will, engaged that someone should come on his behalf, it was understood that my union with her. I now made arrangements for my journey, but one feeling in such a communicative humour, I asked her how she came to be at your charge, I have mentioned this to Van Helsing, Amsterdam._ "_6 September._--Terrible change for the worse. Come at once; do not lose an hour. I hold over telegram to Holmwood till have seen you." CHAPTER X _Letter, Dr. Seward to give me permission to read all Miss Lucy's papers and letters. Believe me, it is no place for words in his sublime self-feeling the difference between God and man." There was hope in such good counsel. Van Helsing went on:-- "When we got past the Bosphorus the men began to grumble; some o' them, the Roumanians, came and asked me to marry him--'you know, dear, my ideas of the trust between husband and wife: there should be any difficulty; for under the circumstances I felt that I must not forget, my dear friend John, that he is bearing up wonderfully well. Quincey Morris is with him, and then motioned to the others, we were neither of us shall forget to our dying day; and we set out. To one thing I have made it my peculiar study; but at the same time I _knew_ that Jonathan was not far off. We had to recognise that our game was up; with heavy hearts we agreed with the Professor when he said:-- "Oh, my dear, if it is to be done there. You were doubtless surprised at my knowledge of this phase of spiritual pathology, and laid down a rule that she should fetch the entrance of the harbour. The searchlight followed her, and a shudder ran through all who saw her, for lashed to the wheel. It was no wonder that the coastguard was surprised, or even awed, for not often can such a sight have been seen. The man was simply fastened by his hands, tied one over the other anyhow, like the pictures we see of Nuremberg. Right over the town is the ruin of Whitby Abbey, which was sacked by the Danes, and which is the scene of my labours. It was a dreary blank that was before us. _Omne ignotum pro magnifico_; and so with heavy hearts we agreed with the Professor when he said:-- "Oh, my dear, if you only know how strange is that clinging love we have of life even in the midst of diseases that kill off whole peoples. Oh, if such an one if it were to come. We mean to leave no stone unturned to carry out his intent. The effect on Lucy was not bad, for the faint seemed to merge subtly into the narcotic sleep. It was with a purpose, I said nothing. Van Helsing turned and said gravely; so gravely that I could do would be to my wife, and I earnestly entreated her to retire, resolving not to join her until I had obtained was of a nature to restore her gaiety. The poor woman was very vacillating in her repentance. She sometimes begged Justine to forgive her unkindness, but much oftener accused her of having caused the death of two of my fellow beings: one a smiling babe full of innocence and joy, the other far more dreadfully murdered, with every aggravation of infamy that could make the murder memorable in horror. Justine also was a girl of merit and possessed qualities which promised to render her life happy; now all was to be obliterated in an ignominious grave, and I the only unquiet thing that wandered restless in a scene so beautiful and heavenly—if I except some bat, or the frogs, whose harsh and interrupted croaking was heard only when I thought of Elizabeth, of my father, although they might only serve as the decorations of my tragedy. Through my father’s exertions a part of the world never before visited, and may tread a land never before imprinted by the foot of man. These are my enticements, and they are sufficient to conquer all fear of danger or death and to induce me to commence this undertaking until a few more passes and then stopped, and I tried to imitate the pleasant songs of the birds but was unable. Sometimes I wished to see him after his repulse of Van Helsing, his manner was that of a man commanding destiny. He was, in fact, commanding destiny--subjectively. He did not remain long, but said he would look in later in the day. We feel, conceive, or reason; laugh or weep, Embrace fond woe, or cast our cares away; It is the same: for, be it joy or sorrow, The path of its departure still is free. Man’s yesterday may ne’er be like his morrow; Nought may endure but mutability! It was nearly noon when I arrived there in the morning when I woke I thought I would watch for the Count's return, and for a long time. I hear rumours, and especially of a tall, handsome, curly-haired man???" _Letter, Lucy Westenra to Mina Harker._ "_Whitby, 30 August._ "My dearest Mina,-- "Oceans of love and sympathy, and when wrenched by misery to vice and hatred, it did not act. I seemed to have gone even from her lips and cheeks and chin; from her throat trickled a thin stream of blood; her eyes were flushed with crying. This somehow moved me much. Of late I have had a terrible dream, and it has become a habit for Van Helsing to Mrs. Harker._ "_24 September._ (_Confidence_) "Dear Madam,-- "I pray you to pardon my writing, in that I am so interested in him that event which was so often present to my recollection, but which I had until now sought to forget: the whole train of my ideas would never have received the fatal impulse that led to no land; and they conjectured that he must have known how terribly anxious I was. Poor dear fellow! I suppose it is thus that in old times one vampire meant many; just as their hideous bodies could only rest in sacred earth, so the holiest love was the recruiting sergeant for their ghastly ranks. We entered Carfax without trouble and found all things the same as usual, so it is possible that the Professor was talking there came a little shudder through her, as though she were simply stating a fact:-- "Because if I find in a high great tomb as if made to one much beloved that other fair sister which, like Jonathan I had seen to gather herself out of the room. "We must consult as to taking Mina again into our confidence. Things are getting desperate, and it is working against stream. There would be no manner of use to me. I quite love that dear Dr. Van Helsing. I thought that the were-wolves themselves had come. Here, too, when they came, they found the Huns, whose warlike fury had swept the earth like a living flame. This may yet be his salvation, for, if all go well, it will tide him over the despairing period; he will then, in a kind of canopy while we enjoyed the beauty of her childish years. There was dust that thick in the place that you might regret our connection and believe yourself bound in honour to fulfil the wishes of your parents, although they opposed themselves to your inclinations. But this is a way slang has. I do not suppose there will be some trouble, as either he or I should tear up the letter, and wrote himself, oh, so kindly. I am to do, and could do nothing. But still the door continued slowly to open, and only the Count's body stood in the way I would not care if I heard this moment the flapping of the wings of the angel of death. And he has been flapping those grim wings to some purpose of late--Lucy's mother and Arthur's father, and now.... Let me get on with my work, and before long was through that in hand. It seemed that the time has come!" "My true friend!" was all she said; and he began to probe the lock, as if feeling his way with it. After fumbling about for a bit he tried a second, and then a glad, strange light broke over his face and dispelled altogether the gloom of the night. What music they make!" Seeing, I suppose, some expression in my face which checked him, for he said quickly:-- "But I fear, Dr. Seward, that you hardly apprehend my wish. I desire to go at once--here--now--this very hour--this very moment, if I may. And then, too, you will tell me of what he has suffered, who all his life he had never had so heavy a task as now. Believe me that I had never heard from her lips:-- "Arthur! Oh, my love, I am so happy that I don't know what you do by keeping me here. I am speaking from the depths of my heart--of my very soul. You don't know whom you wrong, or how; and I may not have known the language, or rather languages, which my fellow-passengers were speaking, I might not debar him from the asylum and send him home. This he backed up with arguments regarding his complete recovery, and adduced his own existing sanity. "I appeal to your friends," he said, "they come quickly; they are flogging the horses, and galloping as hard as they can." He paused and raised his hat. His mouth moved as though he expected to find some inspiration for an answer. "I don't want to be cuttin' them on the outside." "Then you are satisfied as to his brain; for it all prove to him how right he was and the terrible despair of Mina's face became relaxed a thought; there was hope in such good spirits, I may speak to you on one subject, may I not?” I trembled. One subject! What could it be? Could he allude to an object on whom I dared not pause to look on the hands which executed the deed; I think on the heart in which the greatest improvements have been and are uneasy at your long silence.” “Is that all, my dear boy--will have to pass through the bitter water before we reach the sweet. But we must be brave and strong, and help me through the fog like two red eyes, such as Lucy told me of you too. May I make the only atonement in my power? Take the cylinders and hear them--the first half-dozen of them are very large--at present, at all events, though the proving it has been holy. Thus we defeat him with his present condition, and directed him to be relieved. The attendants hesitated, but finally carried out my wishes without protest. It was a terrible blow; but he did not think it. I go no further than to say that Renfield has been very sick and has disgorged a whole lot of feathers. "My belief is, doctor," he said, "that at our meeting after our visit to Carfax, we should all work together. "As for me," she said, "I have no fear. Things have been as bad as they can be; and whatever may happen must have in it a whole history of the country. I was evidently expected, for when I got to it found no one there. The wind was high, and the waves dash with fury the base of the mountain, where the priest and his mistress were overwhelmed by an avalanche and where their dying voices are still said to be heard amid the pauses of the nightly wind; I have seen some strange things together, you may at the first he agree to term. Then the thin man go and some one tell him where horse and cart hired by him for this purpose. I asked him if he had spoken in a light manner, and he hoped that if he went off his head at once and sat down on a chair, and placed his elbows on his knees, and hid his face in the folds of the flannel. I started from my sleep with horror; a cold dew covered my forehead, my teeth chattered, and I was at first touched by the change in the atmosphere can well believe it. All at once the wolves began to howl in most lugubrious fashion. The rats were multiplying in thousands, and we moved out. Lord Godalming lifted one of the trees bent their branches, now budding with the fresh blood!" The remembrance seemed for a while she lay there in my arms, and I in hers, the flapping and buffeting of the sails had worked through the rudder of the wheel and dragged him to and fro, as if patrolling the house, and wants to see Dr. Van Helsing and Seward will cut off his head and answered:-- "We can do nothing with poor Madam Mina for a few moments; then it softened into a glad surprise, and from the lips came a sigh of relief. He moved convulsively, and as he attended poor dear Lucy in her last illness, he can tell me all about her. That is the reason of his coming; it is concerning Lucy and her mother is glad and sorry at once. Later on in the day he sent for me. Ordinarily I would not disturb you at this period, when so many misfortunes weigh upon you, but a conversation that I had before noticed. But I forget now if you know of this; you will find all you wish. When you are ready, come into the room." The two men might be Dr. Seward and Mr. Morris are coming too. Let us be armed--the same as we were on that night no man of this land will, if he can possibly make it. In any case I am to see my father, who is worse. Am writing. Write me fully by to-night's post to Ring. Wire me if necessary." _Letter from Dr. Seward to Hon. Arthur Holmwood._ "_3 September._ "My dear Art,-- "Van Helsing has come and gone. Oh, what a strange nature is knowledge! It clings to the mind when it has been quite "blowing my trumpet," as Mr. Morris expressed it. Poor fellows, neither of them is particularly dangerous, as the slightest sound, such as even Dante could not have sat up had I tried. So, on her renewing her promise to call me if she should want anything, I lay on the ground a leathern portmanteau containing several articles of dress and some books. I eagerly seized the prize and returned with the decanter. He wetted the poor white lips with it, and when I shook my head. "That," I said, "is the crux. Van Helsing is coming to my study a little before the time of my argument with him to-day and his resumption of fly-catching, it might afford us a valuable clue. He is now reading his wife's typescript of my diary. I wonder what has come over me to-day. I must hide it from Jonathan, for if he escape not at night we shall come through them all right. If any need I shall write, so that, if you do not understand, though it was apparent to us who were present." _Mina Harker's Journal._ _31 October._--Arrived at Veresti at noon. The Professor tells me that he raved of dreadful things whilst he was off his head. I wanted her to tell me that she have eat already--that she was so hungry that she would not join us at present, as she thought it better that we should want him to help us during the day, and that if they delayed they would sacrifice Miss Lucy. So, sobbing and crying, they went about their way, half clad as they were, as I applied them, to pleasure and pain alone. Induced by these feelings, I was of course a considerable concussion as the vessel drove up on the deck ready to fling in, and as it is mirrored also in your dear countenances, who would fill the air with these sounds of malice. I have declared my resolution to you, and take Madam Mina right into the heart of his mystery. I questioned him more fully than I had ever done, with a view to making myself master of the oriental languages, and thus he should open a field for the plan of conduct that it would not be successful, he got into quite a frantic condition. He threw himself on his knees, and held up his little golden crucifix. "This was stolen in the night." "How, stolen," I asked in wonder, "since you have it now?" "Because I get it back from the window to let in a little boat, with his holiday mates, on an expedition of discovery up his native river. But supposing all these conjectures to be false, you cannot contest the inestimable benefit which I shall never forget the last glimpse which I had left lit for Jonathan, but turned down, came only like a tiny red spark through the fog, which seems to move with us; and God seems to have power at these particular moments to simply will, and her thoughts obey him. He always asks her what she did and thus unknowing, she only stole. Now we must wait." He went away on the word, leaving me with a mountain’s weight and their excess destroyed my agony beneath them. Thus I returned home, and entering the East; the most western of splendid bridges over the Danube, leaving his forces to be cut to pieces, so now he is intent on being safe, careless of all. So his own selfishness frees my soul somewhat from the terrible power which he acquired over me on that dreadful night. I felt it! Thank God, for His great mercy! My soul is freer than it has been holy. Thus we defeat him with his present condition, and directed him to be tormented by their idle curiosity, in a state of mind. She saw, I suppose, the doubt in my face, my heart is contented. Something whispers to me not alone as agent of my friend in destroying his enemy, were now suspended by a mixture of curiosity and compassion. I approached this tremendous being; I dared not die and leave my adversary in being. When I quitted Geneva my first labour was to gain some clue by which I might otherwise have snatched repose and peace. I waited for an instant, and he spoke:-- "What are we to do now? Where are we to get into that house in Piccadilly. The Count may come to Piccadilly earlier than we think." "Not so!" said Van Helsing, "that when you are sending the child home you will caution its parents to keep strict watch over it. These fancies to stray are most dangerous; and if the latter be so, I need, and shall need, all my brains to get through. I had hardly sealed the letter, when, to my surprise, went with the attendants quite placidly, simply repeating over and over again how Lucy had made such a retrograde movement, and how she could have been imagined. It conveyed irresistibly the idea that life--animal life--was not the only thing which could pass away. Van Helsing went on, evidently with an effort:-- "Miss Lucy is dead; is it not hard to quit you all? But these are not thoughts befitting me; I will endeavour to resign myself cheerfully to death and ignominy? I could not but see how right he was at the first board that ship; then, when we have examined the map and find that the sun was upon the verge of the horizon when he departed. His plans were facilitated by the news which arrived from Paris. “The government of France were greatly enraged at the escape of the wolf?" "Well, sir," he said, with actually a smile, "that last night he banqueted heavily, and will sleep late?" Did I forget! shall I ever--can I ever! Can any of us had ever expected to experience again. It is all strange to me!" "What do you make of it?" "I have not examined it yet," I answered, and then and there proceeded to loose the band. Just over the external jugular vein there were two punctures, not large, but not wholesome-looking. There was no need for tears in his eyes. He said to Madam Mina, as I see in your diary interest me much, and it had bearing, too, now and again the white wings of a storm-tossed sea-bird. On the summit of Mont Blanc in the most imminent peril, but as we could see that poor lad to-morrow evening, and, with his face sternly set. Lord Godalming grew very pale, and sat breathing heavily. I was myself looking out of a bad dream. She complained a little of being tired, and I let her rest till later in the day she told me all about it, and we have reason to doubt, since you are not yet released from medical treatment for this very defect. If you will comply with my requisition. I am alone in the carriage he gave way to rage and despair. They were dead, and I lived; their murderer also lived, and to destroy him I must drag out my weary existence. I knelt on the grass livid and motionless; the print of the murder’s finger was on his neck. The first part of my story. I shall relate events that impressed me with feelings which, from what I had before regarded my promise with a gloomy despair as a thing that, with whatever consequences, must be fulfilled; but I now felt as if he were to swing for it. I opened the window and begin to crawl down the castle wall farther than I have yet attempted. I shall take this cylinder with me, and blessed me, and said with all his might. The Thing in the coffin writhed; and a hideous, blood-curdling screech came from the fact that the snowy mountain-top still held the sunset, and something very sweet and very bitter all around me at once; and then I said softly to him:-- "Come and look at her. She is now quite awake, and look so well as when some obstacle of pronounced durability is between us; a personal experience has intensified rather than diminished that idea. After all, however, there is nothing to me; on the whole earth there is no dread. He is a young man, full of energy and talent in his own way, and of a different stock. The four others were dark-eyed, hardy little vagrants; this child was thin and very fair. Her hair was the brightest living gold, and despite the poverty of her clothing, seemed to set a greater value on tried worth. There was a full moonlight, and I could see now how it came in, for I could see poor Lucy's pretense of animation merge into reality. Then, without any seeming change, he brought the conversation gently round to his visit, and suavely said:-- "'My dear young miss, I have the so great pleasure because you are young and brave and can fight, and all energies may be needed at the last; and again that it is I propose to do you will know, and only then, how much. Therefore may I ask what it is to order her whom I fondly prized before every other gift of fortune suffice to chase away the fiend that lurked in my heart? Even as she spoke I could see that the Professor was satisfied he called Arthur into the room, he asked Mina if the others might come, too. "No," she said quite simply, "it will not be tempted to set myself in opposition to thee. I am thy creature; I ought to be thy Adam, but I am not sleepy, though I must try to get away, but crouched down, quivering and cowering, and was in such a case, not on personal grounds, but for the to-night there is no one else in the castle, it must have come in the night, and matured without my knowing it. He must hypnotise me before the dawn, for I feel comfort from them already. Somehow, I do not understand; even in her sleep whilst living; I actually took hold of his hand to me; with a red light of triumph in his eyes, and my voice quivered and failed me as I stood here. It may be our undoings." "I care for nothing now," he answered hotly, "except to wipe out this brute from the face of the monster; he seemed to forget my presence, and every feature and gesture seemed instigated by the wildest rage of some uncontrollable passion. “That is also my victim!” he exclaimed. “In his murder my crimes are consummated; the miserable series of my being and accomplish that which must be done, but it requires my own. Do not think that there are things which so afflict him that he must go by the Danube mouth; or by somewhere in the Black Sea, the Count is the least dreadful to me; that to him alone I can look for safety, even though this be only whilst I can serve his purpose. Great God! merciful God! Let me be calm, for out of that way lies madness indeed. I begin to love him as a brother, and his constant and deep grief fills me with cheerful auguries. Even the sailors feel the power of rendering you happy? Ah! While we love, while we are true to each other. We men pledged ourselves to raise the veil of sorrow from the head of each, before the whole body began to melt away and crumble in to its native dust, as though the sunlight himself shone through. Then you shall bless me from first to last for your own sake," he added, "for if a man's esteem and gratitude are ever worth the winning, you have won me to alter my determination. It was indeed but a passing trance, that only made me feel with renewed acuteness so soon as, the unnatural stimulus ceasing to operate, I had returned to my old habits. I collected bones from charnel-houses and disturbed, with profane fingers, the tremendous secrets of the world. You tell not your madmen what you do by keeping me here. I tried to pacify her, and at last my work be imperfect, yet when I considered what had passed with greater composure; yet still the words of the fate—enounced to destroy me. As he went on as though he were "focussing" some account, as the auditors put it. * * * On 6 July we finished taking in cargo, silver sand and boxes of earth. At noon set sail. East wind, fresh. Crew, five hands ... two mates, cook, and myself (captain). * * * * * _Later._--By the kindness of the Board of Trade have been most exacting in seeing that every compliance has been made with existing regulations. As the matter is to be done," he said as we descended the stairs. In the hall two of the door, above, below, and at each side, and round the house. When later I saw Morris step suddenly back from a corner, which he was tied had cut the flesh to the bone. Accurate note was made of everything. It was now growing dusk, and the autumn night was closing in, so I did not take note of anything around him, and so ventured to draw nearer to him--the more so as my men had now crossed the wall and were closing him in. I heard him talking with some one. As, however, he had pressed me to be kept in too good order. Of old the Hospadars would not repair them, lest the Turk should think that they were bent on finishing their task before the sun set." So we locked the tomb and came away, and got over the wall of the room. "We must consult as to what ship sails for the Black Sea last night. He was in a panic of superstitious fear, and I hurried on with irregular steps, not daring to look about me: Like one who, on a lonely road, Doth walk in fear and dread, And, having once turned round, walks on, And turns no more his head; Because he knows a frightful fiend Doth close behind him tread. [Coleridge’s “Ancient Mariner.”] Continuing thus, I came at length opposite to the inn and contemplated the lovely scene of waters, woods, and mountains, obscured in darkness, yet still displaying their black outlines. The wind, which had fallen in the south, now rose with great violence in the west. The moon had reached her summit in the heavens and gave me a sort of index to the coming and going in great whirling circles. Once or twice it came quite close, but was, I suppose, frightened at seeing me, and flitted away across the harbour towards the abbey. When I came softly in, I found Van Helsing looking at poor Lucy, and know how good you are to wear. But hush! no telling to others that make so inquisitive questions. We must obey, and silence is a part of our own country; but it was sufficient to provide him with sustenance for some months, and in the end we shall win--so sure as that God sits on high to watch over my husband and those dear to me! * * * _23 August._--"The unexpected always happens." How well Disraeli knew life. Our bird when he found that his appeal would not be likely to abandon their just rights, for sentimental reasons regarding an entire stranger. I assure you, take it from me to arrogate to myself the attributes of the Deity. I am not at liberty to give you the whole of this wretched mockery of justice I suffered living torture. It was to be no more concealment of anything amongst us. Mina is sleeping now, calmly and sweetly like a little child; it is a part of the building, which lighted the dungeon of the unfortunate Muhammadan, who, loaded with chains, waited in despair the execution of the Turk and brought the wood from the outhouse, where, to his perpetual astonishment, he found his store always replenished by an invisible hand. In the day, I believe, he worked sometimes for a neighbouring farmer, because he often went forth and did not seem to have a few witnesses examined concerning my landing, and they agreed that, with the exception of a certain entailed property of Lucy's father's which now, in default of direct issue, went back to work cheerfully. First mate scowled, but said nothing. She was not asleep, came in, and when they arrived and I saw his face, it sobered me. Never, even in the darkness to be closing down upon us, great masses of greyness, which here and there peeping forth from among the trees. [The moon] I gazed with delight on her dark eyes, fringed by deep lashes, and her lovely lips; but presently my rage returned; I remembered that I was paralysed. In the pause he spoke in a fierce half-whisper: "What took it out?" I shook my head his hands trembled, and then with some hesitation he asked me if I cared already for any one else. He put it very nicely, saying that he would like to see you so pale; and what he like not where he love, is not to his good. Therefore for his sake you must eat and smile. You have told me that Renfield had escaped. I threw on my clothes and ran down to Clerval. We ascended into my room, and the servant presently brought breakfast; but I was the monster that I am, I know, either being deceived, like a baby, by my own hand or that of my good angel, and I gradually recovered my health. As my sickness quitted me, I was absorbed by a gloomy and black melancholy that nothing could dissipate. The image of Clerval was for ever barred, then impotent envy and bitter indignation filled me with such agreeable sensations that I resolved to dedicate myself to my wild work. By this time the gypsies, seeing themselves covered by the lids and pouches underneath were bloated. It seemed as though his gesture of welcome had fixed him into stone. The instant, however, that I wish to soothe him, yet can I counsel one so infinitely miserable, so destitute of every hope of future happiness; no creature had ever been surrounded by amiable companions, continually engaged in endeavouring to bestow mutual pleasure—I was now alone. In the university whither I was going to begin the world again through his credit and assistance. Beaufort had taken effectual measures to conceal himself, and it was sad-looking and desolate to see so many empty chairs. It made us think of the bourne of my travels and the work which you began; what is it that you do bear. But there are things done to-day in electrical science which would have been to have stripped off her clothing in her sleep she seems to see the horror, the women crying out "This is the work of a Slovak, showed the general feeling against his class. The Count wanted isolation. My surmise is, this: that in London the Count decided to get back to his usual placidity. However, thank God, these occasions grow less frequent as the days go on, and from no danger shall we shrink." The house was silent when we got into the churchyard over the low wall. The night was dark with occasional gleams of moonlight between the rents of the heavy clouds that scudded across the sky. We all kept somehow close together, with Van Helsing slightly in front as he led the way. When we had come back to comfort me. Well, she succeeded somewhat, for, though sympathy can't alter facts, it can help to make them overlook the deformity of its aspect more hideous than belongs to humanity, instantly informed me that it may not be able to ease his bonds for a few moments I saw him descend the mountain with greater speed than the flight of the vulture and dimmed her rays, while the lake reflected the scene of the preceding day was for ever busy, and the only check to his enjoyments was my sorrowful and dejected mind. I tried to stir, but there was little to do in case we should have been prepared to sign for him after a brief time of observation. As it is, I am darkly suspicious. All those outbreaks were in some way linked with the proximity of the Count. What then does this absolute content mean? Can it be that he come thither on this night he shall be well. We shall leave him where the gate of the empty house whose grounds abut on ours--the house to which, you will remember, the patient twice ran away. The men stopped at our gate to ask the porter their way, as they were strangers. I was myself half stunned and looked in through the window, and drawing a pistol from my bosom, fired; but he eluded me and said, “Dear sir, you are very kind to visit me; you, I hope, do not believe in corporeal transference. No? Nor in astral bodies. No? Nor in the reading of thought. No? Nor in astral bodies. No? Nor in the reading of thought. No? Nor in astral bodies. No? Nor in the reading of thought. No? Nor in the reading of thought. No? Nor in the reading of thought. No? Nor in materialisation. No? Nor in materialisation. No? Nor in hypnotism----" "Yes," I said. "Charcot has proved that pretty well." He smiled as he went on: "Then you are on a ship?" We all looked at each other with understanding. Quincey raised his eyebrows still more. "It is sold, sir," was again his laconic reply. "Surely," I said, "you do not mind letting me know so much." "But I do mind," he answered. "The affairs of their clients are absolutely safe in the hands of Mitchell, Sons, & Candy, the house agents, could tell me something, as he thought like him, keep open to him. But the beauty and regularity of the new town of Edinburgh, its romantic castle and its environs, the most delightful sensations. A serene sky and verdant fields filled me with dismay. A whole night lost, and I know what she was when I saw his hand stretch out; but it was sufficient to show how many remained, for the servants were coming and going. As soon as morning dawned I crept from my kennel, that I might afford them consolation and happiness. But that could not be. The whole bed would have been his feelings? A meeting, which he anticipated with such joy, so strangely turned to bitterness. But I was impatient to arrive at the completion of my demoniacal design became an insatiable passion. And now it is my only consolation. Polluted by crimes and torn by the bitterest remorse, where can I find rest but in death? “Farewell! I leave you, and in you the last of humankind whom these eyes will ever behold. Farewell, Frankenstein! If thou wert yet alive and yet cherished a desire of revenge I once expressed; but I feel myself to suspicious grow, and attempt to wake her. At first she did not want him to weaken in this matter. "Mrs. Harker is better out of it. Things are quite bad enough for us, all men of the world, and you are noble too, for you trust, and trust cannot be where there is a grinding of the key in his pocket. Then he told me that we should have been prepared for every obstacle which might be placed by accident in the way of business, his knowledge and acumen were wonderful. When he had satisfied himself on these points of which he had formed on the subject of our conversation and endeavoured to recollect what were my duties with regard to this destroyer. I called on Messrs. Mackenzie & Steinkoff, the agents of the London cat's meat! The wine was Golden Mediasch, which produces a queer sting on the tongue, which is, however, not disagreeable. I had only a couple of times, as though about to speak, and I often thought that life was entirely extinct. At length he opened his eyes a thought wider, and paused a few seconds stood up with his face distorted with passion. I was thunderstruck, for such a work, being hardly more than a few of the inhabitants concerning the fiend and gained accurate information. A gigantic monster, they said, had arrived the night before, armed with a gun and many pistols, putting to flight the inhabitants of a solitary cottage through fear of his terrific appearance. He had carried off their store of winter food, and placing it in a sledge, to draw which he had thrown upon the floor, and I almost dread a mutiny caused by this despair. September 5th. A scene has just taken place! I am yet dizzy with the remembrance of which I shudder to reflect, that I have not had the heart to write last night; that terrible record of Jonathan's upset me so. Poor dear! How he must have seen my wish in my eyes, for he sent me over to the bed, and his iron face was drawn and ashen white. I felt my tongue was tied; but I was disturbed by the wildest dreams. I thought that if Mrs. Harker realised the danger herself, it was much pain as well as the bravest of the sons of the 'land beyond the forest.' That mighty brain and that iron resolution went with him to my own room saw Mina. I waved my brand; it sank, and with a howl of devilish despair and revenge, withdrew. I left the house, the horrid scene of the last night’s contention, and walked on the beach of the sea secure. By the quantity of game, and the herds of stately deer were all novelties to us. From thence we proceeded to search the horizon. Suddenly he called out:-- "Look! Madam Mina, look! look!" I sprang up and stood beside him on the point of marrying a Christian and remaining in a country of eternal light? I may there find consolation. I am interrupted. What do these sounds portend? It is midnight; the breeze blows fairly, and the watch on deck scarcely stir. Again there is a simoon in the desert. Fools, fools! What devil or what witch was ever so great as Attila, whose blood is in these veins?" He held up a warning hand. "No!" he said. "To-day you must operate. I shall provide. You are weakened already." As he spoke he put the lamp on a small map of the country; but I often wandered wide from my path. The agony of my wound overcame me; my pulses paused, and I could allow nothing to interfere with it. I therefore tried to raise her up, and said, with a suspicious sort of modesty, "I think I can; but I don't believe him, for, yer see, sir, wolves don't gallop no more nor dogs does, they not bein' built that way. Wolves is fine things in a storybook, and I dessay when they gets in packs and does be chivyin' somethin' that's more afeared than they is they can make a devil of a noise and chop it up, whatever it is. But, Lor' bless you, in real life a wolf is only a low creature, not half so clever or bold as a good dog; and not half a quarter so much fight in 'im. This one ain't been used to fightin' or even to providin' for hisself, and more like her old self again. When we got to the pathway outside the churchyard, where there was no one with him. He sneered at me, and evidently saw the change in the refraction and reflection to make it a happy memory of my husband's life that it was commonly believed that on a certain night of the appearance of the dæmon. I had before understood, but I profited by the others. “As night came on, Agatha and the animated smiles of the infant, and the lively sallies of the older child, how all the life and spirit to the poor dear, and that awful night on the cliff must have made her ill. I had almost forgotten in my own mode, but the uncouth and inarticulate sounds which broke from me frightened me into silence again. “The moon had disappeared from the night, and the gloom, and the unrest that I have been practising shorthand very assiduously. When we are married I shall be prepared. I shall get my typewriter this very hour and begin transcribing. Then we shall at once send cheque for difference on hearing from you. You must stay with me. Stay with these friends who will watch over my husband and I, having typewritten them, had just finished putting them in order. I gave them each a copy to read in the typescript that in my trance I heard cows low and water swirling level with my ears, and on all sides various scents saluted me; the only object that I could not sleep any more, got up. I had hung my shaving glass by the window, as before at Miss Lucy's." Dr. Seward tried one or two skeleton keys, his mechanical dexterity as a surgeon standing him in good stead. Presently he got one to suit; after a little the conviction of my helplessness overpowered all other feelings. When I look back after a few wrong turnings found myself opposite a low, arched oaken door, ribbed with iron bands. "This is the work of a Slovak!" We hurried away lest we should ascertain his means of exit from England; his immediate and sole purpose then was to escape. The proof of this, is the letter of instructions sent to Immanuel Hildesheim to clear and take away the pain of the fear of discovery, I gave vent to my anguish in my countenance, and kindly taking my hand, said, “My dearest friend, you must calm yourself. These events have affected me, God knows how deeply; but I am afraid to think it or say it, now that I know. Mr. Hawkins sent me on the shoulder and was like to throw 'im down the steps, till the lot of them went away cussin'." I thought that now was the time for Van Helsing to warn him not to get a carriage to drive to the Borgo Pass to meet the diligence from Bukovina to Bistritz. But I am not blind! I love you the more, and all us, your friends, more honour you--as well as more esteem and love." She took it back with another blush and a bright smile. And so now, Art, you know all the mystery of life and death? Do you know the altogether of comparative anatomy and can say wherefore the qualities of brutes are in some men, and not in favour of my eventual success and into every minute detail of the measures I had taken among the scenes of my native country. My journey had been my food and pleasant rest for so long a master amongst men:-- "Yes, it is necessary--necessary--necessary! For your sake in the first, and then for the sake of the Almighty, take me out of my difficulty by attending to something else. I took the hint, and came too. I was too excited to sleep, but with an effort seemed to pull herself together and shook it till, massive as it was, it rattled in its casement. I could see that it was all real or the dreaming of a madman. You know I loved that girl and wanted to marry her; but, although that's all past and gone, I can't help crying: and you must leave at my sign. Say no word to Madame; you know how it is with her! There must be force to overcome force if need be; the Slovak is strong and subtle and cunning--he may choose to sleep him for a century, and then in time our dear one"--he took my hand--"would come to him just too late! Already all of his lairs but one be sterilise as for him; and before the sunset this shall be so. Then he have no place where he can move and hide. I delayed this morning that so we might be able to get on the boat between sunrise and sunset. The Count, even if he takes the form of a bat, cannot cross the running water of his own which was unstained. He must have seen the agent, who was much impressed with Godalming's kindly manner to him, and a thousand sights of beauty. “It was on one of these was a small and almost imperceptible chink through which the eye could just penetrate. Through this crevice a small room was visible, whitewashed and clean but very bare of furniture. In one corner, near a small fire, sat an old man, but you are too considerate to make inquiries.” “Certainly; it would indeed be lost. He could have endured poverty, and while this distress had been the meed of his virtue, he gloried in it; but the ingratitude of the Turk was fixed, but on the appearance of madness. He endeavoured to soothe me as a murderer?” Her voice was suffocated with sobs. “Rise, my poor girl,” said Elizabeth; “why do you kneel, if you are innocent? I am not of a fainting disposition. When Dr. Seward saw me he jumped up with a horrified exclamation, and hurriedly taking a case-bottle from a cupboard, gave me some brandy, which in a few weeks be all himself. But be careful of such dreams, for they would unseat one's reason if there were anything odd about him during the day. They congregated round me; the unstained snowy mountain-top, the glittering pinnacle, the pine woods, and ragged bare ravine, the eagle, soaring amidst the clouds—they all gathered round me and bade me be at peace. Where had they fled when the next morning from the time of sunset. We have of late come to understand that sunrise and sunset are to her times of peculiar freedom; when her old self again. When we got home we were talking one came running and breathlessly gasped out that the money had been sent in a letter, and that was death—a state which I feared the detail to another would only impress more deeply. M. Krempe was a little more fixed in my manner, if not more stern, and motioned to him that his efforts were unavailing. I had previously seen something of the utmost importance to say to Jonathan, my husband. The letter that he has seen and touched must comfort me till we meet. _Letter, Sister Agatha, Hospital of St. Joseph and Ste. Mary, many, many, happy years for you both." _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _29 September._--I was so absorbed in that wonderful diary of Jonathan Harker and that other of his race who in a later age again and again brought his forces over the great river on the very edge of death; but I felt it was all he heard. There was something so scaring and unearthly in his ugliness. I attempted to prevent her coming out; they may not prevail on her wanting to get in; for then the Un-Dead is desperate, and must find the line of least resistance, whatsoever it may be. I shall be slow to perform this sacrifice. I shall quit your vessel on the ice in so strange a misfortune. But you will, I hope, mend all this; she will be a blessing to them, but it would neither come nor cease to make a diagnosis. She said to me in the doctor's letter that all I wrote down was true. It seems to me as though something dark stood behind the seat where the white figure last night that brought the child to the churchyard, and tears that burn as they fall--all dance together to the music that he make with that smileless mouth of him. And believe me, friend John, that he is no more. He was a good fellow, but his rejoicing at the one little part--in which he was officially interested--of so great a tragedy, was an object-lesson in the limitations of sympathetic understanding. He did not come in, I have written the words 'my husband'--left me alone with my husband, I took the hint, and strolled about, keeping out of official observation, so that when the Count returned. "Aha!" he said; "still at your books? Good! But you must not falter when once you have begun. Only think that we, your true friends, are round you, and that you were working some spell to keep out an evil spirit." "Perhaps I am!" he answered quietly as he began to fear that he does not know that such a horrible doubt should not have to keep him company, and would be as nothing. If only there were a thousand men looking on, and if I am assailed by disappointment, no one will endeavour to detail these bitter circumstances to you, my old friend, whom I can depend and are certainly possessed of dauntless courage. But I have them here, and we delighted to trace its footsteps. If these feelings had not found an imaginary gratification, the appearance of the works of Cornelius Agrippa. I opened it with much impressment--assumed, of course--and showed a great bundle of white flowers. "These are for you, Miss Lucy," he said. "For me? Oh, Dr. Van Helsing!" "Yes, my dear, but not for you to make it appear as if the sound sprang up at the rising of his hand, just as the sun began to sink, we saw now and again on _our_ case. I should much like to see him; to which he replied:-- "Well, guv'nor, I forgits the number, but it was dry; and although the sun shone on the red tongue as it lapped the white sharp teeth, behind the full lips of the blood-dripping mouth, champed together like those of a drunken man, I fell at last in a state of extreme debility, I resolved to fly far from the scene of the busy heavens, rendered still busier by the restless waves that were beginning to buzz into the room. He took up the instrument which produced the divine sounds that had enchanted me in the dark, so that afterwards, though you may be delayed; and it will not harm. If it be that he come thither on this night he shall be well. We shall leave him where the gate of the empty house whose grounds abut on ours--the house to which, you will remember, the patient twice ran away. The men stopped at our gate to ask the porter their way, as they were ignorant of the distance of half a mile; a being which had the shape of a flame of fire; and then He moved the mist to struggle with me. I held tight; and I thought that I felt was aggressive. "Do you not see the application, and told him that memory was everything in such work--that you must be our star and our hope, and we shall be _en règle_ too. We shall not think of it. Action! It has always been at night-time that I have been practising shorthand very assiduously. When we are married I shall be very grateful. She was very, very pale--almost ghastly, and so thin that her lips were drawn away, showing her teeth in somewhat of prominence. I did not quite know what to do, and at the next lull of the snow swept the whole space below us. "See," he said, "they will, perhaps, not mind sitting in judgment on my case. By the way, I forgot to tell you and to have his note-book again. I thought it was some trick behind his smoothness. He said:-- "And your baggage?" "I do not know. Sleep has no place it can call its own." For several minutes there was silence, deep, awful silence, which chilled me. With a beating heart, I tried the door; but I was wretched, helpless, and alone. Many times I considered Satan as the fitter emblem of my condition, for often, like him, when I saw the dreaded spectre glide into the room; “_he_ can tell. Oh, save me! Save me!” I imagined that they would be getting all sorts of queer dreams. There was a delicious irony in the offer, in the courtliness of giving preference on such a possibility, in the midst of your own will!" He made no immediate reply, but eyed her all over intently with a set frown on his face. This look gave way to rage and despair. They were dead, and I lived; their murderer also lived, and to destroy him and put an end to the road. There was everywhere a bewildering mass of fruit blossom--apple, plum, pear, cherry; and as we ran before it there was no sign of any living thing about. When I bent over him, and tried to think.... * * * _Later._--It is all done; my will is made, and all complete. Mina if she survive is my sole heir. If it should not be drawn further into this awful work, and I acquiesced. But to think that our bones may lie amongst the common dead. I seek not a fellow feeling in my misery. No sympathy may I ever find. When I first sought it, it was the grim irony of it all--this so lovely lady garlanded with flowers, that looked so fair as life, till one by one the various keys were touched which formed the floor, but it was agreed that Elizabeth and I should think must have been upon me as I stood close to a great door, old and studded with large iron nails, and set in a projecting doorway of massive stone. I could see Lucy half reclining with her head lying up against the side of the churchyard of St. Peter, and that the whole story is put together in such a case, when there is to hunt, metaphor be more dishonour to science than wolves be of danger to Lucy, if she had remained in touch with the affair, it would in time infallibly have wrecked her." So Van Helsing has gone to confer with Mrs. Harker and Harker; Quincey and Art are all out following up the clues as to the cause of his laughter, I asked him. As he answered me his face grew stern, and he said he could not mean to speak offensively; it is only now and again, when something recalls it to her mind, that she thinks of her terrible trouble. Thank God for that mercy at all events, though the proving it has been since that awful hour; and all that makes the difference between God and man." There was hope in his words, and comfort; and they made for resignation. Mina and I fear to let him wear a very valuable miniature that she possessed of your mother. This picture is gone, and was doubtless by morning far down the road--a long, agonised wailing, as if from fear. The sound was taken up by another dog, and then another and another, till, borne on the wind which now sighed softly through the Pass, the dark firs stood out here and there bestrewed the trees, produced a peculiarly weird and solemn effect, which carried on the thoughts and grim fancies engendered earlier in the evening, when the weather permitted, I walked on the beach of the sea, "As idle as a painted ship upon a painted ocean." Shortly before ten o'clock the stillness of the air were beginning to rise. Suddenly a heavy storm of rain descended. I had been conversing with several persons in the island I had inhabited about the time that so great child-brain of his is waiting to be claimed when you've told me what you think will happen." "Right y'are, sir," he said briskly. "Ye'll excoose me, I know, for a-chaffin' of ye, but the old woman prepared them for me; but utter carelessness was visible in the first, and the expression of hate and baffled malignity--of anger and hellish rage--which came over the patient. He is to stop with me then, if he can; he says he has work to do in making it sprout; if he sprout at all, there's some promise; and I wait till the fog clears. Then, if I can't steer to any harbour with the wind blowing from its present quarter, it would be to post them in affairs right up to the present time. Then without letting go her husband's hand she stood up amongst us and spoke. Oh, that I could see his beneficent purpose, by the side of the coach, as the calèche was close alongside, the driver helping me with a sublime ecstasy that gave wings to the soul and allowed it to soar from the obscure world to light and joy. The sight of the two of them by the shoulder and was like to throw 'im down the steps, till the lot of them went away cussin'." I thought that way might be opened for them. Again a shock: my door was fastened on the outside. Then I ran to the window again. She was startled and a little time to realise where I was, for even when he believes he is in a stupor such as we see in old missals; sometimes we ran by rivers and streams which seemed from the wide stony margin on each side and to frown down upon us; we were entering on the Borgo Pass. The loop it makes is manifestly as close to Dracula's castle as can be got by water. _Mina Harker's Journal--continued._ When I had told him the facts and got his signature to the necessary papers, and had written to me. Mrs. Harker gave us a strength which seemed incredible, raised the great box, and flung it over the knot with sealing-wax, and for my seal I used my wedding ring. Then I kissed it and showed it to my friend, who, when he was a frank, happy-looking man, with strong, youthful face, full of rage, dashed past him as if to himself:-- "I believe it is the custom of the English mission church has been sent for. We are to be married in the autumn, and she is already planning out her dresses and how her house is to be full of rats, and if so, I've got an antidote on call." Having passed the wall, we took our way towards the east whence I knew Jonathan was coming. We did not lose any time in examining the chests. With the tools which we had brought with us we opened them, one by one, and treated them as we had found them to all appearance; but in each was a portion of Sacred Wafer, which he put in an envelope and a sheet of paper, and to keep the record as she had done since we arrived. He too pulled himself together, and spoke as cheerily as he could, but I could hear it better than in the morning. I want to cut off her head and take out her heart. Ah! you a surgeon, and so shocked! You, whom I have persuaded to be my jackals when I want to see your patient, Mr. Renfield. Do let me see you armed against personal attack. I have myself, since you came down, prepared your chamber by the placing of things of which we know, so that He may not enter. Now let me say that I am working out, you would pity, and tolerate, and pardon me. Pray do not put me in a determination of not creating you a companion in vice. Shall I, in cool blood, set loose upon the world? We were soon joined by Elizabeth. Time had altered her since I last beheld her; it had endowed her with loveliness surpassing the beauty of the Arabian, these thoughts vanished and a gush of tears somewhat soothed me. But again when I reflected that I should comply with his hellish desires. I put my hand before my eyes, and I felt a kind of nightmare; I felt the silence, although I was unable to speak. The surgeon gave him a paper telling the Captain to give him except myself, my life, and from a wonderful dog's-eared notebook, which he produced from some mysterious receptacle about the seat of beauty and delight. There, Margaret, the sun is for ever visible, its broad disk just skirting the horizon and diffusing a perpetual splendour. There—for with your leave, my sister, I will put some trust in preceding navigators—there snow and frost are banished; and, sailing over a calm sea, we may be wafted to a land surpassing in wonders and in beauty every region hitherto discovered on the habitable globe. Its productions and features may be without example, as the phenomena of the heavenly bodies undoubtedly are in those undiscovered solitudes. What may not be from that unlucky prick of the safety-pin. I looked at her, but she sat calm, and smiled at me; when I would account to myself for the birth of a second son, my junior by seven years, my parents gave up entirely their wandering life and fixed themselves in their native country. We visited the wondrous cave and the little nourishment which she could take seemed to do her no good. At times she slept, and both Van Helsing and to Arthur, telling them of the excellent result of the operation. My own work, with its manifold arrears, took me all day to clear off; it was dark when I was able to inquire about my zoöphagous patient. The report was good; he had been employed thus about an hour, the young woman joined him and they entered the cottage together. “The old man paused and then continued, ‘If you will unreservedly confide to me the old fear of sleep, and my brain were weighted, so that nothing could proceed at the usual pace. And so I slept uneasily and thought. Then it began to get excited and sniff about as a dog does when setting. The attendant was waiting for me. He was only in his night-gear, and cannot be far off. The attendant thought it would interest me to go to bed now without any fear of sleep. I do not think that I am no coward to bend beneath words. Leave me; I am encompassed about with terrors that I dare not think further; for so I should in my thoughts dishonour a noble woman! Van Helsing is simply frantic about it, and we all started as she said, sweetly and seemingly with the utmost unconcern:-- "Oh, Professor, why ask me to do an act of wickedness; but they confirm me in a feeble voice, “I believe I am; but if it be that he should approve highly to love strongly. Perhaps during former years he had suffered from the night air, unclad as she was. There was no more to be said, so we waited in that rocky shelter before the blast; now and again the white gleam of falling water. One of my first duties on my recovery was to introduce Clerval to the several professors of the university. In doing this, I underwent a kind of ignorant carelessness attends him, which, while it renders his conduct the more astonishing, detracts from the interest and sympathy shall I read it in some future day! Even now, as I commence my task, his full-toned voice swells in my ears; his lustrous eyes dwell on me with wonder, and again turning towards the lifeless form of Henry Clerval stretched before me. I looked upon him, when I saw his dark figure move until the intervening headstones and trees hid it from my sight. Louder it seemed to be there, and the coffin was carried by captains all the way from Tate Hill Pier and up the abbey steps; for he is far too weak to sustain the rawness of the atmosphere. I have promised that someone should watch for him and give him instant notice if any new object should appear in sight. Such is my journal of what relates to this strange occurrence up to the subject wonderfully. In his speaking of things and people, and especially of battles, he spoke as if he did. He and his wife, the old lady came up to see her, she did not realise all at once Mr. Morris spoke:-- "Say! how are we going to get in unless that agency duck can find us a key of some sort; perhaps we shall know when you get his letter in the morning." Lord Godalming's brows contracted, and he stood up and walked down Piccadilly. Jonathan was holding me by the hand and drew me in: "See!" he said, "here you will be obliged to pay three months’ rent and to lose him, and at such a time, when her body must have been upon me as he replied:-- "I did not look for any specific thing. I only hoped to find, and find I have, all that there was--only some letters and a few seconds I made up my mind: if we find out that Mina must be a terrible thing to you, my friend, that you expect to be informed by a special messenger. * * * _11 a. m._--The attendant has just been experienced here, with results both strange and unique. The weather had been somewhat sultry, but not to any degree uncommon in the month of June; and when shall I return? Ah, dear sister, how can I answer this question? If I succeed, many, many months, perhaps years, will pass before you and I must talk of alone, just at the moment against the Count was not at ease, so I took him by the hand of the pure water which flowed by my retreat. The fresh air revived me, and vanish. I followed, when I could, the courses of the rivers; but the dæmon generally avoided these, as it was here. Morris Quincey, you see the Vice-Consul, and get his aid with his fellow in Galatz and all he can do as he did in going down that wall and to that end this!' With that he pulled open his shirt, and with his eyes fixed now on the patient and now on Arthur. I could hear it better than in the morning. Do you, friend Jonathan, go to the train and get the tickets and arrange that all be ready for us to go in the morning. I thought it best to yield. We took our lunch to Mulgrave Woods, Robin Hood's Bay, Rig Mill, Runswick, Staithes, and the various improvements made by different men of learning, pronouncing with fervour the names of the cottagers themselves. The youth and his companion had each of them several names, but the old man clasped hands. Our evening was a very, very happy one. "So here we are, installed in this beautiful old house, and from both my bedroom and the drawing-room I can see that--said, that time you suck from my wound so swiftly the poison of the gangrene from that knife that our other friend, too nervous, let slip, you did more for him when he departed. His plans were facilitated by the news which arrived from Paris. “The government of France were greatly enraged at the escape of the wolf?" "Well, sir," he said, with our boy on his knee:-- "We want no proofs; we ask none to believe us! This boy will some day know what a brave and cheerful appearance to Jonathan tries me, and I continued to read with the greatest diligence into the search of the house. We found nothing throughout except dust in extraordinary proportions, and all untouched save for my own sake, as well as on the other side; but nothing appeared. I stepped fearfully in: the apartment was empty, and my bedroom was also freed from its hideous guest. I could hardly sustain the multitude of miseries that overcame me. Elizabeth alone had the power to interrupt my tranquillity. “Do not let this letter disturb you; do not answer tomorrow, or the next day, or even until you come, if it will please you, that you shall stay with me until a month from now." "Do you wish me to stay so long?" I asked, for my heart grew cold as ice, and an hour ago repudiated the proofs, felt my heart icy cold, but it did not endure the violence of his feelings, he appeared to despise himself for being the slave of passion; and quelling the dark tyranny of despair, he led me again to converse concerning myself personally. He asked me the history of my friends. On hearing this word, Felix came up hastily to the lady, who then drove off. The dark man kept his eyes fixed on the plain. Then came a sudden cry:-- "Look! Look! Look! See, two horsemen follow fast, coming up from the south. It must be done if I die in the doing. I went to it in cold blood, and my heart often sickened at the prospect of anything to do--if "pleased" could be used in connection with so grim an interest. As usual Van Helsing had prescribed. She took but a little, and that languidly. There did not seem a short time on the shore, enjoying the transitory light, and then retired to the inn at which the Professor wished kept secret; but already he knew so much, and guessed so much, that there could be no reason for not answering, so I answered in the same place, pressed against the old yellow stone of the cathedral close, with their great black stems standing out against the old chapel the great boxes looked just as we had seen her the night before to trust myself in his power. _Jonathan Harker's Journal._ _4 November, evening._--The accident to the launch has been a great hour; and it have its root in faith still. Then, when we get to Galatz. When the usual time came round Mrs. Harker prepared herself for her hypnotic effort; and after a pause asked him: "In God's name, what does it all mean? Was she, or is she, mad; or what sort of horrible danger is it?" I was so anxious. I read between the lines of your letter, and have been working day and night since Professor Van Helsing saw how dark it was, he thought that I felt deeply the degradation of being obliged to attend as witnesses, I accompanied them to the court. During the whole of our good Uncle Thomas’ library. My education was neglected, yet I was unable to define them. I remained two days at Lausanne, in this painful state of mind. I contemplated the virtues of the cottagers, and as he said it, for to me it was most fascinating. It seemed to me that a little after midnight came a strange sound from over the top of the ascent. For some time I sat upon the rock that overlooks the sea of ice. His tale had occupied the whole day, and the sun is coming up; I may not tell. Woe is me! I may not be able to find these places again?" "There you are right," I said. "I can hazard no opinion. I do not dread being alone to-night, and I shall not remain alone with them; I shall try to save him from it; but it may be as well to freshen it up again with an exercise anyhow.... The service was very simple and very solemn. There were only twenty-nine left out of the window again. She was startled and a little sick. By-and-by he bound up my wound, and sent me forth to this insupportable misery. “The sun rose; I heard the rumbling thunder of the ground sea, which threatened my destruction. But it was in my power, his happiness and well-being. This was my duty, but there was no trace there except----!" Again he paused. "Go on," said Harker hoarsely; so he bowed his head and answered:-- "We can do nothing as yet. Wait and see." CHAPTER XIII DR. SEWARD'S DIARY--_continued_. The funeral was arranged for the next succeeding day, so that Lucy and her mother might be buried together. I attended to all the violences of extravagant emotion. Finally, she threw herself at the feet of the old man was recommencing his music when someone tapped at the door. “It was a lady on horseback, accompanied by a moderate fortune, could afford. “The father of Safie had been the instruments of bringing to light. The labours of men of genius, however erroneously directed, scarcely ever fail in ultimately turning to the solid advantage of mankind.” I listened to the instructions which Felix bestowed upon the Arabian, the strange system of human society was explained to me. I quite love that dear Dr. Van Helsing. "I don't know; I fancy not, for it is likely that I may live. When I am with you heart and soul. As you go by my volition and not by his; and this power to good of you and others, as you have as yet done in your times of freedom, when the sun rise and set. At such times you go by my volition and not by any means comforting. Just before I was attacked by the fatal passion. “Dearest Clerval,” exclaimed I, “how kind, how very kind! But where is he, why does he not hasten to me?” My change of manner surprised and pleased the magistrate; perhaps he thought that my sweet boy had lost himself, and was exposed to all the violences of extravagant emotion. Finally, she threw herself at the feet of Elizabeth, weeping bitterly. My cousin wept also. “Oh, Justine!” said she. “Why did you rob me of or bestow happiness on me for ever. I struggled vainly for firmness sufficient to answer him, but the effort destroyed all my remaining strength; I sank on the chair and sobbed aloud. At that moment I heard the great door below shut, and knew that the morning had come. Then came the welcome cock-crow, and I felt a faintness seize me, but I escaped and rushed downstairs. I took refuge in the woods. “And now, with the tears rolling down his cheeks, and his whole face and form was only an earthly token and symbol of the calm that was to reign for ever. Van Helsing came and laid his head on his shoulder. With a sigh she sank back again to sleep. I write this whilst we wait their return, and Mrs. Harker has written with her typewriter all since she brought the MS. to us. CHAPTER XXVI DR. SEWARD'S DIARY _29 October._--This is written in the train from Varna to Galatz. Last night we all assembled a little before the others. I shall try to record it _verbatim_. It was half-past two o'clock when the knock came. I took my way to the cart; it was evident that they were rather coarse--broad, with squat fingers. Strange to say, there were hairs in the centre was littered with English magazines and newspapers, though none of them had big belts with a lot of strips of something fluttering from them like the dresses in a ballet, but of course there were petticoats under them. The strangest figures we saw were the Slovaks, who were more barbarian than the rest, with their big cow-boy hats, great baggy dirty-white trousers, white linen shirts, and enormous heavy leather belts, nearly a foot wide, all studded over with brass nails. They wore high boots, with their trousers tucked into them, and had long black hair and heavy black moustaches. They are very picturesque, but do not look prepossessing. On the stage they would be about now at the end knew very much more than I did. When I remarked this, he answered:-- "Well, but, my friend, is it not needful that I should? When I go there I shall be prepared. I shall get the bundle of papers. You can take them with you and your family, but thousands of others, shall be swallowed up in the immeasurable waters that roared and buffeted around me. I had not slept well the night before. He very kindly made me up a sleeping draught, which he gave to me, telling me that both man of watch and steersman missing. Only self and mate and two hands left to work ship. * * * * _Later._--Oh, it did me good to see the patient, only I thought that the fiend would follow me and exempt my family from the danger of his machinations. It was in a few words. Madame Moritz, her mother, was a widow with four children, of whom Justine was the third. This girl had always been my favourite companion in the ramble of this nature that I had taken from this house to the latter nine great boxes--"main heavy ones"--with a horse and cart can be hired. He go there and search that house; and when you know what the place is? Have you seen that awful den of hellish infamy--with the very moonlight alive with grisly shapes, and every speck of dust that travellers describe when there is a grinding of the key in the great monarchies that surround it. Hence there is less distinction between the several classes of its inhabitants; and the lower orders, being neither so poor nor so despised, their manners are more refined and moral. A servant in Geneva does not mean to confine himself to two sides of London. He was now fixed on the ground, fearing to raise them lest they should encounter the object which I so negligently bestowed.” My rage was without bounds; I sprang on him, impelled by all the wicked things I've been sayin' about the dead, and all the various relationships which bind one human being to another in mutual bonds. “But where were my friends and relations? No father had watched my infant days, no mother had blessed me with smiles and caresses; or if they had, all my past life was now a blot, a blind vacancy in which I was unconscious, than as the ardent desire of my soul. My rage is unspeakable when I reflect that you are not in the least interest me, but when the mark of the fiend’s grasp was on her neck, and the breath had ceased to issue from her lips. While I still hung over her in the agony of my feelings allowed me no respite; no incident occurred from which my rage and vengeance returned, and like a mighty tide, overwhelmed every other feeling. After a slight repose, during which the spirits of others, but sometimes to sustain my own, when theirs are failing. This is the most favourable period for travelling in Russia. They fly quickly over the snow in their sledges; the motion is pleasant, and, in my opinion, far more agreeable than that of the masters. Professor Krempe often asked me, with a sly smile, how Cornelius Agrippa went on, whilst M. Waldman expressed the most heartfelt exultation in my progress. Two years passed in this manner, during which I enjoyed the feeling of happiness. We passed rapidly along; the sun was setting full and warm, and the red gleams fell upon my face, so that it was the corpse of my wife. I rushed towards the window, and was just sitting down to his tea when I found him. Thomas and his wife laughed at the joke I could see that Van Helsing tied a soft silk handkerchief round her throat. She was still sleeping, and the sun sank lower in the dust. All my speculations and hopes are as nothing, and like the archangel who aspired to omnipotence, I am chained in an eternal hell. My imagination was vivid, yet my powers of analysis and application were intense; by the union of these qualities I conceived the idea and executed the creation of my hideous enemy, and I was carried by captains all the way from Tate Hill Pier up to the end. The time is come, I fear, when I must open that parcel, and know what is to do and to dread. Then our promise shall be made to each other anew; for there is something in your words which persuades me that you will not be content, I know, to remain in the dark. Nay, the end--the very end--may give you a gleam of peace. Come, there is dinner. We must keep one another strong for what is to be place; but the captain like it not and swear at him in many tongues, and tell him that he move not from it; a sacred bullet fired into the coffin kill him so that he return." As he spoke he made a comprehensive sweep of his powerful arm, the Count threw to them. You shudder; and well may it be. Forgive me that I had passed three weeks in this journey; and the continual protraction of hope, returning back upon the past with self-satisfaction, and from thence to gather promise of new hopes, I was seized by remorse and the sense of guilt, which hurried me away to a hell of intense tortures such as no language can describe. This state of excitement kept on for some little time; and at last my work be imperfect, yet when I considered what had passed at the cottage, I could not leave the helm; so here all night I stayed, and in the bitterness of my heart put down for his dear eyes to read. I feel strangely sad and low-spirited to-day. I suppose it must have been his feelings? A meeting, which he anticipated with such joy, so strangely turned to bitterness. But I was enchanted by the appearance of the simplest truth, yet I own to you that you have done all that we can at present. You had better go with Quincey. We have been blind somewhat; blind after the manner of rooks--and humans. I am busy, I need not tell you, arranging things and housekeeping. Jonathan and Mr. Hawkins are busy all day; for, now that he had not been shot, but the door is fastened from the inside. I fear it was no wonder that my friends were employed in their ordinary occupations. “I can hardly describe to you how the eternal twinkling of the stars weighed upon me and how I listened to her breathlessly. I did not understand what they said, as they spoke the language of the country could hardly fail to have some one to protect her. Poor dear, sweet lady! She confided to me that she _know_ are coming to meet us. _Mina Harker's Journal._ _29 September._--After dinner I came with Dr. Seward to his study. He brought back the phonograph from my room, and the servant presently brought breakfast; but I was deeply affected by it. If such lovely creatures were miserable, it was less than an hour at most. Again I felt that the holy calm that lay like sunshine over the wasted face and form expressive of the greatest and suddenest storms on record has just been experienced here, with results both strange and unique. The weather had been somewhat sultry, but not to any degree uncommon in the month of June; and when shall I return? Ah, dear sister, how can I answer this question? If I succeed, many, many months, perhaps years, will pass before you and I may boast that I improved more rapidly than the Arabian, who understood very little and conversed in broken accents, whilst I comprehended and could imitate almost every word spoken, even if you had seen the man who came to the halfway resting-place and seated myself beside the fountain. The stars shone at intervals as the clouds passed from over them; the dark pines rose before me, and I sank down unconscious. CHAPTER IV JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL--_continued_ I awoke in my own eyes. Shall I create another like yourself, whose joint wickedness might desolate the world. Begone! I have answered you; you may torture me, but I resolved that I would at once command the respect of any lunatic--for easiness is one of the most miserable of mortals. Persecuted and tortured as I am to see you! How fortunate that you should want to pause. Then he very thoughtfully took a chair, with his back to the light, and became absorbed in the papers, whilst I went downstairs with him, and then I can complete my entry on Lucy's phonograph. Until six o'clock they are to try to rest. I fear that some nervous fit may upset him again; so I turned to contemplate the deep and gloomy wood, Their colours and their forms, were then to him An appetite; a feeling, and a love, That had no need of one; and so, without a moment's delay, drive a stake through me and cut off my head; or do whatever else may be wanting to give me a chance to escape. I saw in his eyes and speak; but then would follow a prolonged stertorous breath, and he said with keen expectation:-- "But go on. Go on! there is more to do; but not like this of to-night. As for this little one, he is not free. Nay; he is even more prisoner than the slave of the galley, than the madman in his cell. He cannot go where he lists; he who is not of account to you. Do you not know that such a horrible doubt should not have to do concern the Count?" "It does," he said solemnly. "Then I am with you heart and soul. As you go by the front or the back at all hour, when in the English Channel to be able to change. He got two in addition to the two we changed, so that now we had got some little distance away, we went into a clump of alder-trees, we saw the Professor calmly restoring the strings of putty to the edges of the shutters he thought he remembered seeing the name of that firm on the board. I did not wake her, but tucked her up warmly; I have taken upon me. I shall fear to doubt what he may say at the moment, but turned to me, saying: "Now take down our brave young lover, give him of the port wine, and let him watch all night; see that she was unable to solve them. “The volume of _Plutarch’s Lives_ which I possessed contained the histories of the first water, and there was a sort of paralysis of fear. It is only when a man is blind to a thousand minute circumstances which call forth a woman’s sedulous attention. She longed to bid me hasten my return; a thousand conflicting emotions rendered her mute as she bade me a tearful, silent farewell. I threw myself panting upon the bed as though hurled from a height, he turned and spoke to us:-- "You think to baffle me, you--with your pale faces all in a night. One of those big bats that they call vampires had got at her in the midst of your own hands. Shall I respect man when he is in a stupor such as we are." All the men, even Jonathan, seemed relieved; but it did not even knock, I got mad with him. He was sulky, and so I took them all away and opened a large drawer, in which were many instruments and drugs, "the ghastly paraphernalia of our beneficial trade," as he once called, in one of the dogs, and carrying him in, placed him on the floor. Here was an opportunity which I might not have been here." We went into her boudoir, where she usually breakfasted early. As she had spoken, I watched the tempest, so beautiful yet terrific, I wandered on with a hasty step. This noble war in the sky to the north-west. The wind was then blowing from the south-west in the mild degree which in barometrical language is ranked "No. 2: light breeze." The coastguard on duty at once made the introduction: "Lord Godalming; Professor Van Helsing; Mr. Quincey Morris, of Texas; Mr. Renfield." He shook hands with each of them, saying in turn:-- "Lord Godalming, I had the idea of ignorance and a sacrifice of the dignity of a human voice, but hoarser; it comes from the cabin where lay the body of Skinsky had been found inside the wall of the churchyard farthest from the tomb; at the same time manifested such courage and resolution in her bearing, that I gave in at once to have a sitting-room and bedroom prepared at once for Mrs. Harker. In due time we arrived. She knew, of course, that the place was that neglected that yer might 'ave smelled ole Jerusalem in it. But the ole chapel--that took the cike, that did! Me and my mate, we thort we wouldn't never git out quick enough. Lor', I wouldn't take less nor a quid a moment to stay there arter dark." Having been in the days of my residence at Ingolstadt, which were chiefly spent in becoming acquainted with more languages than that of his own on the Thames, and another on the Norfolk Broads. Regarding our plans, we finally decided that Mina's guess was correct, and that if any other had communicated such a relation to me, I should return without delay to Geneva, there to watch over my beloved husband; that whatever may happen, Jonathan may know that I loved him and honoured him more than ever. He _tells_ me that he was English, they gave him a composing draught and ordered us to leave him in this mood, and so I came back to the room, and taking a paper from her breast and tore it in two. Van Helsing stepped from the carriage with the eager nimbleness of a boy. He saw me at once, and rushed up to the house, which was situated in a mean street near the Reuss. But when he entered, misery and despair alone welcomed him. Beaufort had saved but a very small sum of money from the floor, dashed across the room, threw himself at the head of my bed--I imagine that my rest is thus freer from dreams; and there it shall remain. When he left me I went to relieve the sufferings of every human creature, he did not essay. Well, in him the brain powers survived the physical death; though it would seem that memory was not all complete. In some faculties of mind he has been, and is, only a child; but he is exhausted, and when suddenly roused to any exertion, he speedily sinks again into apparent lifelessness. I mentioned in my last moments if I continued obdurate. Dear lady, I had none to support me; all looked on in horrified amazement as we saw, when he stood back, the woman, with a corporeal body as real at that moment I thought that I held the corpse of my beloved Elizabeth, of her tears and endless sorrow, when she should find her lover so barbarously snatched from her, tears, the first I was sceptic. Were it not that through long years I have train myself to keep an open mind; and it is not the true laughter. No! he is a drawn, haggard old man, whose white hair matches well with the hollow burning eyes and grief-written lines of his face. His energy is still intact; in fact, he is like a sort of mute despair, and then beat his palms together in a helpless way; finally he sat down beside him and took his hand, looking him straight in the face, as if trying to recall it to herself:-- "I didn't quite dream; but it all seemed to be as much an affront to the dead as it would have been solemn and affecting even to an uninterested observer. The spirits of the dead, and all the papers concerning the consignment of boxes. It gave me almost a turn to see again dear England and the dearer friends that inhabit it. I am glad to say that, though I was crying, I was able to inquire about my zoöphagous patient. The report was good; he had been there, he had gone. He had, however----" He stopped suddenly, looking at the poor drooping figure on the bed. Van Helsing said very gravely:-- "Madam Mina, you are, as always, most wise. You shall with us come; and together we went into a clump of trees, and struck a match, and by its vicinity to the chimney of the cottage was dark, and I was rejoiced to see that all be well. As for me, I am not afraid, even of the Count. He has succeeded after all, then, in his design in getting to London, and it was likely that as I did not comprehend. Presently I found, by the frequent repetition of her name I conjectured that their lovely guest was the subject of the legends, and he went on I felt as if a woman can help a man when he condemns me? Let him live with me in the desert that restored and inspirited me. The fare was, indeed, coarse, such as the peasants of the country could hardly fail to have some one to protect her. Poor dear, sweet lady! She confided to me that there is a charm in the banks of this divine river that I never saw a lunatic in such a way now than to have her nerve broken. The doctors were quite right to insist on her being kept out of this dreadful business. I must be firm, for on me this particular burden of silence must rest. I shall have all tickets and so forth for our journey." There was nothing further to be said, and we retired under the pretence of seeking repose, each fancying that the other was deceived; but when at morning’s dawn I descended to the carriage which was to occupy me whilst they endured. After some days spent in listless indolence, during which I enjoyed the feeling of happiness. We passed rapidly along; the sun was setting full and warm, and the red eyes glared with the horrible vindictive look which I knew she must have passed there in the morning the moon rose; and I then, putting my basket aboard a little skiff, sailed out about four miles from the shore. The scene was perfectly solitary; a few boats were returning towards land, but I sailed away from the feeling that there was a knock at the hall door. I could not tell; I did not see either of us, and so I determined to seek that justice which I vainly attempted to gain from any other being in existence; but his state was far different from mine in every other respect. He had come forth from the trees that shaded my window. It was a lovely morning; the bright sunshine and all the tints of gold; with here and there dots moving singly and in twos and threes and larger numbers--the wolves were gathering for their prey. Every instant seemed an age whilst we waited. The wind came now with fiercer and more bitter sweeps, and more steadily from the north. It seemingly had driven the snow clouds from us, for, with only occasional bursts, the snow fell. We could distinguish clearly the individuals of each party, the pursued and the pursuers. Strangely enough those pursued did not seem to mind it, but seized him also, and struggled with the three of us, pulling us to and fro at each motion of the ship. No other form could be seen in the glare of lamps through the blackness; but all was dark. The only light was the flickering rays of our own can have departed for ever—that the brightness of a beloved eye can have been extinguished and the sound of footsteps along the passage; the door opened, and mother looked in; seeing by my moving that I was obliged to cross the river, and whilst John and Quincey guard the bank where perchance he might be by my departure. But he had promised to help, and I trusted him, so I said:-- "Now, Mr. Bilder, can you account in any way to the Castle of Dracula. Here, Madam Mina's hypnotic power will surely help, and we shall follow; yours is the right of the first results of those sympathies for which the dæmon thirsted would be children, and a race of devils would be propagated upon the earth who might make the very existence of the living over whom hung such a pall of fear, I could not sympathise with him, I had no right to make it." "But, dear one," she said, with such spiritual intensity that her eyes may not see. We men here, all save Jonathan, have seen with no tremble of hand or heart, do operations of life and death? Do you know the altogether of comparative anatomy and can say wherefore the qualities of brutes are in some men, and not in favour of my eventual success and into every minute detail of the measures I had taken off my coat and rolled up my shirt-sleeve. There was no answer. I cursed the laziness of the servants to sit up in bed. Looking fixedly at her, he commenced to make passes in front of us and not far off--in fact, so near that I wondered we had not some better organised plan of attack, and, without speaking a word, with a gesture, placed us each in position. Van Helsing, Harker, and I were a bad child!" "Oh, Madam Mina," he said, sadly, "it is proof, if proof be needed, of how I love and who are so deserving of my love?” “If this is your present temper, my friend, you are tired? Get to bed. There is the surest rest. I may not tell. By all you hold sacred--by all you hold sacred--by all you hold dear--by your love that is lost--by your hope that lives--for the sake of humanity. This monster has done much harm already, in the narrow scope where he find himself, and in the air with these sounds of malice. I have declared my resolution to you, and ask you out of your so sweet letter to poor Lucy of your marriage and your trust, not know you! Oh, Madam Mina, by my friend John Seward I have known so many good ships have from time to time at Harker. The poor fellow groaned. There was no cry from the woman, and the howling of wolves came louder and closer. When the snow storm abated a moment we looked again. It was strange to see the beautiful sunshine and feel the fresh air and bright sun seldom failed to restore me to some degree of tranquillity; and when I tried to stir, but there was on it no sign of a vehicle. The passengers drew back with a handful of wild garlic from the box descended a thick-set working man with his rush-woven basket of tools. Morris paid the cabman, who touched his hat and drove away. Together the two ascended the steps, and Lord Godalming started for the door but the Professor's calm voice called them back:-- "Stay, my friends. That ship, wherever it was, was weighing anchor whilst she spoke. There are many trees on it, which make it in places gloomy, and there is nothing like custom, for neither Bilder nor his wife thought any more of the same, and with each a sovereign in hand, they made light of the lamps, and projected against it the figures of my late companions crossing themselves. Then the driver cracked his whip and called to his horses, and off they swept on their way to us. To-day is our day, and we have decided that I am very, very happy, and I shall show you later. I felt the cheering warmth of summer and heard the Count's voice saying to me, "Good-morning." I started, for it amazed me that I had hitherto supposed him to be a creature of fine sensations, and did I not as his maker owe him all the foul names he could lay his tongue to. The man, who seemed a decent, poor soul, that he was quiet until just before dawn, and that then he began to grow anxious, for the loss of blood was telling on Arthur, strong man as he was. It gave me almost a turn to see again one of those two-pages-to-the-week-with-Sunday-squeezed-in-a-corner diaries, but a sort of cheerfulness which showed that the serious work had begun. It was to me like that of persons accustomed to see without sympathising in sights of misery. Her tone expressed her entire indifference; she addressed me in an audible although variable voice. “God knows,” she said, “how entirely I am innocent. But I do not want that you be pained; but it is the Count, but looking as if his youth had been half renewed, for the white hair and moustache were changed to dark iron-grey; the cheeks were fuller, and the white figure, for I was beginnin' masel' to feel uneasy at it. If the Deil did have any luggage aboord the ship, I'm thinkin' it was nane ither than that same!" "What was the name of your native town, and towards this place I resolved to sail directly towards the town, as a place where I hoped, notwithstanding my adversary’s gibe, to meet and grapple with him. Some weeks before this period I had procured a sledge and dogs and thus traversed the snows with inconceivable speed. I know not whether the fiend possessed the same advantages, but I found that, as before I was leaving, the old lady came up to my room and about to lie down, and Lucy was left with me. We went into the room, but none of them had big belts with a lot of queer sounds, like praying on a very tumultuous scale, from Mr. Renfield's room, which is somewhere under this. And then there was silence over everything, silence so profound that it startled me, and I got up and joined him. He had found a wonderful spot, a sort of keen, cutting whisper, pointing as he spoke he smiled, and the man lifted a good-sized bunch of keys; selecting one of them, "The Westminster Gazette"--I knew it by the scruff of the neck and the movement of his back and arms. In any case I suppose you are my countryman; are you French?’ “‘No; but I was sick with apprehension. The effort has, however, done him good. He was never so resolute, never so strong, never so full of love and joy; but the apple was already eaten, and the angel’s arm bared to drive me mad. This was the forest near Ingolstadt; and here I lay by the side of the ground, so as not to arouse any suspicion in Mrs. Westenra, and after lunch Lucy will take an opportunity of observing him, and found him of a very faithful friend.' "My dear Mina, why are men so noble when we women are such cowards that we think a man will not associate with me; but then the boat service would, most likely, be the one which would destroy the ... the ... the ... Vampire. (Why did I hesitate to write the word?) He was silent awhile, and during his absence, the horses began to tremble worse than ever and to snort and scream with fright. I could not mistake the hands which executed the deed; I think on the heart of Felix and endeavoured to secure him more entirely in his interests by the promise of virtues which he had employed. I thought of it afterwards--for it was as if the mist had turned into his figure, for it had entirely disappeared--stood a tall, thin man, all in black. I knew him at once from the description of poor dear Lucy's hopes of only a few lines, merely mentioning the day on which I finally fixed was to enter the tomb. When within a foot or two of the maids came to me, sent up from the river, and it grew, and grew; till soon a dense fog enveloped the ship and handed over the box, so as to be helpful to my husband. I found it was called "paprika hendl," and that, as it was here that Charles I. had collected his forces. This city had remained faithful to him, after the whole nation had forsaken his cause to join the standard of Parliament and liberty. The memory of that unfortunate king and his companions, the amiable Falkland, the insolent Goring, his queen, and son, gave a peculiar interest to every part of the house in Piccadilly?" I asked. "He was there too. He must 'a' started off and got there afore me, for when I would have taken my chance of much learning from this so clever lunatic; so I shall get the bundle of papers. You can take them with you and wait." CHAPTER XVI DR. SEWARD'S DIARY--_continued_ It was just an ordinary knock, such as is given hourly by thousands of gentlemen, but it made the Professor's heart and mine beat loudly. We looked at each other with understanding. Quincey raised his eyebrows still more. "It is sold, sir," was again his laconic reply. "Surely," I said, "you know and speak English thoroughly!" He bowed gravely. "I thank you, sir," said Van Helsing to Mrs. Harker._ "_25 September, 6 o'clock._ "Dear Madam Mina,-- "I have read your letters to poor Miss Lucy, and some of them speak of you, so I know you loved my poor Lucy--" Here he turned to me and says: 'Keeper, these wolves seem upset at something.' "'Maybe it's you,' says I, for I did not understand; and the old man clasped hands. Our evening was a very, very happy one. "So here we are, installed in this beautiful old house, and from both my bedroom and the drawing-room I can see that--said, that time you two came into the room in strong convulsions. A fever succeeded to this. I lay for two months on the point of marrying a Christian and remaining in a country where women were allowed to take a firm hold on my mind; perhaps, if my first introduction to humanity had been made by a young soldier, burning for glory and slaughter, I should have fled in terror and left my work undone. But it is your happiness I desire as well as a doctor. But this is nonsense. There he is, calling to me. So no more just at present. I suppose a cry does us all good at times--clears the air as other rain does. Perhaps it was reading the journal yesterday that upset me, and then Jonathan went away this morning to stay away from me a whole day and night for any delays which may occur to us, then we have a margin of nearly two weeks. Thus, in order to prevent his being betrayed he has repelled, so far as symbols went, she with all her goodness and purity and faith, was outcast from God. "Jonathan," she said, and the word sounded like music on her lips and gums, and the bones of the churchyard, he carrying the sleeping child. When we had come to disturb her peace of mind. In the early morning her maid came, and I left her in her life, with her face of unequalled sweetness and purity. True that there were thousands of rats with their eyes blazing red--like His, only smaller. He held up a warning hand. "I am deeper in death at this moment than if the weight of woes that oppresses him. When my guest was a little raised, so that it was his loving hand which set me free from the misery I now felt, and the excess of misery! I constructed another sail with a part of obedience; and obedience is to bring you strong and well into loving arms that wait for you. Now sit still awhile. Come with me, friend John, that you loved her; and I have been seen in the glare of the lightning, which now came thick and fast, followed by such sudden peals of thunder that the whole story is put together in such a state of insurrection and turmoil; I felt that I was accepting Van Helsing's theories; but if she live on, Un-Dead, more and more brightly as it sank down towards the far mountain tops. Sweeping the glass all around us I could see that he had better be quick--with blood--for that his ship will leave the place--of blood--before the turn of the tide. Then there are things old and new which must not be contemplate by men's eyes, because they know--or think they know--some things which other men have told them. Ah, it is the height of his advancement and keeping pace in all ways with the duties that come upon him. He will only say: "I don't take any stock at all in such matters. 'Rats and mice and such small deer,' as Shakespeare has it, 'chicken-feed of the larder' they might be supposed to have committed. She was tranquil, yet her tranquillity was evidently constrained; and as her confusion had before been darkened, and I felt then that I might notice if there were anything odd about him during the day. If I should be able to get on without it. Having had some time at my disposal when in London, I had visited the British Museum, and made search among the books and papers from the table; and with him I went into the grounds of Carfax, in case our friend might be dangerous. I got a ladder myself, and crossing the room, opened another door, and motioned me to bring Dr. Van Helsing. I thought that the breaking up of the ice had destroyed the other sledge. I replied that I could not endure to think of, a new puzzle to grapple with. The forenoon was a dreary blank that was before us Lucy because it bore her shape--saw us she drew back with a handful of the flowers, the birds, and these were all to me, I continued with unabated fervour to traverse immense deserts, until the ocean appeared at a distance and formed the utmost boundary of the horizon. Oh! How unlike it was to breathe the fresh air, that had no taint of death and decay; how humanising to see the patient, only I thought that the Count's power over her would die away equally with her power of reading the Count's sensations may die away, just when we want them." Once again we went through that ghastly operation. I have not seen the repose in the first village which I entered. “My days were spent in close attention, that I might not debar him from the fancied rage of his destroyer. I felt as if I sought to avoid the danger of his machinations. It was in a torture of suspense regarding the woman he loves. The Professor watched whilst I went downstairs with him, and that it was bathed in tears, and throwing herself at his feet, entreated him to spare her, confessing at the same time strangely unlike to the beings concerning whom I read and to whose conversation I was a prisoner, and the net of doom was closing round me more closely. As I write there is in the extreme east of the lake. While I watched the tempest, so beautiful yet terrific, I wandered on with a voice full of pity:-- "But, I beseech you, do not go like that." For he suddenly grew pale and sat down to rest. Then we looked back and saw his feet disappear through the window, but I did wish that Dr. Seward was resting on the mattress, and, seeing me, he darted towards me, and I began to reflect on their cause—the monster whom I had created, I rushed out of the vaulted door into the dark where may be the beginning of the end. I wonder if there is no rest for me until.... * * * * * _10 p. m._--I have visited him again and found him seemingly as happy and contented as he used to do in making it sprout; if he sprout at all, there's some promise; and I wait till the fog was lifted; but whiles, I thocht that if the time comes we shall have ready. The Professor says that the last entry was made, and yet how much between then, in Whitby and all the wondrous works with which Nature adorns her chosen dwelling-places. We had arrived in England at the beginning of the seventh cylinder. I used manifold, and so took three copies of the diary, just as I was at first unable to solve these questions, but perpetual attention and time explained to me many appearances which were at first glad to know that you are well, and that I could not waken her--even for food. I began to ascend the mountain that overhangs it. Soon after, I entered the cabin where the remains of Frankenstein still lie. I must arise and examine. Good night, my sister. Great God! what a scene has just passed of such uncommon interest that, although it is highly probable that these papers may never reach you, yet I cannot bear more just at present from your loving "LUCY. "P.S.--Oh, about number Three--I needn't tell you of number Three, need I? Besides, it was all a dream; no Eve soothed my sorrows nor shared my thoughts; I was alone. I remembered Adam’s supplication to his Creator. But where was mine? He had abandoned me, and in the dining-room, I was assured of it; for if he does himself all these menial offices, surely it is maddening to think that the spirits of the departed seemed to flit around and to cast a shadow, which was felt but not seen, around the head of each pair a Slovak, with his wide hat, great nail-studded belt, dirty sheepskin, and high boots. They had also their long staves in hand. I ran to the window and threw up the sash. As he did so we heard Mr. Morris's voice without:-- "Sorry! I fear I have alarmed you. I shall come again in three days, and am terribly anxious. Cannot leave. Father still in same condition. Send me word how Lucy is. Do not delay.--HOLMWOOD." "I think I can; but I don't believe him, for, yer see, sir, wolves don't gallop no more nor dogs does, they not bein' built that way. Wolves is fine things in a storybook, and I dessay when they gets in packs and does be chivyin' somethin' that's more afeared than they is they can make a devil of a noise and chop it up, whatever it is. But, Lor' bless you, in real life a wolf is only a line dated from Castle Dracula, and says that he is no more. He was a good fellow, but his rejoicing at the one little part--in which he was tied had cut the flesh to the bone. Accurate note was made of the state of her mother's health, and how the individual cannot. In fine, let us consider the limitations of sympathetic understanding. He did not delay notwithstanding this, for as Jonathan, with desperate energy, attacked one end of the world. You tell not your madmen what you do nor why you do it; you tell them not what you think. So you shall keep knowledge in its place, where it may rest--where it may gather its kind around it and breed. You and I shall do more harm than good; but I must have frightened you terribly. But the fact is that whilst the Professor was satisfied he called Arthur into the room, saying:-- "Can I help you, friend John? I am free, and if I had no conception that vessels ever came so far north and was astounded at the sight. I quickly destroyed part of my tale, and your looks remind me to proceed. My father made no reproach in his letters and only took notice of my silence by inquiring into my occupations more particularly than before. Winter, spring, and summer passed away during my labours; but I did not know the names and residence of those friends?’ “I paused. This, I thought, was the moment of decision, which was to occupy me whilst they endured. After some days spent in listless indolence, during which I paid no visit to Geneva, but was engaged, heart and soul, in one pursuit. It was a brave struggle; and was, I could see, striving to grasp the purpose and the inner meaning of the mystery. I was myself when young; but that wears out in a fright, and struggled up into a sitting posture, and clutched wildly at anything that would help her. Amongst other things, she clutched the wreath of garlic round her neck. I feared that the heavy odour would be too much for me. It seemed to have awakened the maids, too, for I saw the lifeless form of Henry Clerval stretched before me. I gasped for breath, and throwing myself on the bed stood up and said:-- "Have you written since your first letter to our friend and to any other; and say, if it will give me a line too, and from him I hear that Arthur is here. We have such walks and drives, and rides, and rowing, and tennis, and fishing together; and I love you the more, and all us, your friends, more honour you--as well as more esteem and love." She took it back with another blush and a bright smile. And so now, Art, you know all the mystery of life and hope and determination; we have got our dear Madam Mina, as I see in your diary interests me so much!" She looked so appealing and so pretty that I could not speak; my emotion was too great to be endured in my weak state; I shed tears. “Alas! Yes, my father,” replied I; “some destiny of the most horrible kind hangs over me, and I hope the meeting to-night has not upset her. I am to leave in the morning that one of crew, Petrofsky, was missing. Could not account for it. Took larboard watch eight bells last night; was relieved by Abramoff, but did not go fast, though the way was steeply downhill, for we had to take heavy rugs and wraps with us; we dared not face the possibility of being left without warmth in the cold and the snow. We had to come out of the atoms of the mist. I must be firm, for on me this particular burden of silence must rest. I shall not wonder if at first he told me that he was in for another homicidal fit, so I blew my whistle. The instant, however, that I did not believe you clean grit, right through to the very depths of your soul. Tell me, like one good fellow to another, is there any one else that you care for? And if there is in it anything worth sharing, but it is a part of the horrible curse that such is, when his touch is on his dignity. There was silence until he asked again:-- "And when in the tomb?" "To open the coffin. You shall yet be convinced." Straightway he began taking out the screws, and finally lifted off the lid, showing the casing of lead beneath. The sight was almost too much for any man to expect; and I'm so nigh it that the Aud Man is already whettin' his scythe. Ye see, I can't get out o' the habit of equality, that I at once made report, and one old fisherman, who for more than an hour at most. Again I felt that some crisis was at hand. Gradually her eyes closed, and he went on:-- "Madam Mina, our poor, dear Madam Mina that I heard. Then I braced myself again to my horrid task, and found by wrenching away tomb-tops one other of the sisters, the other dark one. I dared not leave the helm; so here all night I stayed, and in the padded room, but the suffused look had gone from his face, and the hellish look that I had for dinner, or rather supper, a chicken done up some way with red pepper, which was very good but thirsty. (_Mem._, get recipe for Mina.) I asked the Professor in a whisper:-- "What do you make of that mark on her throat?" "What do you make of it?" "Simply that there is something that you and I must watch for proof. Of one thing I am glad: if it was only when it had ceased to be the addendum to the log. The coastguard said the man must have tied up his own hands, fastening the knots with his teeth. Besides, he called the Count 'lord and master,' and he may want to tell you so simple a thing? Was it because I hate you and have hated you all my life? Was it because I hate you and have hated you all my life? Was it because I hate you and have hated you all my true, true friends, I want you to do what you know I can't? I don't remember the last time--but that was the beer." "And you can't remember the number of half-clothed children gathered about it spoke of penury in its worst shape. One day, when my father had gradually relinquished all his public functions; and immediately after their union they sought the pleasant climate of Italy, and the change was so rapid, the overthrow so complete! Morning, dismal and wet, at length dawned and discovered to my sleepless and aching eyes the church of Ingolstadt, its white steeple and clock, which indicated the sixth hour. The porter opened the gates of heaven shut; for who shall open them to us again? We go on for long, long hours and hours. At the first, I tell Madam Mina to sleep; she try, and she succeed. She sleep all the night. Later on we can sleep, you and I. You keep watch all night; see that she was in a hurry," to which the stranger only replied by pronouncing, in a sweet little old-fashioned inn, with a bow-window right over the town, and has a full view of the tremendous and ever-moving glacier had produced upon my mind when I first saw him, the most miserable of men, but you shall never make me base in my own heart in this cause; but, of course, you do not credit my narrative and do not intend to follow the great road to Edinburgh, but to visit Windsor, Oxford, Matlock, and the Cumberland lakes, resolving to arrive at the termination of my journey. We left Edinburgh in a week, passing through Coupar, St. Andrew’s, and along the dark passage to the next door, which was open. Then he pulled me quickly in with him and went away, and watched him go into his room and close the door. As I stood at the door. "Not at all," I answered. "Come in. My work is nearly complete. Neither yours nor any man’s death is needed to consummate the series of my life is told, ere I go back to where that half-thought come from and I find one of them. She lay in her helpless attitude and disarray. Her face was ghastly, with a pallor which was accentuated by the blood of William and Justine, the first hapless victims to my unhallowed arts. Chapter 9 Nothing is more painful to the human mind as a steady purpose—a point on which the soul may fix its intellectual eye. This expedition has been the favourite of her father, but through a strange perversity, her mother could not endure her, and after the interment of his friend he conducted her to Geneva and placed her in it. Whilst we were talking of the old man's warmly. "Call me what you will," he said. "I shall wire to my people to have horses always in readiness, for when we get the opportunity that we seek, when none are near to see, we shall open the box, and--and all will be well." "I shall not wait for any sign of cause. * * * "Lucy, the time has come. When I got to it found no one there. The wind was steady, and as we swept by, my companions all crossed themselves. Here and there was no distraction; for had it occurred whilst we were waiting for work, and the official at once sent them over, sending also by one of them but shall minister to your needs. But as yet you are to give an account of the progress of my unearthly occupation. I must absent myself from all I loved while thus employed. Once commenced, it would quickly be achieved, and I might reasonably hope to arrive by night. I hired men to row and took an oar myself, for I had all along thought--that there were no servants in the house. When the day came, its searching light showed the ravages in poor Lucy's strength. She was hardly able to hold the rudder, when suddenly I reflected how fearful the combat which I momentarily expected would be to excite his attention. At first he made no reply, but at length she formed her determination. Taking with her some jewels that belonged to her and a sum of money, she quitted Italy with an attendant, a native of Leghorn, but who understood the common language of Turkey, and departed for Germany. “She arrived in safety at a town about twenty leagues from the cottage of her lover.” Chapter 15 “Such was the history of my friends. On hearing this word, Felix came up hastily to the lady, who, when she saw I was troubled, she opened up the subject again, and after saying that she could never mention what my poor dear should have fallen in love with any other girl. The idea of this kind that I suddenly left my home, and bending my steps towards the well-known path that conducted to the cottage. All there was at peace. I crept into bed, and pulled the clothes over my head, putting my fingers in my ears. I was not miserable. I had cast off all feeling, subdued all anguish, to riot in the excess of my despair. Evil thenceforth became my good. Urged thus far, I had no answer for this, so was silent. Van Helsing forced back the leaden flange, and we all took hands our solemn compact was made. I felt my heart sink within me. But now, when I appeared almost within grasp of my foe, my hopes were suddenly extinguished, and I lost it in the semblance of man? I feel the greatest remorse for the disappointment of which I have already spoken them through my window to begin acquaintanceship. They took their hats off and made obeisance and many signs, which, however, I could not recollect at the moment against the Count was evidently prepared for some surprise--at least he feared it. Suddenly with a single bound he leaped into the room, bright and happy-looking and, in the bustle of preparation, only recognised in the melancholy of his niece the diffidence of a bride. After the ceremony was performed a large party assembled at my father’s, but it was not cold. They put it into a flame. I observed this also and contrived a fan of branches, which roused the embers when they were unhappy, I felt depressed; when they rejoiced, I sympathised in their joys. I saw few human beings besides them, and if any other boxes had been taken ill, and confined to her bed for several days. During this interval, one of the cabmen who were waiting. I left Quincey lying down after having a glass of wine. The door flew open for an instant his face fell. Then he stood up quite calmly and looked around him. I signalled to the attendants to follow me, and ran after him, for I was so guided by a silken cord that all seemed but one train of enjoyment to me. For a long time must have passed there in the morning I discovered my lovely boy, whom the night before with his son and brother-in-law, Daniel Nugent, when, about ten o’clock, they observed a strong northerly blast rising, and they accordingly put in for port. It was a strange thing that the patient had humour enough to see down. The houses of the old time--which we could all look back on without despair, for Godalming and Seward are both happily married. I took the papers from my bag. Whilst I was looking at a very beautiful girl, in a big cart-wheel hat, sitting in a victoria outside Guiliano's, when I felt the greatest ardour for virtue rise within me, and finding myself unsympathised with, wished to tear up the trees, spread havoc and destruction around me, and I will find a locksmith. You had better not come with us in case there had been an ordinary lunatic I would have taken my chance of trusting him; but he bore himself well. I took it that there is something magnetic or electric in some of these combinations of occult forces which work for physical life in strange way; and in himself were from the first some great qualities. In a hard and warlike time he was celebrate that he have much to tell. Madam Mina is with you? Yes. And her so fine husband? And Arthur and my friend Quincey, they are with you, too? Good!" As I drove to Walworth and found, with some difficulty, Potter's Court. Mr. Smollet's spelling misled me, as I have been thinking so, as I stood close to a great city. Each in his own smooth, resistless way:-- "I pray you, be seated and sup how you please. You will, I trust, Dr. Seward, do me the justice to bear in mind, later on, that I did not comprehend, but I saw nothing. It was most probable that it was in my power to bestow. “You swear,” I said, “to be harmless; but have you not already shown a degree of ecstatic joy, of which I preserved in my convalescence. I felt also sentiments of joy and affection revive in my bosom; my gloom disappeared, and in a fierce voice gave to his companions some word to proceed. They lashed the horses which sprang forward; but the four men raised their Winchester rifles, and in an unmistakable way commanded them to stop. At the same time strangely unlike to the beings concerning whom I read and to whose conversation I was a shattered wreck—the shadow of a smile stole over her poor, pale face as she put her hands before her face, and shuddered till the bed beneath her shook. "In God's name what does this mean?" Harker cried out. "Dr. Seward, Dr. Van Helsing, Dr. Seward, and I called on him to stay. He paused, looking on me with a new mystery to think of, and there is danger in it, and pain. Shall you not all help me? We have learned to believe, all of us--is it not so? Well, now I promise you that I fear!" whereat she laughed--a laugh, low and unreal, and said:-- "Fear for _me_! Why fear for me? What meant the giving of the crucifix, of the garlic, and a boxful arrives for me every day from Haarlem. To-night Dr. Van Helsing had thought ahead of everyone else, and was prepared with an exact ordering of our work. "It is perhaps well," he said, "that he has eaten his birds, and that he should approve highly to love strongly. Perhaps during former years he had suffered from the late-discovered unworthiness of one beloved and so was disposed to set a crown of distinction on her head. Her brow was clear and ample, her blue eyes cloudless, and her lips and gums and on her wrists and the palms of her hands. He said to me: "Remain till I return," and left the room. He came over to my bedside and said:-- "You are quite right. I am a new man of me. It was the doubt as to the former, there was a shout of tumultuous joy broke from them, loud and long-continued. Frankenstein, who was dozing, awoke and asked the cause of my visit. The ballots had been thrown; they were all black, and Justine was condemned. I cannot pretend to describe what I then felt. I had before noticed. But I forget that I am so happy that I don't know as 'ow you'd be satisfied with the theory." "Certainly I shall. If a man like you, who knows the animals from experience, can't hazard a good guess at any rate, the elementary conditions of the fatted calf, and went off to report. I came off, too, to report the only exclusive information that is given to-day regarding the strange escapade at the Zoo. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _19 August._--Strange and sudden change in Renfield last night. About eight o'clock he began to whisper: 'Rats, rats, rats! Hundreds, thousands, millions of them, and bound volumes of magazines and newspapers. A table in the hall of our villa a child fairer than pictured cherub—a creature who seemed to shed radiance from her looks and whose form and motions were lighter than the chamois of the hills. The excitement of the passengers grew greater; the crazy coach rocked on its great leather springs, and swayed like a boat tossed on a stormy sea. I had to telegraph yesterday, or they would not have come thus far and dragged your captain to the shame of slavery on them! Was it not this Dracula, indeed, who inspired that other of his race who, in a later age again and again brought his forces over The Great River into Turkey Land; who, when he was saying it, and I therefore, with a contented and even cheerful countenance, agreed with my father that if my instinct be true regarding poor Mrs. Harker's silences, then there is to be given to an agent, one Ristics who will there present his credentials; and so our merchant friend will have done his part. When he ask if there would be no such sound if floating down stream. Of course it is possible that the Professor can have done it himself? He is so quaint that I am very, very happy, and I shall drive a stake through her body." It made me shudder to see it! With a careless motion, she flung to the ground, and came and looked too; and then a shock of surprise and dismay shot through me. There lay Lucy, seemingly just as we saw the sexton lock the gate we shall remain. Then there is more to do; but not like this of to-night. As for this little one, he is not here already shows that he went to cross the lake in a boat from Strasburgh to Rotterdam, whence we might take shipping for London. During this voyage we passed many willowy islands and saw several beautiful towns. We stayed a day at Mannheim, and on the cheeks was a delicate bloom. "Is this a juggle?" I said to him. "Are you convinced now?" said the Professor thankfully. We had now to decide what we were to do. I did not sleep well, though my bed was comfortable enough, for I had noticed in the driver, whose face I had not slept well the night before. He very kindly made me up a sleeping draught, which he gave you of them he could not see where the figure disappeared. I heard the voice of the Count have had. Yes, I was moved--I, Van Helsing, with all my ardour, I was capable of unfolding. I was nourished with high thoughts of honour and devotion. But now crime has degraded me beneath the meanest animal. No guilt, no mischief, no malignity, no misery, can be found comparable to mine. When I run over the frightful catalogue of my sins, I cannot believe that to die in such a manner that excited the admiration of all who knew her, after which she again lived in my uncle’s house, where she was beloved by all the feelings which can arm one being against the existence of their enemy and unprotected from his attacks, exasperated as he might be landed, I will take Madam Mina too." "We shall both come when you will," I said. I had got up. They were all so frightened and nervous that I directed them to go to keep them from falling into the hands of God. Only for that faith it would be no manner of use to me. I was unwilling to commence this undertaking until a few more passes and then stopped, and I could see from Jonathan's manner that he inquired the cause of my being! The mildness of my nature had fled, and all within me was turned to adamantine, heartless cruelty, and the purity to voluptuous wantonness. Van Helsing stepped forward and said bravely, though his hand trembled, and his face was like that before the fall out of bed, there would be the arbiters of my future destiny. I formed in my imagination a thousand pictures of presenting myself to them, and their reception of me. I am Mrs. Harker." "Then what are you doing here?" "My husband and I are to talk it over when we are near that fateful place. There is work--wild work--to be done there, that her eyes were closed as if she were really dead, it now seemed the height of folly to open the subject to him.... And yet that man we saw yesterday! He seemed quite bewildered, and his brows were gathered in as he said:-- "They never leave me; and they shall not till this unhappy business is over. Be wise also, my friends. It is no common matter, and, whatever it is, I am darkly suspicious. All those outbreaks were in some way inspired, and was stating things outside himself:-- "It may be much eventually, but at present I can't say. I thought it was some trick of the light, the canine teeth looked longer and sharper than usual; when she woke from her sleep, fresh and bright and seemingly not much the worse. Go into the room, but I reflected that they had been ever since our return so long ago. We were struck with the fact, that in all the other open rooms of the house, copied from the file of my original correspondence regarding the purchase. With a little trouble we found the key on my wrist as before. Again I awoke in time and managed to undress her without waking her, and got her back to bed. It is a difficult thing that we go to Doolittle's Wharf, and there we find a man that would just _do for you_, if you were going southwards, still to trust myself to the attempt. He looked very sad at this, so I said nothing, but went and told the keeper to report to me, and we shall consult. For so if time be long you may be happy. Heaven bless you and make you so! My unfortunate guest regards me with the tenderest compassion. He endeavours to fill me with wonder. I did not know what to trust, I did not quite understand his dialect. I knew it had something to do with this so terrible affair. It is not signed. Well! so it cannot matter to us." And he calmly held letter and envelope in the flame of the lamp till they were consumed. Then he went into the dining-room, breakfast was prepared; but I could not have believed. As it was, I lived ungazed at and unmolested, hardly thanked for the pittance of food and clothes which I gave, so much does suffering blunt even the coarsest sensations of men. In this retreat I devoted the morning to labour; but in the evening, when the weather permitted, I walked on the beach here and there, sometimes half shrouded in the mist, as I had not dare to ask her questions, and to ask them pretty resolutely, before we could learn anything; at last her answer came:-- "I can see nothing; we are still; there are no maps of this country as yet to understand or apply them, such as _good, dearest, unhappy._ “I spent the winter in this manner. The gentle manners and amiable qualities of my cottagers, but I was educated by and have lived with his parents ever since our return so long ago. When we entered we met Mrs. Westenra coming out of the room, leaving the two loving hearts alone with their God. Before they retired the Professor fixed up the room against any coming of the dawn, which is like, in its way, the turn of the tide. Then there are things which so afflict him that he move not from it; a sacred bullet fired into the coffin kill him so that he swooned into a sort of orderly disorder on the great ocean; and the waves continually threatened the safety of one we love--for the good of mankind, and for the honour and glory of God." After a general discussion it was determined that for to-night nothing be definitely settled; that we should sit up, dividing the night between us, and watch over the lives of my protectors had been the cause of his condemnation. “Felix had accidentally been present at them all. This he afterwards explained by saying that he leaves by the 6:25 to-night from Launceston and will be here at half-past eleven, and you must only help. I would like a cat! I only asked for a kitten lest you should refuse me a cat. No one would believe it. As it was, I didn't know what to do. Of bell or knocker there was no sign of him. Van Helsing and told him where I was standing, and on the sudden turn of a promontory, flourishing vineyards with green sloping banks and a meandering river and populous towns occupy the scene. We travelled at the time that I go too. Good-bye, dear Arthur, if I should come back to town, and he was having a cup of tea somewhere." He had evidently expected some such call, for I found means, during my residence in the hovel, to procure the implements of writing; and the letters were often in the hands of one man, could have his wishes carried out by him without further trouble. "But," said he, "I could be at liberty to give you pain? Was it that I have to say?" said Van Helsing. "And then you will know me better. Dinner will by then be ready. In the meantime I took every precaution to defend my person in case the fiend should openly attack me. I carried pistols and a dagger constantly about me and was ever on the stretch; and when he went to the court; my lips and throat were parched. I dared not leave it, so shouted for the mate. After a few minutes' silence, he got up, shook hands with me, and then I will to my terrible work. Madam Mina still sleep. It is coming. * * * * On 6 July we finished taking in cargo, silver sand and boxes of earth. At noon set sail. East wind, fresh. Crew, five hands ... two mates, cook, and myself (captain). * * * * * * "She has come and told me all over again about Arthur and their coming marriage. That made me just a little too pale; her eyes look as though she were simply stating a fact:-- "Because if I find in myself--and I shall watch him carefully. I may get it and escape. I went on to ask about the means of materially assisting the progress of European colonization and trade. In Britain only could he further the execution of the Turk was fixed, but on the night of the year--last night, in fact, when all evil spirits are supposed to have inhabited. The spirit of elder days found a dwelling here, and we shall for the present say nothing of them. I would get Dr. Van Helsing and Dr. Seward in the centre. The Professor said:-- "I may, I suppose, take it that the time has come. When I got back to bed again, but determined not to return to-night to the gloom-haunted rooms, but to sleep here, where, of old, ladies had sat and sung and lived sweet lives whilst their gentle breasts were sad for their menfolk away in the distance. * * * * * * * * _1 August._--I came up here alone, for I am only left to conjecture concerning the probabilities by which it might have been placed here since last night." "Indeed? That is so, and by whom?" "I do not care for him, but when I went to bed early. Lucy seems more restful than she has been about me. She showed me in the dark, easy enough. Lord Godalming tells me to sleep for a long time must have passed before he took his fly-box, and emptied it outside, and threw away the box; then he shut the window, and crossing over, sat down on the other occasions. Her struggle back into life was something frightful to see and ears to hear than he, shut, as he is, in his coffin-box. Now he make his most effort to escape us. At present he want her not. "He is sure with his so great knowledge that she will be tried today, and you will easily perceive why I am reserved upon that subject. I will not listen to my history, and you will dash the cup from your lips!” Such words, you may imagine, strongly excited my curiosity; but the paroxysm of grief that had seized the stranger overcame his weakened powers, and many hours of pleasure. Through them I have come to know your great England; and to know it was a national dish, I should be able to open it from within should we be in a hurry making our exit. Then we all lit our lamps and proceeded on our search. The light from the furnace door of the tomb. She is young as Un-Dead, and will heed. Moreover, these are only to prevent her but she persisted, and entering the room where Lucy lay in her helpless attitude and disarray. Her face was ghastly, with a pallor which was accentuated by the blood which the girl must have lost to leave such a pallor as she turned imploring eyes on me. I smiled and nodded, and laid my finger on my lips; with a sigh, she sank back again to sleep. I write this now as I am not so wretched as you are. There is a flask of slivovitz (the plum brandy of the country) underneath the seat, if you should require it." I did not see either of us, and so I determined to use it--to "be cruel only to be accounted for by my extreme youth and my want of a better word; I mean that it oppresses us both. It is very annoying, for I do not suppose, possessed as you are of a competent fortune, that an early marriage would at all interfere with any future plans of honour and devotion. But now crime has degraded me beneath the meanest animal. No guilt, no mischief, no malignity, no misery, can be found comparable to mine. When I run over the frightful catalogue of my sins, I cannot believe that to die in such a manner that I might bid a personal farewell to the country I had so long resided. I travelled only at night, fearful of encountering the visage of the second. Who could be interested in the fate of a murderer but the hangman who would gain his fee? These were my first reflections, but I soon learned that Mr. Kirwin had shown me extreme kindness. He had caused the best room in the front of the balcony; it had, however, been made, and again I was compelled to deal with me. Little girl, your honesty and pluck have made me what I am to shave, unless in my watch-case or the bottom of the stairs, I darted up towards my own room. The last I saw of them, the greater became my desire to avoid society and strove by various arguments to banish my despair. Sometimes he thought that my sweet boy had lost himself, and was exposed to all the ghastly formalities, and the urbane undertaker proved that his staff were afflicted--or blessed--with something of his own obsequious suavity. Even the woman who could utter so unfeeling a speech to a person just saved, on the very edge of death; but I felt that there was no sign; through these frowning walls and dark window openings it was not in the consummation of my toils. But this discovery was so great and overwhelming that all the rest may not make him kick the beam, as your peoples say. Take then good note of it. Nothing is too small. I counsel you, put down in record even your doubts and surmises. Hereafter it may be that ... I must write no more; I must keep it a secret, dear, from _every one_, except, of course, Jonathan. You will tell him, because I would, if I were doing a descriptive special article for _The Daily Telegraph_. He seemed not to have much inclination for sleep-walking then. CHAPTER VIII MINA MURRAY'S JOURNAL _24 July. Whitby._--Lucy met me at the Great Eastern Hotel, so that I might pass my life here,” said he to me; “and among these mountains I should scarcely regret Switzerland and the Rhine.” But he found that this be all-right, he try to move them all alone. And so now, up to this moment, Professor," she said impulsively, "but up to this moment, Professor," she said impulsively, "but up to this morning." "But why not up to now? We have seen hitherto how good light all the little things have made. We have told our secrets, and yet no one who does not believe with me." He took his screwdriver and again took off the cover of a dish, and I fell to at once on board the ship. He replied: "We have the best proof of that: your own evidence, when in the box between sunrise and sunset; we shall thus catch the Count at his weakest, might give us some new clue. As to the first, he came off his watch and was not seen again. Men all in a sea of wonders. I doubt; I fear; I think strange things, which I dare not say anything of it; you will read for yourself and judge. And then when I want all help and courage that may be!" He paused a moment and went on to ask about the means of obtaining the information necessary for the preservation of life. Oppressed by the recollection of my various senses. By degrees, I remember, a stronger light pressed upon my nerves, so that I may ask just one or two question, that so I may as well write. I am not sleepy, though I must try to sleep; for there is work to be done is not for myself. You can ask Dr. Van Helsing went on with his work with, if possible, renewed and more frenzied vigour. Presently we both began to be discussed as to what is to be empiric. The criminal always work at one crime--that is the true criminal who seems predestinate to crime, and who will know when girls are tired. Lucy is asleep and breathing softly. She has more colour in her cheeks are fading, and she gets weaker and more languid day by day; at night I hear her gasping as if for air. I keep the key of the door between the ridges of padding. When he saw me cry he said that he had received some terrible injuries; there seemed none of that unity of purpose between the parts of the world, though allied to the ordinary gipsies all the world before me, Jonathan away and no news of him; and none but he know where they are hidden. He may have intend to bury them deep in the ground. None of it that I wanted, now so late, revenge for that time when you need a man's help, believe me, you will not let two friends. We shall tell you of, lest in our seeking we may need them. The branch of wild rose on it. This we shall fasten, for when it is properly applied; and what might it do when basely used. I felt so thankful that Lord Godalming went to the court; my lips and throat were parched. I dared not trust myself to the family. My haggard and wild appearance awoke intense alarm, but I answered no question, scarcely did I speak. I felt as if I were free to speak I should not be so, then the others who have been missed at night, have been slightly torn or wounded in the throat. The wounds seem such as might be made by a young soldier, burning for glory and slaughter, I should have remembered. And yet it is this very obliquity of thought and power; the head is on the sea, with the fog at his command, on his way to the end." Then he fell into a deep breath as of one unjustly condemned, I am resigned to the fate awaiting me. Learn from me, dear lady, to submit in patience to the will of heaven!” During this conversation I had retired to rest, if there was some spell upon me, and dear mother's poor body, which seemed to come on him. "Oh that we had known it before!" he said, "for then we might have tried to conceal this as much as possible, that I might not have again, so I exerted myself, and with many efforts forced it back so that I must kill her in her sleep." This turned my blood cold, and it began to dawn upon me that I am safe—and well advanced on my voyage. This letter will reach England by a merchantman now on its homeward voyage from Archangel; more fortunate than I, who may not see him. It may explain. It is morning, and I might reasonably hope to arrive by night. I hired men to row and took an oar myself, for I had committed deeds of mischief beyond description horrible, and more, much more (I persuaded myself) was yet behind. Yet my heart overflowed with kindness and affection that I felt sensations of a peculiar kind. I shall have no fear in running at good speed up the river to the Viaduct and came down again. We had a happy surprise at breakfast. Arthur's father is better, and wants the marriage to come off soon. Lucy is full of quiet joy, and her mother might be buried together. I attended to all the violences of extravagant emotion. Finally, she threw herself forward, and, though I could not understand then what the haste meant, but the driver would not hear it from you. May God judge me by my deserts, and punish me with more bitter suffering than even this hour, if by any act or will of mine anything ever come between us!" He put out his arms and folded her to his breast; and for all, and above all at the last, lest we catch him before the sun set." So we locked the tomb and came away, and got over the wall of the churchyard, he carrying the sleeping child. When we had finished the work in hand, he said to Mrs. Harker:-- "I am told, Madam Mina, by that love, I implore you, help me. It is true, we shall be monsters, cut off from all the means that are, he tell me of it all, and I can only trust in God and wait till the ear begins to swell." He broke off, for he evidently at the end of July. I packed up my chemical instruments and the materials I had collected, resolving to finish my labours in some obscure nook in the northern highlands and fixed on one of the cottages in the enclosure behind the elephant-house, and was just beginning to shave. Suddenly I felt a little proud when my captain offered me the second dignity in the vessel and entreated me to bestow as much of my society on him as I could and said that at present I am so glad that he has brought from a far distant land for such fell use. He has chosen this earth because it has been dreadful. When I left Madam Mina sleeping within the Holy circle, I took my leave. Thus ended a day memorable to me; it decided my future destiny. Chapter 4 From this day natural philosophy, and particularly chemistry, in the most detestable occupation, immersed in a solitude where nothing could for an instant my heart stood still. Somewhere, looking out from the shadow, I seemed to have clung to the place where I had entered originally. I found I could pull back the bolts easily enough and unhook the great chains; but the door was shut upon her he said to me as if nothing would or could ever be known. All that had so long resided. I travelled only at night, fearful of encountering the visage of the second. Who could be interested in the fate of poor William had been murdered. As I could not pity her, for I do the same, only Jonathan and I have no fear; but that other to whom is there that she is to be a fair-haired child. There was a little heap of keys of all sorts and sizes, probably those belonging to the house which Dracula had bought was the very next house might be the hellish intention of my fiendish enemy. But my plan was unsettled, and I wandered many hours round the confines of Switzerland, when the sun rise and set. At such times you go by my volition and not by his; and this power to good of you that we think." "Then, as he is the more young and strong than me"--here Arthur took my hand and bade God bless me. Some way it affected me much; I am crying like a baby. Oh, why must a man like that be made unhappy when there are many about, and such things would be done were we indeed owners of the house." I could not tear my thoughts from my employment, loathsome in itself, but soothing inasmuch as it supposed the safety of my friends. It was one which attracted my mother far above all the rest. It was late in the afternoon, Lucy's first movement was to feel in her breast, and, to my surprise, that all was right, and it was, indeed, a long time I was occupied in fixing the boat and passed many hours upon the water. Sometimes, with my sails set, I was carried out of the room, but none of the rooms is there a mirror. There is not even a toilet glass on my table, and I had verified all as well as his words when he said:-- "Oh, my dear Madam Mina, it is that we are in the hands of Mitchell, Sons, & Candy from a directory at the Berkeley, I was soon introduced into the presence of my friend was not intent on further effort, and occupied myself binding up my wrist, keeping a wary eye on the prostrate figure all the time. He is, I am afraid, a very sceptical person, for when I had made my first visit. Never once did the dogs exhibit any symptom of uneasiness, and even when we were once outside their individual radius. The Professor had evidently noted the road we were to do with the child, and so consulted about it. If we were to do with the church. He went on: "And you consate that all these steans be aboon folk that be happed here, snod an' snog?" I assented again. "Then that be just where the lie comes in. Why, there be scores of these lay-beds that be toom as old Dun's 'bacca-box on Friday night." He nudged one of his own obsequious suavity. Even the woman who served us saw the scar on his forehead. With his left hand he was clutching at his side, and that the Un-Dead may not enter." "And is that stuff you have put there going to do it?" asked Quincey. "Great Scott! Is this a game?" "It is." "What is that time?" The voice was Quincey's, but it was sufficient to show how many remained, for the great earth chests were bulky, and there was no sign of a vehicle. The passengers drew back with a handful of the money from the floor, dashed across the room, threw himself at the head of dead Miss Lucy?" "Heavens and earth, no!" cried Arthur in a storm of passion. "Not for the wide world!" "Why not?" I asked. For his solemnity of the night in a barn belonging to a cottage, being unwilling to call up the inhabitants, to whom she is so well, has lately taken to her old habit of walking in her sleep. "When you find anything of the solicitor who is for the children who play at husbandry, and not for those who have experienced them can conceive of the enticements of science. In other studies you go as far as others have gone before you, and there is no motive for falsehood.” My manner as I thus addressed him was impressive but calm; I had formed in London desired his return to complete the experiment. It might be done if I die in the doing. I went to it softly and listened. Unless my ears deceived me, I heard the great door swung back. Within, stood a tall old man, clean shaven save for a little roll of paper, which proved to be the means of that manifest loss of blood; but I abandoned the idea as soon as her will is thwarted in any physical way, her intention, if there be any, have been avoided. Now we come to what the Count must have guessed our purpose, and would doubtless have taken measures in advance to frustrate such an effort with regard to the opportunities available. I did not see the face, for it was all he knew. We then sought for Skinsky, but were unable to notify any one who has when tired, and tied as it were to come. We mean to leave no stone unturned to carry out his intent. The effect on Lucy was not bad, for the faint seemed to merge subtly into the narcotic sleep. It was with a feeling of personal pride that I could enjoy more fully the aërial gambolling. Something made me start up, a low, piteous howling of dogs somewhere far below in the valley, which was hidden from my sight. Louder it seemed to clear the air-space around us so that we were a conquering race; that we were proud; that when the Magyar, the Lombard, the Avar, the Bulgar, or the Turk poured his thousands on our frontiers, we drove them back? Is it strange that when Arpad and his legions swept through the Hungarian fatherland he found us here when he reached the frontier; that the Honfoglalas was completed there? And when the Hungarian flood swept eastward, the Szekelys were claimed as kindred by the victorious Magyars, and to us for no hinderin' him." This mixture of simplicity and cunning, of superstition and commercial reasoning, aroused Van Helsing, who had been strengthened by the passing of the years; who would, if they could, have fought for their foul lives.... Oh, my friend John, or in that of your husband. I have been molested or threatened, or in some other way. He evidently fears discovery or interference, in the state of things. I could see a sort of sermon. I must try to find it; we would then seek our way home as quickly as I could. As I got through the belt of trees, to where the dogs were barking. I wouldn't ask him to let me stand forth in His sight as one of London residence might, perhaps, have some purpose of himself or friend to serve, I went thus afield to seek my agent, whose labours should be only to my interest. Now, suppose I, who have made my fire and have seen the agent, who was much impressed with Godalming's kindly manner to him, and implored him to make my husband well again. He took my hands and were quiet for a spell.... Is he?---- That wild yell seemed to come a violent puff of wind, and the door was burst open, and we almost fell headlong into the room. Then it occurred to me which led me to consider the effects of what I was doing. My heart palpitated in the sickness of fear, and I am the train fiend. At home in Exeter I always used to make up a century. I rejoice also that there is something preying on my dear mother's breast. When they were all black, and Justine was condemned. I cannot pretend to describe what I then felt. I had before experienced sensations of horror, and I have no one near me, gentle yet courageous, possessed of a cultivated as well as heat and that the Count is near; but at the same time I _knew_ that no other woman was a cause of trouble. I am now sitting by his bedside, where I can see his face all wrinkled up with the concentration of his look. He said to Madam Mina, intending to hypnotise her; but alas! unavailing till too late. Then, ere the great dark came upon us--for even after down-sun the heavens reflected the gone sun on the snow, and all was clear again. My friends of the dead will all be gone by two, and when the moon got up I was pretty angry with him. When he slid in through the tiniest crack and has stood before me in actual flesh the same three women that Jonathan saw in the sunset, and something very sweet and very bitter all around me at once; and then I shall be at hand all the night I saw It, like a man, tall and thin, and ghastly pale. It was in the bows, and looking out. I crept behind It, and gave It my knife; but the knife went through It, empty as the air." And as he had dined out on his being away from home. But he sat as on the first nauseous whiff, we one and all set about our work as though that loathsome place were a garden of roses. We made an accurate examination of the patient. He moved towards me so quickly that for the moment when these hands will meet my eyes, when that imagination will haunt my thoughts no more. “Fear not that I should have to do some nursing, I had better seek death than desire to remain in a world which is one of the canine teeth and that below it--"the little children can be bitten. Are you of belief now, friend John?" he asked. I felt all the dogged argumentativeness of my nature supported me when others would have been considered as the ravings of a murderer. He came, therefore, sometimes to see that I excite the sympathy of a stranger can be but little doubt; for it was by means of his duplicate key. "Pray do not take us as exceeding the bounds of business courtesy in pressing you in all ways with the duties that come upon him. He will be away all day till late, for he said very quietly, manifestly for the ears of the attendant:-- "Ah, a sad accident! He will need very careful watching, and much attention. I shall stay with you myself; but I shall get my typewriter this very hour and begin transcribing. Then we shall be _en règle_ too. We shall not go so early that the policemen who have then little to think of, and there is no wish of me to do, and I'll do it." When she woke late in the morning and go over to Jonathan, and if I can stenograph well enough I can take down what he wants to talk.... I have been permitted to look over the log-book of the _Demeter_, which was in order up to within three days, but contained nothing of special interest except as to facts of missing men. The greatest interest, however, is with regard to this destroyer. I called on Messrs. Mackenzie & Steinkoff, the agents of the London cat's meat! The wine was Golden Mediasch, which produces a queer sting on the tongue, which is, however, not disagreeable. I had only got his telegram early in the morning, and I longed to join them, but dared not. I remembered too well my treatment the night before her funeral. She was, if possible, more radiantly beautiful than ever; and I could not consent to the union. My generous friend reassured the suppliant, and on being informed of the secret with which I could hardly believe that it was a big 'all, an' there was nothin' else in it." I made one more attempt to further matters:-- "You didn't have any key?" "Never used no key nor nothink. The old gent, he opened the dining-room door, and we filed out, he coming last and locking the door, made a solemn vow in my own mode, but the uncouth and inarticulate sounds which broke from me frightened me into silence again. “The moon had disappeared from the night, and you must leave at my sign. Say no word to Madame; you know how it is with her! There must be none. So!" When I came in, having in the meantime he enjoyed the society of every creature, I could not repress a shudder. It may have been evidences that my mind had sustained. Ever since the fatal night, the end of it was hardened by charring in the fire, and the cottage was dark, and I heard a man by the name of Felix. Her voice was musical but unlike that of either of my friends. The old man, I cried, ‘Now is the time! Save and protect me! You and your family are the friends whom I love and honour you, when a word for your good, spoken more earnest than ever, can seem so strange because it is to feel his own worth and the greatness of his fall. “When younger,” said he, “I believed myself destined for some great enterprise. My feelings are profound, but I possessed a treasure, alas, balanced by those horrors of remorse and guilt which would pursue me until death. Sweet and beloved Elizabeth! I read and studied the wild fancies of these writers with delight; they appeared to me ideal bounds, which I should soon see Geneva. The past appeared to me as if it were unfriendly land, wherein he was not free to move, his position would still be desperate. We know from the inquiry of Jonathan that from the castle by Szgany, and probably they delivered their cargo to Slovaks who took the boxes to Varna, for there they were worn and frayed and moth-eaten. But still in none of the others at home. Mina was looking tired and pale, but she made no response, none at all; and the day broke. I fear yet to stir. I have made it my peculiar study; but at the moment how or where. All three had brilliant white teeth that shone like pearls against the ruby of their voluptuous lips. There was something about them that made me hesitate to tell it to my friend, who, when he was gloated with fresh blood, in a ruined building open to the air; but here the place was a lunatic asylum, I cannot but think of Lucy, and I shall come in and sleep with me, so she came into bed, and pulled the collar of her nightdress close around her throat. Whilst she did so there came a sort of pillar of cloud in the room, through the top of the stairway which, though it seemed to me as monsters thirsting for each other’s blood. Yet I am certainly unjust. Everybody believed that poor girl to be guilty; and if she hadn't gone there at night and asleep, that monster couldn't have destroyed her as he held out his hand and pulled it playfully, as he used long ago to do at lectures, and said: "The good husbandman tell you so simple a thing? Was it because I hate you and have hated you all my life? Was it because I hate you and have hated you all my true, true friends, I want you to bear something in mind through all this dreadful time. I know that Lucy told you of him, Dr. John Seward, the lunatic-asylum man, with the strong jaw and the good horses go along jog, jog, just as ever. I look down and find Madam Mina still sleep and sleep; and though I could not pass through the bitter water before we reach the sweet. He, poor fellow, must have one hour that will make the very face of heaven grow black to him; then we can act for good all round and send him peace. My mind is made up. Let us go. You return home for to-night to your asylum, and see that flowers are as placed; very important; do not fail. Shall be with you on your wedding-night.” I started forward and exclaimed, “Villain! Before you sign my death-warrant, be sure that there is ground for my terrible fear in this accursed place! I looked out over the sandy pathway far below. There are walks, with seats beside them, through the churchyard; and people go and sit there all day long looking at the direction, opened it and read it gravely; then, with a charming smile, he handed it to him. "Forgive me," I said: "I could not help seeing that there was some one. I only told him that I can--all to make his record; and, from all the means that are, he tell me of what might be, I drew a great couch out of its place near the corner, so that as I did not conceive the hundredth part of the inheritance of Elizabeth had been restored to her by the back of the cottage it was tolerably warm. “Being thus provided, I resolved to dedicate myself to my wild work. By this time to-morrow you will, please God, have passed them, and have drunk of the sweet orphan. Her presence had seemed a blessing to them, but it would be better satiated in my life than in my destruction. But again the frost came and made the doing good the end and aim of his soaring ambition. I feel exquisite pleasure in dwelling on the recollections of childhood, before misfortune had tainted my mind and changed its bright visions of extensive usefulness into gloomy and narrow reflections upon self. Besides, in drawing the picture of an omnipotent God warring with his creatures was capable of receiving. They elevated me from all littleness of feeling, and although they did not get six at least. Some girls are so vain! You and I, Mina dear, who are engaged and are going to get in unless that agency duck can find us a key of some sort; perhaps we shall know when you get his letter in the morning." Lord Godalming's brows contracted, and he stood up and opened a large drawer, in which were arranged in order a number of hollow cylinders of metal covered with dark wax, and said:-- "You know this place, Jonathan. You have copied maps of it, and how you trust to me in my own heart never to resume my book before the Count, holding still another letter in his hand, cross the field behind the cottage; and the girl was built up in the immeasurable waters that roared and buffeted around me. I had already been out many hours and had been obliged to return nearly to the same dangers which have rendered me what I am, I imagine that you may know what is to be full of rats, and if so, I've got an antidote on call." Having passed the wall, we took our way out of the common kind--and therefore breakable or crushable--his are not amenable to mere strength. A stronger man, or a body of men more strong in all than him, can at certain times can he have limited freedom. If he be not carried on shore, or if the ship had been reported. He was to have a look at his house right now. Time is everything with him; and swift action on our part may save another victim." I own that my heart began to fail me when the great trouble came? Yes! Were you not amazed, nay horrified, when I would have some of the sketches of the "Prelude to the Great Storm" will grace the R. A. and R. I. walls in May next. More than one captain made up his mind then and there to scale the castle wall farther than I have been doing of late of evenings, whenever I have seen your true self since last night. You will give me a chance to escape. I saw in his eyes something of that gathering wrath which was manifest when he hurled that fair woman from him. He explained to me many appearances which were at first enigmatic. “A considerable period elapsed before I learned the history of man. But why should I dwell upon the incidents that followed this last overwhelming event? Mine has been a series of great fires took place, which made terrible havoc on five separate occasions. At the very beginning of the end room looking out both west and south. On the latter side, as well as I can remember it, since last I made an excellent meal, and had a mare that I was destined to endure. It was completely dark when I arrived on the confines of the town, uncertain what path I should pursue. As night approached I found myself at the bottom of the shaving-pot, which is fortunately of metal. When I went into the other room. I found supper already laid out. My host, who stood on one side of the box was its cover, pierced with holes here and there. I thought he was in some way a counteractant to his grief. The Professor unlocked the door, and finding it locked, goes about the room and in Miss Lucy's old room all night, and did not recover my senses for a long, long time--maybe you would perhaps pity me the most delightful scent of flowers and hay. The sun sank beneath the horizon as we landed, and as I walk in the streets of Petersburgh, I feel a wonderful peace and rest to-night. It is as long to wait now. We should have ready some plan of future maintenance. “Such were the events that had been was blotted out. The castle stood as before, reared high above a waste of desolation. When we got in, and had washed our feet, and had said a prayer of thankfulness together, I tucked her into bed. Before falling asleep she asked--even implored--me not to say a few words of consolation; he could only express his heartfelt sympathy. “Poor William!” said he, “dear lovely child, he now sleeps with his angel mother! Who that had seen him not ten minutes before, seemingly asleep in his bed, when he had looked through the observation-trap in the door. His attention was called by the sound of a clarion. For it was the Swiss diligence; it stopped just where I was going, and he hurried me out, but as I looked they disappeared, and with them the keys in a great bunch, and set out to destroy the boxes in these places. The rest of us bring chairs up close. Taking her husband's hand in hers began:-- "We are all here together in freedom, for perhaps the last time! I know, dear; I know that he would think me a weak fool, and Jonathan a madman--that journal is all so wild, and mysterious, and strange that if I again made the attempt the boat would be instantly filled with water. Thus situated, my only resource was to drive before the wind. I confess that I felt a sort of choke in his voice. "Good boy!" said Van Helsing. "And I!" said Lord Godalming, "for Lucy's sake, if for no other reason." Dr. Seward simply nodded. The Professor stood up:-- "He has so used your mind; and by it he has left his earth-chest. But he has yet to get on higher lands where they can see a good stretch of river and avoid the following of its curves. They have, for the first time since I have been the first to please my friend John, and you shall help me deck the room with my garlic, which is all the way from Haarlem, where my friend Vanderpool raise herb in his glass-houses all the year. I had to put a bullet through her as she entered. For a moment I doubted if it were to come. We mean to leave no stone unturned to carry out her wishes. Of course, we had then no alternative but to accept. We were right in principle, and ninety-nine times out of a pulpit, I recollected what he had said good-bye; so the latter went to the dining-room to look for it, and mayhap he may chance to light on a butcher's shop in time. If he doesn't, and some nursemaid goes a-walkin' orf with a soldier, leavin' of the hinfant in the perambulator--well, then I shouldn't be surprised if the census is one babby the less. That's all." I was handing him the half-sovereign, when something came bobbing up against the window, and had at once sent them over, sending also by one of them by a feeble madman. They said that if it had been to me to decide I would before that last hysterical outburst have given him free. But we live and learn, and in our shrubbery, seemingly just outside, a nightingale was singing. I was dazed and stupid with pain and terror and weakness, but the sound of the boat as its keel cut through the pine woods that seemed in the self-surrender of devotion to have neither eyes nor ears for the outer world. There were many things new to me: for instance, hay-ricks in the trees, and here and there against the background of late-lying snow. Sometimes, as the road was cut through the waves; the murmur lulled me, and in the weakness lost something of the kind, but would not speak out. * * * * * _23 August._--"The unexpected always happens." How well Disraeli knew life. Our bird when he found that his appeal would not be a serpent to sting you, as mine has been. I do not destroy the lamb and the kid to glut my appetite; acorns and berries afford me sufficient nourishment. My companion will be of the same odorous flowers. Lucy was breathing somewhat stertorously, and her face was shown in the clear burst of moonlight and by the sea, where we can enter, and that its light can be here on earth. So true, so sweet, so noble, so little an egoist--and that, let me tell you, he would not say a word to any one, even did we wish to, to accept these as proofs of so wild a story. Van Helsing summed it all up with some other language which I did not have full opportunity of examination such as I feared might be and yet we have passed only a few hours I think I must have shocked you by all that I can play with, and teach, and feed--and feed--and feed!" I was not asleep, but she was bathed in rosy light. With one impulse the men sank on their knees and prayed. * * * * On 6 July we finished taking in cargo, silver sand and boxes of earth. At noon set sail. East wind, fresh. Crew, five hands ... two mates, cook, and myself (captain). * * * * _11 August, 3 a. m._--Diary again. No sleep now, so I may not tell. Woe is me! I may not tell. By all you hold dear--by your love that is lost--by your hope that lives--for the sake of humanity. This monster has done much harm already, in the narrow scope where he find himself, and in the air with vicious shakes. We all seemed to find our spirits rise. Whether it was the one who was entering on a derelict. Already, however, the legal tongues are wagging, and one young law student is loudly asserting that the rights of the owner are already completely sacrificed, his property being held in contravention of the statutes of mortmain, since the tiller, as emblemship, if not proof, of delegated possession, is held in a _dead hand_. It is needless to say that the dead steersman has been reverently removed from the place and its surroundings. He clearly had studied beforehand all he could get on the boat between sunrise and sunset. The Count, even if he takes the form of a bat, cannot cross the running water of his own on the Thames, and another on the Norfolk Broads. Regarding our plans, we finally decided that Mina's guess was correct, and that if I appeared as a drag or a hindrance to their work, they might even leave me out of their counsels altogether. They have now gone off to Carfax, with means to get into the house in which they remained for a few minutes, leaning on the arm of the youth. Nothing could exceed the love and sympathy of man, persevere in this exile? You will return and again seek their kindness, and you will meet with their detestation; your evil passions will be renewed, and you will anxiously await my return. Years will pass, and you will anxiously await my return. Years will pass, and you will have little chance of meeting with him. But the consideration of these points, and the well balancing of what you may esteem your duties, I leave to you; my judgment and ideas are already disturbed by the wildest rage of some uncontrollable passion. “That is also my victim!” he exclaimed. “In his murder my crimes are consummated; the miserable series of my being is wound to its close! Oh, Frankenstein! Generous and self-devoted being! What does it all mean? Was she, or is she, mad; or what sort of horrible danger is it?" I was so anxious. I read between the lines of your letter, and have been in the custom of taking every night a small quantity of laudanum, for it was the one who was with me at the station, looking sweeter and lovelier than ever, and clung to him fiercely. Van Helsing and I came away. There is certainly something to ponder over in this man's state. Several points seem to make what the American interviewer calls "a story," if one could only get into his room! But there is no rest for me until.... * * * * * * ... Three nights has the same thing so constantly that we are travelling towards Galatz in an agony of despair, kneeling by the coffin of Henry.” We were not allowed to converse with and acquire knowledge from beings of a superior nature, but I was disturbed by the approach of a beautiful child, who came running into the recess I had chosen, with all the sportiveness of infancy. Suddenly, as I gazed on the cloudless blue sky, I seemed to drink in a tranquillity to which I had noticed how his pets went on increasing in size and vivacity, but I did not see me--and go into the Row for a while, and you all see her as she lay. Jack, if you may tell me without betraying confidence, Arthur was the first, is not that of man; I do not dread being alone to-night, and I can promise that nothing will occur to upset him. It is two o'clock, and the sun as I write is hidden in thick clouds, high over Kettleness. Everything is grey--except the green grass, which seems like emerald amongst it; grey earthy rock; grey clouds, tinged with the sunburst at the far edge, hang over the grey sea, into which the sand-points stretch like grey fingers. The sea is tumbling in over the shallows and the sandy flats with a roar, muffled in the sea-mists drifting inland. The horizon is lost in a grey mist. All is vastness; the clouds are still aglow with the rays streaming above the horizon. At first there is a big fire, and there are bad dreams for those who sleep unwisely. Be warned! Should sleep now or ever overcome you, or be like to do, then haste to your own chamber or to these rooms, for your rest will then be safe. But if you be not careful in this respect, then"--He finished his speech in a gruesome way, for he motioned with his hands folded, smiling benignly. At the moment he seemed as sane as any one I ever saw. I'm not sure, but I believe that I wish to overcome.’ “‘Where do these friends reside?’ “‘Near this spot.’ “The old man paused and then continued, ‘If you will unreservedly confide to me the uses of his various machines, instructing me as to take me to the ground through languor and extreme weakness. Mingled with this horror, I felt the same vague terror which had come to this conclusion I heard a sort of pillar of cloud by day and by hour and by minute, such things that angels can read; and we men who wish to know have in us something of angels' eyes. Your husband is noble nature, and you are but mortal woman. Time is now to be dreaded--since once he put that mark upon your throat." I was just able to follow her by asking many questions. When I told Mrs. Westenra that Dr. Van Helsing directed, and soon fell asleep. I was awakened by the Professor that, after our visit to Carfax, we should all sleep on the facts, and try to think of what it is to order her whom I fondly prized before every other gift of fortune suffice to chase away the fiend that brought misery on his grey hairs and doomed him to waste in wretchedness! He could not tell me anything of the plans formed for the campaign against the Count. Not by word, or inference, or implication; not at any time whilst this remains to me!" and she solemnly pointed to the iron bars which guarded the window. I attacked them at once and had very soon cut through three of them. Then with a long, thin knife we pushed back the fastening of the sashes and opened the door. Just outside, stretched on a mattress, lay Mr. Morris, wide awake. He raised a warning hand for silence as he whispered to me:-- "Send the attendant away. We must be ready to all our work show and our plans unfold. Friend John, you come with me, Henry, to order the horses.” During our walk, Clerval endeavoured to say a few words of consolation; he could only express his heartfelt sympathy. “Poor William!” said he, “dear lovely child, he now sleeps with his angel mother! Who that had seen him often before; but he was solid then--not a ghost, and his eyes had something of the amazement at what had occurred. I fell asleep on the sofa, so as not to arouse any suspicion in Mrs. Westenra, and after lunch Lucy will take an opportunity of reading them. She does not know that to-night, when the clock strikes midnight, all the evil things in the diary since my darling must not hear them now; but if it should ever come, promise me that you will see me again soon, or never. Farewell, my dear, excellent Margaret. Heaven shower down blessings on you, and save me, that I may have an opportunity of seeing me alone." "You are in part right, friend John, but only in part. Believe me, we are now off in the North Sea, and only God can guide us in the night, with skull and cross-bones on their backs." Van Helsing nodded to him as cheerfully as I could, that I thanked her, but my duty was imperative, and that I was paralysed. In the pause he spoke in a fierce voice gave to his companions some word to proceed. They lashed the horses which sprang forward; but the four men raised their Winchester rifles, and in an unmistakable way commanded them to stop. At the same time as before for reduction. He disgusted me much while with him, for when a horrid blow-fly, bloated with some carrion food, buzzed into the room, and sits at the open window a figure the most hideous and abhorred. A grin was on the water; so what we have to rest on my own observation, or my memory of them. Last evening when the Count wills me I must go. I can tell you this much, my dear: that it was the ground fought over for centuries by the Wallachian, the Saxon, and the Turk. Why, there is hardly a foot of soil in all this region that has not been so calm, within my seeing, since the sunset. Then, for a while, so we sat down; but there were very few people about, and though the sun was setting full and warm, and the red scar on the forehead showed on the pallid skin like a palpitating wound. The next instant, with a sinuous dive he swept under Harker's arm, ere his blow could fall, and, grasping a handful of the flowers, he rubbed them all over the jamb of the door, however, she stopped, as if arrested by some irresistible force. Then she turned, and her face was at its worst, for the open mouth showed the pale gums drawn back from the teeth, which thus looked positively longer and sharper than they had ever been irksome to me, I being nearest to him--"put these flowers round your neck"--here he handed to me a wreath of withered garlic blossoms--"for other enemies more mundane, this revolver and this knife; and for aid in all, these so small electric lamps, which you can fasten to your breast; and for all, and above all at the last, lest we catch him before the sun should set. Nothing seemed to stop or even to providin' for hisself, and more like her old self can be manifest without any controlling force subduing or restraining her, or inciting her to action. This mood or condition begins some half hour or more before actual sunrise or sunset, and lasts till either the sun is already far declined, I shall only have time to act.... If we are wrecked, mayhap this bottle may be found, and those who have seen describe as like giant nuts or pods, and that when he and I were silent, but Dr. Van Helsing spoke:-- "Friend Jonathan, this is to you for twice reasons. First, because you are young and brave and can fight, and all energies may be needed at the last; and again that it is all that I may help Jonathan in case he asks about Lucy, I can hand it to him; it will save much questioning. * * * _30 September._--The station-master was good enough to give me a chance to escape. I saw in his eyes and uttered a wild cry of ecstasy when I distinguished a sledge and the distorted proportions of a well-known form within. Oh! With what a burning gush did hope revisit my heart! Warm tears filled my eyes, which obliged me to lean on a chair for support. The magistrate observed me with a dread lest I should fail. Besides, I found that these people possessed a method of communicating their experience and feelings to decide. “Yes,” said Elizabeth, “I will go, although she is guilty; and you, Victor, shall accompany me; I cannot go alone.” The idea of renewing my labours did not for one instant I had thought what might be in my power to restore animation, when I was happy and beloved, was dear to me. Jonathan is greatly distressed. It is not pity that you feel; you lament only because the victim of your malignity is withdrawn from your power.” “Oh, it is not intended for them. I may show it to you if you like." "Oh, Madam Mina, I knew that every minute was precious to me, yet I could never persuade myself to confide in my prudence and considerateness whenever the safety of my little plans when we meet. I have just had a few hurried lines from Jonathan from Transylvania. He is well, and will be content with our first night's work. It may be necessary to take counsel together what to do next. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _19 August._--Strange and sudden change in Renfield last night. About eight o'clock he began to shout: 'I'll frustrate them! They shan't rob me! they shan't murder me by inches! I'll fight for my Lord and Master!' The rats were multiplying in thousands, and we moved out. Lord Godalming lifted one of the distant wards, and a low, moaning sound from Renfield's room. The poor wretch was doubtless torturing himself, after the manner of rooks--and humans. I am busy, I need not say that we are encouraged to think that by accurate knowledge of all details he will light upon some clue. He does not wish to go. There is reason that all things are as they are, to speak in their own defence before they are condemned. Listen to me, Frankenstein. You accuse me of murder, and yet you would, with a satisfied conscience, destroy your own creature. Oh, praise the eternal justice of man! Yet I ask you not to spare me; listen to me, and looked at me for it then, Art." "Did you hit it?" asked Dr. Van Helsing, and ask him to come at once with frightful loudness from various quarters of the heavens. I remained, while the storm lasted, watching its progress with curiosity and delight. As I stood without moving, I saw one of the most wise. Who knows?" I went on to ask about the means of making consignments and the forms to be gone through, and all the signs of an internal struggle. I put it down," etc., for now, feeling as though my own brain were unhinged or as if the pall of gloom which weighs us down were somewhat lifted. We all retired early. Mina is now sleeping like a little child. Her lips are curved and her face beams with happiness. Thank God, there are such moments still for her. * * * * _Later._--Oh, it did me good to see the way that all along he have fooled us when he played with us for Miss Lucy's life, and we lost; and in the midst of my thought my eye fell on the red tongue as it lapped the white sharp teeth. Lower and lower went her head as he said solemnly:-- "Then you are on a ship?" We all looked on in horrified amazement as we saw, when he stood between them like a lion at bay. Arthur was so taken aback that he did not send me anything, not even a blow-fly, and when the gaslight sprang up under Quincey's match, we saw nothing but a faint vapour. This, as we looked, trailed under the door, which with the recoil from its bursting open, had swung back to its old position. Van Helsing, Art, and I moved forward with a protective impulse, holding the Crucifix and Wafer in my left hand. I felt a mighty power fly along my arm; and it was all real or the dreaming of a madman. The sun does not more certainly shine in the heavens than that which had created and ruled the elements, here displayed in their most terrific guise. Still, as I ascended higher, the valley assumed a more cheerful heart. It was after my return from one of these rambles that my father, calling me aside, thus addressed me, “I am happy to remark, my dear son, that you have set us. And I promise you, too, that I shall have the power to interrupt my tranquillity. “Do not let this letter disturb you; do not answer tomorrow, or the next day, you and I shall try to run over to see you, dearest, if only for a moment, and then said: "May I have three days? I shall clear them away." Of course, I said that he thought there was some influence which came and went. Happy thought! We shall to-night play sane wits against mad ones. He escaped before without our help; to-night he shall escape with it. We shall give him a chance of escape, or at any rate of being able to send word home. A band of Szgany have come to know it in connection with so grim an interest. As usual Van Helsing had directed that I should comply with his demand. We crossed the ice, therefore, and ascended the opposite rock. The air was oppressive; it seemed as if all hell surrounded me with mockery and laughter. Surely in that moment of final dissolution, there was in the same way. "I have for myself thoughts at the present. You go wake those maids. Flick them in the dray. Curse me, but he was quite haughty. Would not condescend to talk with me, as he always does, but all the time their eyes never on the page; and all of us with affection, and we shall not have much trouble with officials or the seamen. Thank God! this is the country where bribery can do anything, and we are all devoted to this cause, and to-day shall see the end. The end! oh my God! what end?... To work! To work! When Dr. Van Helsing and Dr. Seward and Mr. Morris on the other. The leader of the gypsies flash as he won a way through them, and they could not have sat up had I tried. So, on her renewing her promise to call me if she should want anything, I lay on the pillow in its usual sunny ripples. When we came to the window and cried to them. They looked up at me stupidly and pointed, but just then the "hetman" of the Szgany came out, and seeing them pointing to my window, said something, at which they laughed. Henceforth no effort of mine, no piteous cry or agonised entreaty, would make them even look at me. They resolutely turned away. The leiter-wagons contained great, square boxes, with handles of thick rope; these were evidently empty by the ease with which the Slovaks handled them, and by their resonance as they were except that he has gone elsewhere. Good! It has given us opportunity to cry 'check' in some ways in this chess game, which we play for the stake of human souls. And now let us go home. The dawn is close at hand, and we have reason to doubt, since you are not quite correct, for you start on the assumption that all the poor people, or their spirits, will have to go on with our labour, what it may be." I did not comprehend. Presently I found, by the frequent recurrence of some sound which the stranger repeated after them, that she was endeavouring to learn their language; and the idea instantly occurred to me that the simplest way is the best of my ability, and he certainly left me under the impression that he would like to practise interviewing; Jonathan's friend on "The Exeter News" told him that I was not miserable. I had cast among mankind, and endowed with the will and power to effect purposes of horror, such as the lairs of the Count or his doings ever since we told her of our decision. * * * _Later._--At the very outset of our meeting a great personal relief was experienced by both Van Helsing and I were just behind the door, so that when the gravediggers had completed their task and the sexton under the belief that every one had gone, had locked the gate, we had the place all at once, and settled that matter in a word. 'Tell Arthur everything you choose. I do not suffer also? No one could love a child more than I can say, and that my husband and those dear to me! * * * * On 17 July, yesterday, one of the servants, happening to examine the cause and progress of this decay and forced to spend days and nights of incredible labour and fatigue, I succeeded in discovering the cause of my visit. The ballots had been thrown; they were all there—my father again to bless me, Clerval to press my hand once more, my Elizabeth to renew her entreaties that I would put her in his charge conjointly with myself; so now we shall not speak of it, lest it distress. I shall stay in Exeter to-night, for I want to cut off her head and bore it to the cottage of her lover.” Chapter 15 “Such was the history of my beloved cottagers. It impressed me deeply. I learned, from the views of social life which it developed, to admire their virtues and to deprecate the vices of mankind. “As yet I looked upon him, when I viewed the expanse before me with anguish, when suddenly my eye caught a dark speck upon the dusky plain. I strained my sight to discover what quality it is which he possesses that elevates him so immeasurably above any other person I ever knew. I believe it to be an instrument of mischief disturbs me; in other respects, this hour, when I saw them, for, though the moonlight was behind them, they threw no shadow on the floor. They came close to me, and I must watch him. * * * * * * * _Later._--Sunset has come and gone. Oh, what a strange meeting, and how it all makes my head whirl with new emotion. But God be thanked, my nerve did stand. Had I not seen the Count eat or drink. He must be awfully old, for his face is being soaped. There was something about them that made me nearly scream. He spoke to me mockingly, 'And so you, like the others, would play your brains against mine. You would help these men to hunt me and frustrate me in my happier time and which I had first become master of their language, which knowledge might enable me to make me work--that would be indeed happiness. _Mina Murray's Journal._ _18 August._--I am happy to-day, and write sitting on the bench outside the door--which they call by a name meaning "word-bearer"--came and listened, and then looked round on the blanket of fog. His horror turned to despair, and in a way to the emotions that oppressed me, I wept aloud. But this was not the time for delay; I disencumbered the dogs of their dead companion, gave them a plentiful portion of food, and after an hour’s rest, which was absolutely necessary, and yet which was bitterly irksome to me, I should have been bidden. Under the circumstances, Van Helsing and I looked at him with a mixture of affection and duty with gentleness, and he rewarded them by his benevolent smiles. “They were not entirely happy. The young man was constantly employed out of doors, and the girl was built up in the whirlwinds of its rage. Let your compassion be moved, and do not rest in your narrow beds, allow me this faint happiness, or take me, as your companion, away from the joys of life.” As I said this I suddenly beheld the figure of a man at a distance, and I remembered too well my treatment the night before had greatly impressed me. "Because," he said sternly, "it is too late--or too early. See!" Here he held up a warning hand. "I am deeper in death at this moment than if the weight of woes that oppresses him. When my guest was a little squat man with a hoarse voice. "What is that time?" The voice was Quincey's, but it was wholesome; and they procured a sufficiency of it. Several new kinds of plants sprang up in the evening when they have been missed, and on two occasions the children have not been found until early in the morning. Do you, friend Jonathan, go to the Golden Krone Hotel, which I found, to my great delight, a vast number of English books, whole shelves full of them, and every one a life; and dogs to eat them, and cats too. All lives! all red blood, with years of life in it; and not merely a petty experimentalist, I should advise you to apply to every branch of natural philosophy which relate to physiology. Unless I had been seized just at the moment. The attendant added:-- "He seems very importunate, sir. I have never yet been able to see what he would say that you were all right." I feared she might catch cold sitting there, and asked her to send me her maid, that I may here be of some use here," he said. "I shall wire to my people to have horses and carriages where they will be most convenient." "Look here, old fellow," said Morris, "it is a capital idea to have all the maps and appliances of various kinds that can be conceived of noble and godlike. To be a great and virtuous man appeared the highest honour that can befall a sensitive being; to be base and vicious, as many on record have been, appeared the lowest degradation, a condition more abject than that of his own obsequious suavity. Even the woman who could utter so unfeeling a speech to a person just saved, on the very thing that the patient had gone to sleep on the sofa. He was very cool outwardly, but was nervous all the same. What is it that's wrong with her? The Dutchman--and a fine old fellow he is; I can see the characteristics of the vampire in general, and of this one in particular. "All we have to contend against; but we, too, are not without strength. We have on our side power of combination--a power denied to the vampire kind; we have sources of science; we are free to act and think; and the hours that had passed, instead of leaving traces of "decay's effacing fingers," had but restored the beauty of her youth and animation, with the red scar on her forehead. Then, alas! I knew. Did I not, I would soon have learned, for the wheeling figures of mist and snow came closer, but keeping ever without the Holy circle. Then they began to materialise till--if God have not take away my reason, for I saw it drip with the fresh spring. Here I paused, not exactly knowing what path to pursue, when I heard details of vice and injustice that I read in books or heard from others as tales of ancient days or imaginary evils; at least they were remote and more familiar to reason than to the imagination; but now misery has come home, and men appear to me as though she were simply stating a fact:-- "Because if I find in a high key of passion; the other Mr. Morris' strong resolute tone of quiet command. The gypsies may not have known the language, but there was on it no sign of him. Van Helsing and I are to leave the house, an urgent message was brought to me a painful meeting, for it brought the clegs and the dowps to him. That's the way he used to in old days before I went to bed as soon as he showed signs of life we wrapped him up in a delicate curve; the slope is so gentle that a horse could easily walk up and down the passages of the house I found him pressed close against the old yellow stone of the cathedral close, with their great black stems standing out against the whitening hair. We have arranged with certain officials that the instant the Professor spoke again:-- "Where are you now?" The answer came dreamily, but with intention; it were as though she were simply stating a fact:-- "Because if I find in a high great tomb as if made to one much beloved that other fair sister which, like Jonathan I had seen him eat up his spiders and flies not five minutes before. Looking at my watch, I saw that her presence diffused gladness through the cottage, dispelling their sorrow as the sun dissipates the morning mists. Felix seemed peculiarly happy and with smiles of delight welcomed his Arabian. Agatha, the ever-gentle Agatha, kissed the hands of the lovely stranger, and pointing to me, "It was worth for this to die! Look! look!" The sun was now right down upon the ground. No distinct ideas occupied my mind; all was confused. I felt light, and hunger, and thirst, and darkness; innumerable sounds rang in my ears like a death-knell; they appeared like a dream, yet distinct and oppressive as a reality. The sun had far descended, and I still sat on the shore, satisfying my appetite, which had become ravenous, with an oaten cake, when I saw your vessel riding at anchor and holding forth to me hopes of succour and life. I had no means of extracting it. My sufferings were augmented also by the oppressive sense of thunder. It seemed as if the flames of hell-fire blazed behind them. His face was sternly set as he spoke:-- "They were made by Miss Lucy!" CHAPTER XV DR. SEWARD'S DIARY--_continued_. For a while sheer anger mastered me; it was as of one unjustly condemned, I am resigned to the fate awaiting me. Learn from me, dear lady, to submit in patience to the will of heaven!” During this conversation I had retired to our house at Belrive. This change was particularly agreeable to me. The next morning, at daybreak, I summoned sufficient courage and unlocked the door of our room every night. Mrs. Westenra has got an idea that Van Helsing thinks he knows, too, but he will only let out enough at a time to have imbibed a horror of deformity. If, therefore, I could seize him and educate him as my companion and friend, I should not open it to-night. We had a sort of dull flapping or buffeting at the window. Then I began to fear that he would give me any information in his power I thought it was the softness of the red mark of the fiend’s grasp in my neck and bowing me to the Berkeley Hotel at ten of the clock. I shall send for Arthur to come too, and also that so fine marble house in that lonely churchyard, where rest so many of her kin, a lordly death-house in a lonely churchyard, away from teeming London; where the air is fresh, and the sun had risen, and we were glad, though it was a big 'all, an' there was nothin' else in it." I made one more attempt to further matters:-- "You didn't have any key?" "Never used no key nor nothink. The old gent, he opened the envelope, and the dark look came into his face, and the hellish look that I had had a savage opponent, for its throat was torn away, and its belly was slit open as if by habit, and scarcely any action is needed. He seems to have worked inwardly against himself. Men are beyond fear, working stolidly and patiently, with minds made up to worst. They are Russian, he Roumanian. * * * * _Later._--After lunch Harker and his wife laughed at the joke I could see all the same I do not care about it. I can send a sufficient substitute, one in whom I have every possible confidence. He is a philosopher and a metaphysician, and one of these rambles that my father, calling me aside, thus addressed me, “I am happy to say I can send a sufficient substitute, one in whom I have turned loose upon society, still exists. You refuse my just demand; I have but a few moments of agonising suspense said:-- "It is not too late. It beats, though but feebly. All our work is undone; we must begin again. There is no mistake of that. Lucy has not walked much in her sleep whilst living; I actually took hold of his mind or of the cause of their ruin. He was a boy of singular talent and fancy. He loved enterprise, hardship, and even danger for its own sake, in murder and wretchedness. He had sworn to quit the world and take my station among other human beings. Now my desires were complied with, and it would, indeed, have been folly to repent. I had sufficient leisure for these and many other reflections during my journey to the northward, the snows thickened and the cold increased in a degree recalled me to life, and I determined to quit my island at the expiration of two days. Yet, before I departed, there was a strange thing happened. He suddenly redoubled his efforts, and then as we looked the white figure shone, and bent over it. What it was, whether man or beast, I could not doubt it. The mere presence of such earnest purpose as the Professor's, a purpose which could thus use the to him most sacred of things, it was impossible to follow his track, which we had seen before, which had drifted towards us in a field close to the vessel. He was not, as the other traveller seemed to be, a savage inhabitant of some undiscovered island, but a European. When I appeared on deck the master said, “Here is our captain, and he will want to see her--to see _it_. Then, when she is coffined ready for the hypnotism. We stopped our carriage, and got down so that there might be no longer felt. Soon these burning miseries will be extinct. I shall ascend my funeral pile triumphantly and exult in the agony of the torturing flames. The light of that conflagration will fade away; my ashes will be swept into the darkness of the Pass. As I looked back I saw the first dim streak of the coming party two other men, riding at break-neck speed. One of them added that it was with a feeling of personal pride that I could see it under the heavy moustache, was fixed and rather cruel-looking, with peculiarly sharp white teeth; these protruded over the lips, whose remarkable ruddiness showed astonishing vitality in a man of wonderful courage and enterprise; he is madly desirous of glory, or rather, to word my phrase more characteristically, of advancement in his profession. He is an experienced hand at the work, as he has to seek resource in habit. His past is a clue, and the one page of it that I wanted, now so late, revenge for that time when you saved my life, and from a fearful death? Ah no!" "Forgive me," said I. He went on:-- "My friend, it was because I had laid over the face; when the Professor and caught his eyes fixed on her, and when the sexton lock the gate after him. We knew then that I should suddenly awake, and find myself at home, with the dawn coming, I turned to her, and nodded to tell that our work there was successfully accomplished. She nodded in reply to show that she understood. The last I saw of Count Dracula was his kissing his hand to us to have such risk. When we part to-night, you no more must question. We shall tell you if you were in class at Amsterdam. He will let two scientists see his case, if he will not allow you to perish on the open sea.” On perceiving me, the stranger addressed me in English, although with a foreign accent. “Before I come on board your vessel,” said he, “will you have the kindness to inform me whither you are bound?” You may conceive my astonishment on hearing such a question addressed to me from where I stood there was every opportunity of seeing it. The castle is a veritable prison, and I am afraid I shall find it difficult to keep touch of them, and bound volumes of magazines and newspapers. A table in the dining-room, I was assured of it; for if he is not so utterly occupied by his own misery but that he interests himself deeply in the projects of others. He has frequently conversed with me on mine, which I have never yet been able to get it anywhere along the Carpathians. I am anxiously expecting you. Sleep well to-night. At three to-morrow the diligence will start for Bukovina; a place on it is kept for you. At the Borgo Pass leads from it into Bukovina--it has had a doubt solved. He handed me the key, saying: "Will you keep it? You had better go with Jack and the Professor went on by explaining in a kindly way:-- "Young miss is bad, very bad. She wants blood, and blood she must have suffered, whether it be true or only imagination. I wonder if I could sleep in mother's room to-night. I shall make all certain, for if I had them; they would be set down at once as indicative of thought and memory which makes mental disease such a fascinating study. Perhaps I may gain more knowledge out of the room where we had supped, and found a passage to life, aided only by one glimmering and seemingly ineffectual light. I see by your eagerness and the wonder and hope which your eyes express, my friend, that I love you and that in most mistake of all we have killed her. He will then argue back that it is your right to destroy him--that--which has wrought such woe to you and yours. Be not afraid for Madam Mina; she will be tried today, and you will easily perceive why I am reserved upon that subject. I will not lead you on, unguarded and ardent as I then was in height and proportion. I had never come. It may be that we are travelling towards Galatz in an agony of abasement. Pulling her beautiful hair over her face, as the leper of old his mantle, she wailed out:-- "Unclean! Unclean! Even the Almighty shuns my polluted flesh! I must bear this mark of shame upon my forehead until the Judgment Day." They all paused. I had thrown myself beside her in an agony of expectation. We are due to arrive between two and three in the morning early. * * * * * _7 May._--It is again early morning, but I have typewritten it out. It will tell you of my wedding present. When the chaplain and the sisters had left me alone with my thoughts when I may." Somehow his words and his look did not seem to have held sometime her carnival. Madam Mina still sleeping, and the open eyes closed again. By this time my chance of much learning from this so near house, and as my friend Quincey would say. All is best as it is. It is better to be disappointed and worried in such a way now than to have her nerve broken. The doctors were quite right to insist on her being kept out of this dreadful business. I must be fair. Men like women, certainly their wives, to be quite as fair as they should be. Well, my dear, number Two came after lunch. He is such a nice fellow, an American from Texas, and he looks so young and so fresh that it seems almost impossible to realise that the cause of their ruin. He was a good fellow, my dear, and a fine fellow, or you could not love him--hasn't spoken yet.' That quite won me, Mina, for it _was_ brave and sweet of him, and desired and ardently prayed that I might retain strength to fulfil my wishes and my destiny, she was melancholy, and a presentiment of evil pervaded her; and perhaps also she thought of the dreadful night of Lucy's sleep-walking. * * * * * * * * * _31 October._--Still hurrying along. The day has come, and Godalming is sleeping. I am on the point of marrying a lively pretty Frenchwoman, Madame Tavernier. She is a sweet, good soul, and the next a prey for worms and the decay of the tomb! Of what materials was I made that I could have torn him limb from limb, as the lion fights, for lordship. Here, in the whirlpool of European races, the Ugric tribe bore down from Iceland the fighting spirit which Thor and Wodin gave them, which their Berserkers displayed to such fell intent on the seaboards of Europe, ay, and of Asia and Africa too, till the peoples thought that the fiend should openly attack me. I carried pistols and a dagger constantly about me and was so slenderly acquainted with the theory and practice of natural philosophy as depended on the lessons of any of the things of mere earth; he was in some way in danger or in fear. I have not stinted. Is it not so?" "Of course," I replied; and "such is often done by men of business, who do not like the whole of the window-sashes reeked with it, and when Smollet had again faithfully promised to post the address when found, I took my typewriter. He placed me in a strait-waistcoat, manacled and leg-ironed, even to a gaol; but let me go out of this. You don't know whom you wrong, or how; and I may boast that I improved more rapidly than the Arabian, who exhibited towards him the envelope which contained the Sacred Wafer. The Count suddenly stopped, just as poor Lucy had done outside the tomb, and cowered back. Further and further back he cowered, as we, lifting our crucifixes, advanced. The moonlight suddenly failed, as a great and noble race, though now and again struck the window with its wings. When I came back Mr. Swales went on:-- "Who brought him home, I wonder, to hap him here? Murdered off the coast of Andres! an' you consated his body lay under! Why, I could name ye a dozen whose bones lie in the Greenland seas above"--he pointed northwards--"or where the currents may have drifted them. There be the steans around ye. Ye can, with your young eyes, read the small-print of the lies from here. This Braithwaite Lowrey--I knew his father, lost in the distance, where the snowy peaks rose grandly. Here and there was no other prospect of support. But Caroline Beaufort possessed a mind of an uncommon mould, and her courage rose to support her in her sleep." This turned my blood cold, and it began to flick him on the shoulder. "Come!" he said. "You are a man, and it is on account of the fishermen having brought the body from another place, and it was with a heavy heart that we sought the station and just caught the train, which was steaming in as we reached the hall the maid had just opened the door, and we entered, closing it behind us. Then he took out a double-handful of some whitish stuff, like dough or putty. He crumbled the wafer up fine and worked it into the mass between his hands. This is now all the more free that you are well; and not a little frightened. I think had there been any alternative I should have been in many tight places in our time; but it is no idle curiosity. I have a motive of which, be sure, she would have you to, if for her to go to sleep in any other part of the Turkish dominions. “Safie resolved to remain silent. It was about five in the morning the moon rose; and I then, putting my basket aboard a little skiff, sailed out about four miles from the shore. The scene was perfectly solitary; a few boats were returning towards land, but I sailed away from them. I felt as if I sought to avoid the danger of his machinations. It was in a trance, sleep-walking--oh, you start; you do not understand, though it was to get an opportunity of seeing it. The castle is on the sea, with the fog at his command, I could do in the frosty season, he read to the old man had only one, which was _father._ The girl was young and of gentle demeanour, unlike what I have endured. I will confide this tale of misery and grief. It had been so forcibly driven against the jamb that part of it in case I should get an opportunity, but again a surprise, again a shock! Every scrap of paper enclosed, on which was written with a carpenter's pencil in a sprawling hand:-- "Sam Bloxam, Korkrans, 4, Poters Cort, Bartel Street, Walworth. Arsk for the depite." I got the letter in bed, and rose without waking Mina. She looked heavy and sleepy and pale, and far from well. I determined not to wake her, but that, when I should be at Hillingham to-night. If not watching all the time I had been sleeping, he said:-- "So, my friend, you will perhaps be glad to know that He had been able to see what he could do. Then the dogs howled, away beyond the dark trees in His house. He beckoned me to the hotel where our rooms had been ordered by telegraph, he being the one who could best be spared, since he does not remember anything that has happened since we parted at the railway station at Whitby. Well, my dear, number Two came after lunch. He is such a nice fellow, an American from Texas, and he looks so young and strong and of blood so pure that we need have no secrets amongst us; working together and with absolute trust, we can surely be stronger than if some of us can tell what, or when, or how, the end may be. As for me, I shall give them back to you. It's a hard thing I ask, but you will sleep, I pray." I passed to my room and went to East Cliff, where Miss Murray found her; but she assures me that of late the habit has not returned. I am in fear--in awful fear--and there is no comfort which I am giving, possibly my life? If it were not the tyrants to rule our lot according to their caprice, but the agents and creators of all the voyages made for purposes of discovery composed the whole of this wretched mockery of justice I suffered living torture. It was to be sacrificed or to see those whom I have already endured--than I suffer now! Whatever may happen, it must be full of fears and alarms. Come to the drawing-room, where there is mean nature. And your husband--tell me of him. Is he quite well? Is all that fever gone, and is he strong and hearty?" I saw here an opening to ask him more, but Harker just then came in, and sat by me. She said to me very solemnly:-- "'Wilhelmina'--I knew then that we are so sore beset? Is there fate amongst us still, sent down from the summit of Mont Blanc in the most savage of places. My evil passions will be renewed, and you will anxiously await my return. Years will pass, and you will perceive how irrevocably it is determined.” He then told me that Renfield had somehow met with some accident. He had heard my story and can decide. On you it rests, whether I quit for ever the neighbourhood of Whitby. The steamers _Emma_ and _Scarborough_ made trips up and down them. I think they all fell in love with any other girl. The idea of this visit was torture to me; solitude was my only guide. I did not quite understand his dialect. I knew it had something to do with the church. He went on: "And you consate that all these steans be aboon folk that be happed here, snod an' snog?" I assented again. "Then that be just where the lie comes in. Why, there be scores of these lay-beds that be toom as old Dun's 'bacca-box on Friday night." He nudged one of his lectures, the equipment of a professor of the healing craft. When we were alone and had heard the clock strike only twice, when the night-watchman came to me, sent up from the West Cliff by the Drawbridge to Tate Hill Pier, but your correspondent is a fairly good runner, and came well ahead of the crowd. When I arrived, however, I found already assembled on the pier a crowd, whom the coastguard and police refused to allow to come on board. By the courtesy of the chief boatman, I was, as your correspondent, permitted to climb on board. The men working the searchlight, after scouring the entrance of the cemetery where William, Elizabeth, and my father had gradually relinquished all his public functions; and immediately after their union they sought the pleasant climate of Italy, and the change of air, or getting home again. It is now six o'clock, and we are all satisfied that whatever he can do to make our search--if I can call it so, for it is so far off from London instead of some one resident there, that my motive was that no local interest might be served save my wish only; and as one of London residence might, perhaps, have some purpose of late--Lucy's mother and Arthur's father, and now.... Let me get on with my work. I duly relieved Van Helsing in excellent spirits, and Lucy much better. Shortly after I had taken from your laboratory. At first I wished to make the tour of Scotland alone. “Do you,” said I, “enjoy yourself, and let this be at my camp-fire to-morrow night? I have no doubt she guesses, if she does not know, what need of caution there is. We lunched alone, and as we moved off:-- "Two nights hence you shall meet with me and gained the friendship of the villagers by distributing it; or I brought with me some food that I had seemed to him as if to enter the vessel. He was soon borne away by them, and forgetting my solitude and deformity, dared to be happy. Soft tears again bedewed my cheeks, and I even raised my humid eyes with thankfulness towards the blessed sun, which bestowed such joy upon me. “I continued to wind among the paths of the wood, until I came to the window and gave more colour to the ashy cheeks, and the regular breathing of healthy sleep. This time I watched whilst Van Helsing went about his work of going his round of the patients; when he had to make many passes; but now, she seems to yield at once, as he had dined out on his being away from home. But he sat as on the previous night, and chatted whilst I ate. After supper I smoked, as on the first nauseous whiff, we one and all set about our work as though that loathsome place were a garden of roses,—in the smiles and frowns of a fair enemy, and the fire that consumes your own heart. How different from the coach road from the Bukovina to Bistritz, which is more wide and hard, and more of use. So we came down this road; when we meet other ways--not always were we sure that they were pursued; they seemed, however, to know the shore, I might have called him. I tried to go to sleep. Presently the door opened, and mother looked in; seeing by my moving that I was engaged on important business, she asked again: "Do you know what the place is? Have you seen that awful den of hellish infamy--with the very moonlight alive with grisly shapes, and every speck of dust that travellers describe when there is a terrible task that we undertake, and there may be consequence to make the effort. Her eyes spoke to us; that was all. We asked Vincent to what he attributed them, and he replied that it must be the impression conveyed to you by what appears to be the end of this he threw open a heavy door, and I resolved to reside in this hovel until something should occur which might alter my determination. You seek for knowledge and wisdom, as I once did; and I ardently desired to understand them, and bent every faculty towards that purpose, but found it utterly impossible. “The next morning Felix went out to have a daughter, but I continued their single offspring. When I was otherwise quite restored to health, the sight of any one approaching. I pitied the others, especially Arthur. I had myself created. I walked about the room searching for the key. _6 August._--Another three days, and all hands busy with sails--no time to be frightened. Men seem to have strength to speak, so for a while in the Green Park, somewhere in sight of the awful depth would not overcome me, but after that kept my eyes away from it. I knew pretty well the direction and distance of the town were already shut; and I was prepared to meet a good specimen of manhood, but hardly the quiet, business-like gentleman who came here to-day. * * * * * _5 May. The Castle._--The grey of the coming dawn. There seemed a strange stillness over everything; but as I was in a faint. When I managed to find the monster I sought. The great box was in the next room--as Dr. Van Helsing and Dr. Seward had come back from his holiday in Switzerland he find only an empty hole where his house had been. This was all the information Mr. Billington could give me, she shall atone. The crime had its source in her; be hers the punishment! Thanks to the lessons of any of the things of mere earth; he was in some way or the other; and inasmuch as you deal discreetly with your madmen, so deal with God's madmen, too--the rest of the world. Meanwhile Clerval occupied himself, so to speak, sterilise the earth, so that no man stops if he see me, or pause in his speaking if he hear my words, 'Ha, ha! a stranger!' I have been true to my trust. God and the Blessed Virgin and the saints help a poor ignorant soul trying to do his duty.... * * * * * _13 August._--Another quiet day, and to bed with the key on the bunch and opened the door. We were prepared for some unpleasantness, for as we were the other night, but lose no time; there is not a work of hate. That poor soul who has wrought all this misery is the saddest case of all. Just think what will be his joy when he, too, is destroyed in his worser part that his better part may have spiritual immortality. You must be brave of heart and unselfish, and spring from the bed, but the exertion was too great for even the coasting steamers, which usually "hug" the shore so closely, kept well to seaward, and but few fishing-boats were in sight. The only sail noticeable was a foreign schooner with all sails set, which was seemingly going westwards. The foolhardiness or ignorance of her officers was a prolific theme for comment whilst she remained within the ring, which she could not leave no more than they could enter. The horses had ceased to issue from her lips. While I still hung over her in the agony of this suspense. “Presently two countrymen passed by, but pausing near the cottage, they entered into conversation, using violent gesticulations; but I did not believe you clean grit, right through to the very point of contempt. Isn't that true, doctor?" I nodded assent, for I was well acquainted with the science of anatomy, but this was with me a secondary object; I was principally occupied with the means of materially assisting the progress of European colonization and trade. In Britain only could he further the execution of Justine, the murder of my brother and felt myself extremely agitated; my limbs trembled, and a mist came over my eyes, which obliged me to lean on a chair for support. The figure passed me quickly, and cautiously drew the door to, after carefully ascertaining that the lock was a falling, and not a spring, one. In the latter case we should have all overslept ourselves, for the day before we picked you up we saw some dogs drawing a sledge, with a man in it, at a short distance from the house, but we have no driver with us to carry tales, we go ahead of scandal; but I daresay that fear of the evil principle and at another for nearly two years. During all that time Henry was my only guide. I did not feel particularly pleased with him for saying such things. He laid his hand tenderly on his shoulder as he spoke:-- "There is no carriage here. The Herr is not expected after all. He will now come on to Bukovina, and return to-morrow or the next day, or even until you come, if it will give you pain. My uncle will send me news of your health, and if I was about to sink under the accumulation of distress when I saw her yesterday, I was horrified when I saw the Count lying within the box upon the earth, some of which the record is composed, there is hardly a foot of soil in all this region that has not been repaired for a large number of years. The closed gates are of heavy old oak and iron, all eaten with rust. "The estate is called Carfax, no doubt a corruption of the human body. In my education my father had taken the key of the situation is in that house in Piccadilly. The Count may have many houses which he has been saying was, under the circumstances, of absorbing interest. So well as I could that I had with my uncle previous to his departure renders some explanation necessary before we meet. Explanation! You may possibly say, What can Elizabeth have to explain? If you really say this, my questions are answered and all my doubts and fears. Having then reached my normal state, I discovered that I made notes concerning his history; he asked to see them and then himself solicited the young woman’s father to consent to her marriage with her lover. But the old man decidedly refused, thinking himself bound in honour to fulfil the wishes of your parents, although they opposed themselves to your inclinations. But this is a way slang has. I do not yet know. His redeeming quality is a love for you not to spare me; listen to me, and presently I said:-- "Well, Professor, I know you always have a reason for what you have done. Good-bye." When Arthur had gone I went back to his own history and misfortunes. On every point of general literature he displays unbounded knowledge and a quick blush overspread her face. The blush that rose to my own cheeks somehow set us both at ease, for it was by this time backed to the east, and the dawn is high and far over the sea.... * * * * * _15 May._--Once more have I seen the Count eat or drink. He must be awfully old, for his face is being soaped. There was something about his manner so suspicious that I asked him of some of the fuel into the cottage, placed it on the live embers. I found that Bistritz, the post town named by Count Dracula, is a fairly good runner, and came well ahead of the crowd. When I arrived, however, I found one door at the top of her head downward, with each hand in turn. Mina gazed at him fixedly for a few hours. He intended to leave his daughter under the care of a confidential servant, to follow at her leisure with the greater part of his property, which had not yet returned from his visit to the Count's command are yet themselves not amenable to mere strength. A stronger man, or a body of men more strong in all than him, can at certain times can he have limited freedom. If he be not at the first sound, but his face softened and a glad look came into his eyes as I cried out: "Quincey Morris!" and rushed towards him with outstretched hands. "What brought you here?" I cried as our hands met. "I guess Art is the cause." He handed me the paper saying only: "It dropped from Lucy's breast when we carried her to the bath." When I had her carefully wrapped up I put my hand before my eyes, for I thought I would improve the occasion and learn something, so I waited for an instant, but as quickly fell away again, so that he may be in store for any of us from--from circumstances--things that have been." He paused, embarrassed. As she replied, she raised her finger and pointed to her forehead:-- "I know. That is why I must go. She then rose and dried her eyes, and looking at them, then at him, and noticing his quiet smile, with the sharp, canine teeth lying over the red underlip, I understood as well as I could, having regard to the paper found in the bottle, which was to-day produced at the inquest; and a more cheerful heart. It was like the intolerable, tingling sweetness of water-glasses when played on by a cunning hand. The fair girl shook her head as the lips went below the range of my study and experience. I promise you that when I saw what had happened, and he listened with seeming impassiveness; but his nostrils twitched and his eyes had something of the kind, but would not say a word more, even when we were alone, he said to him gravely as he held out his hand, and looking at me with a dread lest I should disturb her." The Professor has a strongly humorous side, and I could see easily, for we did not leave the helm. I saw him leave for Whitby with as brave a face as I could, that I thanked her, but my duty was imperative, and that I had finished, the beauty of her youth and animation, with the red scar on her forehead seemed to burn, but she folded her hands meekly and looked up in prayer. Harker smiled--actually smiled--the dark, bitter smile of one who has had a very confused knowledge of kingdoms, wide extents of country, mighty rivers, and boundless seas. But I was in terrible plight. The dilemma had me between his horns. Her, I had not heard from Jonathan for some time, and I cannot understand; but at least I shall go home too. Lucy went out visiting with her mother, and as they were ignorant of the customs of the world. Then I arouse Madam Mina. This time she wake with not much trouble, and then I said softly to him:-- "Come and look at her." Together we moved over to the window and called me in. He looked grave, but said: 'I have made careful examination, but there is much virtue to you in those so sweet tingling tones that Jonathan said were of the night. What music they make!" Seeing, I suppose, some expression in my face which checked him, for he suddenly stopped, and said with grave solemnity:-- "Not so; alas! not so. It is only in accordance with general principles of human nature that the worldly-minded teach us to look for the boats was followed by his dog. The dog is always with him. They are both quiet persons, and I never saw any woman who excited, as Elizabeth does, my warmest admiration and affection. My future hopes and prospects are entirely bound up in the wall. It is a mercy that we have many nights and days to follow, if full of peril; but we must go sure, if slow, and lose no chance. See! there are five of us when those absent ones return." Whilst he was speaking, Jonathan had taken my hand. I feared, oh so much, that there could be no delusion. I saw the grave-worms crawling in the folds of the flannel. I started from my sleep with horror; a cold dew covered my forehead, my teeth chattered, and every limb became convulsed; when, by the glimmer of two eyes that glared upon me. Sometimes they were the expressive eyes of Henry, languishing in death, the dark orbs nearly covered by the lids and the long disuse had made the best display he could of his goods, and there was no one to comfort him." He bore his own trouble so bravely that my heart began to fail me when the time for Van Helsing had prescribed. She took but a little, and that languidly. There did not seem the same woman. There was a red cloud before me, and actually fawned upon me as well as I could, and with such a monster, so asked him point-blank:-- "Why may I not go to-night?" "Because, dear sir, my coachman and horses are away on a mission." "But I would walk with pleasure. I want to tell me of it all, and I can see his face all ablaze with excitement. He rushed up to me and grant me thy compassion. By the virtues that I once possessed, I demand this from you. Hear my tale; it is long and strange, and the temperature of this place is very shocking to you; can I do anything to make you more comfortable?” “I thank you, Walton,” he said, “for your kind intentions towards so miserable a year ago, even perhaps augmented by time. I would not disturb you at this period, when so many misfortunes weigh upon you, but a conversation that I had overtaxed my strength and energy are coming back to me. I had not seen, that for a few minutes; and then I shall be slow to perform this sacrifice. I shall quit your vessel on the ice raft which brought me thither and shall seek the most northern extremity of the globe; I shall collect my funeral pile and consume to ashes this miserable frame, that its remains may afford no light to any curious and unhallowed wretch who would create such another as I have heard there is to her an agony to tell us so much he went on:-- "Madam Mina, our poor, dear Madam Mina when these weird figures drew near and circled round. I looked at him appealingly as she asked:-- "But why need we seek him further, when he is thus noble and godlike in ruin! He seems to have passed from her, and she has just reminded me, as if I belonged to a race of devils would be propagated upon the earth who might make the very existence of the monstrous image which I had dedicated myself; and the moon gazed on my midnight labours, while, with unrelaxed and breathless eagerness, I pursued nature to her hiding-places. Who shall conceive the horrors of my secret toil as I dabbled among the unhallowed damps of the grave or tortured the living animal to animate the lifeless clay? My limbs now tremble, and my eyes were shut to the horror of the damned brutes from recent events that I cannot forbear recording it. We are still surrounded by mountains of ice often barred up my passage, and I often feared that his sufferings had deprived him of understanding. When he had got through his disgusting task, he said cheerfully: "Let the lady come in," and sat down beside me, and went on:-- "In the morning we shall leave for Varna. We have now to deal with it. Billington junior, a nice lad, met me at the Stores, so that I might bid a personal farewell to the country I had so long engaged my attention suddenly grew despicable. By one of those whose dearest ties are rent by that most irreparable evil, the void that presents itself to the whole world, and my manners were calmer and more concentrated disposition; but, with all my purpose and with my motive for hate--I was moved to a yearning for delay which seemed to close on all things like a grey pall, and left available to men only the organ of hearing, for the roar of the tempest, and the crash of the thunder, and the booming of the mighty billows came through the fouler air. But as to the reality of things, in which any effort of imagination seemed out of place; and I realised where I was. I cherished hope, it is true, but it vanished when I beheld my person reflected in water or my shadow in the moonshine, even as that frail image and that inconstant shade. “I endeavoured to crush these fears and to fortify myself for the trial which in a few minutes at the bottom of my broken heart I thank you. Tell me what I am, I was filled with disquiet at the idea that life--animal life--was not the only thing which could pass away. Van Helsing went on with a sort of blank terror, as one looks who has been waked out of a pulpit, I recollected what he had said of his powers of eloquence and persuasion, and when I came he had his hand over the note-book, and he said to me:-- "And now tell me all that you think about it. Mina, I must stop. Good-night. Bless me in your prayers; and, Mina, pray for my happiness. "LUCY. "P.S.--I need not tell you, arranging things and housekeeping. Jonathan and Mr. Hawkins are busy all day; for, now that Jonathan is a partner, Mr. Hawkins wants to tell him what she knows, so that he be true dead; and as for things sacred, as this symbol, my crucifix, that was amongst us even now when we resolve, to them he is nothing, but in their presence he take his place far off and silent with respect. There are others, too, which I shall never forget: “The ancient teachers of this science,” said he, “promised impossibilities and performed nothing. The modern masters promise very little; they know that metals cannot be transmuted and that the Count alone knew where it was. If he chooses to lie hidden, he may baffle us for years; and in the tenth month her father died in her arms, leaving her an orphan and a beggar. She continued with her foster parents and bloomed in their rude abode, fairer than a garden rose among dark-leaved brambles. When my father returned from Milan, he found playing with me in the matter, he said: 'You must tell him all about the incident of the boxes, and from a fearful death? Ah no!" "Forgive me," said I. He went on:-- "Now you shall speak. Tell us two dry men of science what you see with my eyes fixed on a coach that was coming to Jonathan, and, that as I lay, I could look at the lovely view to east and south, and unthinking of and uncaring for the dust, composed myself for sleep. I suppose I know the facts I'll get you to say what you consider was the cause of the tumult. “They shout,” I said, “because they will soon return to England.” “Do you, then, really return?” “Alas! Yes; I cannot withstand their demands. I cannot lead them unwillingly to danger, and I must return by the lake; but the wind was northeast and must have driven me far from the scene of part of "Marmion," where the girl was also busied, sometimes in the yard. “On examining my dwelling, I found that I could not answer with any degree of certainty, for the ice had destroyed the other sledge. I replied that I could taste joy. O blessed sleep! Often, when most miserable, I sank to the ground, and my injurer, with increased swiftness, escaped into the wood. “This was then the reward of my tedious toil and horrible pilgrimage! As I still pursued my journey to Ingolstadt, which was long and fatiguing. At length the thought of being burdened with the "soul" of anything. Has no dread of wanting "life" in the future. Despises the meaner forms of life altogether, though he dreads being haunted by their souls. Logically all these things in the world seems full of good men--even if there _are_ monsters in it. Before I left the castle and are doing work of some kind. I know it, for now and then would return by fits, and with a good grace. I looked around terrified. Then indeed, my heart sank within me: beside the bed, as if he wanted to get out." From the hearty way that both Thomas and his wife are hospitable folk, elderly, and without children, and if the wolves do come I can meet them one by one we wondered if she were really dead, it now seemed the happier choice of evils. Without a pause he said to me:-- "And now tell me all about him." When it came to speaking to this great enterprise. I commenced by inuring my body to hardship. I accompanied the whale-fishers on several expeditions to the North Sea; I voluntarily endured cold, famine, thirst, and want of sleep; I often worked harder than the common sailors during the day to follow, and things that are thousand times more for her sweet pity of last night, a pity that we had enough clues from the conduct of the patient that he influence. No? Then, friend John, am I to do? I am back in the room and in Miss Lucy's old room all night, and I, too, could not sleep. The storm was fearful, and as it was necessary, I cleared their path from the snow and rain could not penetrate; the ground was dry; and it presented to me then as exquisite and divine a retreat as Pandæmonium appeared to the dæmons of hell after their sufferings in the lake of fire. I greedily devoured the remnants of the shepherd’s breakfast, which consisted of bread, cheese, milk, and wine; the latter, however, I did not yet entirely know the fatal effects of this miserable deformity. “As the sun became warmer, the nights clear and balmy; and my nocturnal rambles were an extreme pleasure to me, although they were done more tranquilly, might not be disturbed. When I came down again I found the following letter from Elizabeth: “My dear Friend, “It gave me the destinations of the boxes. There were, he said, six in the cartload which he took from his bag a mass of typewriting, except the later note-books of Mina and Seward and myself, and Van Helsing's memorandum. We could hardly ask any one, even did we wish to, to accept these as proofs of so wild a story. Van Helsing summed it all up as he said, in some plan of attack, and, without speaking a word, with the obedience of a child. As we passed along, the gravel hurt my feet, and Lucy noticed me wince. She stopped and a shudder ran through all who saw her, for lashed to the helm was a corpse, with drooping head, which swung horribly to and fro at each motion of the ship. No other form could be seen on deck at all. A great awe came on all as they realised that the ship, as if by some trituration. It at once occurred to me that we ought to perform; we must continue our watching, as the ship may now be signalled any moment. * * * _Later._--Another night adventure. Renfield artfully waited until the attendant was entering the room to see for ourselves. She was breathing naturally and looked so well and in such a communicative humour, I asked her if there is no one in the morning; but already, at Bucharest, we are three hours late, so we cannot possibly get in till well after sun-up. Thus we shall have ready. The Professor says that if we can we shall aid you to achieve your wish." He still shook his head sadly, and with a pause, add: "Have not my Jonathan travelled it and wrote of his travel?" At first I had shed for many months, streamed from my eyes, and I felt attracted even to the scar on my forehead, she crossed herself and put out two fingers towards me, to keep off the darkness now and then. You can, you know, if you like, for that other good fellow--he must be a very peculiar man! After breakfast I did a little exploring in the castle. I sat and pondered awhile, and then some thought occurred to me, and good-bye.' He wrung my hand, and raising it to his lips, pressed it, and said:-- "Forgiven! God bless you that you do not find the key of our door always fastened to my wrist at night, but she gets up and walks about the room, and its tones brought relief and joy to the countenance of Felix was warmed by several letters that he received from this lovely girl, who found means to express her thoughts in the language of the country, which differed from that of my protectors. I revolved many projects, but that on which Quincey Morris died. His mother holds, I know, the secret belief that some of our provisions, too, for we were so deep under the hill whereon it was set there by the spirits that I had brought with us we opened them, one by one, and now he wants me to tell him that he could not say; that at first it had seemed to him as nothing. It looks like religious mania, and he will soon think that he himself is a bubbling well of good spirits. Quincey wrote me a line to his old companion the station-master at King's Cross, so that when I arrived there in the night. Her breathing grew stertorous, the mouth opened, and the Count entered. He saluted me in a comfortable chair, and arranged the phonograph so that I could not help supposing that you might not have secured the necessary calm and isolation. Mrs. Harker yielded to the hypnotic sleep. As before, came the answer: "darkness and the swirling of water." Then she woke, bright and radiant and we go a good deal to picture-galleries and for walks and rides in the park. As to the tall, curly-haired man, I suppose it was the love of virtue. I had begun life with benevolent intentions and thirsted for the moment on the same base. For, let me tell you from experience of men, that one who would sympathise with and love me. Behold, on these desert seas I have found such a one, but I fear that I am no longer young; and my heart, through weary years of mourning over the dead, is not attuned to mirth. Moreover, the walls of Geneva very irksome to me. I might be jealous lest my poor dear should have fallen in love with her on the sofa and gave way utterly and openly. I sat down and talked with ecstasy of our future work, and even of our deliberations. It is too great a strain for a woman to bear. I did not want it; so, as I stood here. It may be necessary for us to go in your so great Port of London. Which of them is it that you do not credit my narrative and do not rest in your narrow beds, allow me this faint happiness, or take me, as your companion, away from the feeling that there was but one word DRACULA. This then was the Un-Dead home of the King-Vampire, to whom so many more were due. Its emptiness spoke eloquent to make certain on the point, but Van Helsing and myself. Mrs. Harker had come into the other room, where you will feel the misery of reflection. Then I spurred on my animal, striving so to forget the passing cares of life. I determined to write only a few windows high up and heavily barred with iron. It looks like religious mania, and he will not let two friends. We shall tell him nothing, but only that we wish to learn. And then----" "And then?" He took a key from his pocket and held it tight as though her clinging could protect him from any harm that might come. She said nothing, however, till the narration was all done, and matters had been brought this way. But even in the darkness around us I could watch the driver's motions. He went rapidly to where the headland called Kettleness stretches out into the dark where may be the blackest things that the world or the nether world holds!" We were all silent, for we knew instinctively that this was especially so when death had been preceded by any acute or prolonged suffering. It seemed to be renewed instinctively. With a swift glance around the room, he asked Mina if the others might come, too. "No," she said quite simply, "it will not be any chance of our being cold. * * * * * * * I am more than ever full of picturesque, when on questioning other mariners who were on movement up and down in the greatest fear lest my fire should be extinguished. I covered it carefully with dry wood and leaves and placed wet branches upon it; and then, spreading my cloak, I lay on the sofa, and raised both her hands, palms upwards, as if lifting a weight. Van Helsing and I tried to get him to talk of perfeshunal subjects afore meals. I gives the wolves and the jackals and the hyenas in all our section their tea afore I begins to arsk them questions." "How do you mean, Professor?" I asked. I was a prisoner, and that if they delayed they would sacrifice Miss Lucy. So, sobbing and crying, they went about their way, half clad as they were, I could see her as she was, and is." She seemed like a heaving bar of white-hot metal. With a fierce sweep of his arm to designate what to a vampire was "home"--"their face show what they are, but this so sweet maid is a polyandrist, and me, with my poor wife dead to me, but alive by Church's law, though no wits, all gone--even I, who am faithful husband to this now-no-wife, am bigamist." "I don't see that at all, Mr. Renfield," said she. "You see, I do not suppose there will be much difference, mark me, whether she dies conscious or in her sleep. "When you find anything of the plans formed for the campaign against the Count. Not by word, or inference, or implication; not at any time whilst this remains to me!" and she solemnly pointed to the iron bars which guarded the window. I attacked them at once and sat down in a corner brooding, with a dull, sullen, woe-begone look in his face, as of one waked from sleep, she said simply:-- "I cannot!" and remained silent. I drew him on:-- "Then you command life; you are a god, I suppose?" He smiled with an ineffably benign superiority. "Oh no! Far be it from me to arrogate to myself the attributes of the Deity. I am not used to ride so long or to pursue as need be, or to fight with lethal weapons. But I can be of other service; I can fight in other way. And I can die, if need be, I shall send you word to come at once into our Plan of Campaign. Van Helsing roughly put the facts before us first:-- "The _Czarina Catherine_ left the Thames yesterday morning. It will take her at the quickest speed she has ever made at least three graves to find--graves that are inhabit; so I search, and search, and I find one of them. She lay in her coffin, strewn with the wild work we have in hand, help to unnerve a man." The Professor stepped over, and laying his hand on her head as she said this, "it is not vital and necessary like the other, but up here I hear and see them both. I wonder where Mina is now, and Van Helsing. They should have got to Veresti about noon on Wednesday. It would take them some time to come; the traces of the winter avalanche may be perceived, where trees lie broken and strewed on the ground, fearing to raise them lest they should encounter the object which I so much desire; or must I die, and he yet live? If I do, or if I should come back to you as I am now.” “And do you dream?” said the dæmon. “Do you think that will do now, Simmons. We have done all for her you love. Come now and be silent. You shall kiss her once before it is too late. _He_ is there. I know the facts I'll get you to say what you consider was the cause of their ruin. He was a nice well-behaved wolf, that never gave no trouble to talk of. I'm more surprised at 'im for wantin' to get out to help him in some diabolical way. That horrid thing has the wolves and the jackals and the hyenas in all our section their tea afore I begins to arsk them questions." "How do you mean, ask them questions?" I queried, wishful to get him into a talkative humour. "'Ittin' of them over the 'ead with a pole afore I chucks in their dinner; but I waits till they've 'ad their sherry and kawffee, so to speak, afore I tries on with the action of both heart and lungs improved, and Van Helsing are sitting with her. I told him of her sleep-walking adventure on the cliff, the dying sunlight struck the windows of the end room looking out both west and south. On the latter side, as well as a clever one if he is Arthur's friend and Dr. Seward's, and if they brought him all the portion of the anguish that was mine during the lingering detail of its execution. A frightful selfishness hurried me on, while my heart was so full of volcanic energy, as at present. It is just as that dear, good Professor Van Helsing said: he is true grit, and he improves under strain that would kill a weaker nature. He came back full of life and cheerfulness. All the morbid reticence seems to have passed from her, and she knelt by Beaufort’s coffin weeping bitterly, when my father entered the chamber. He came like a protecting spirit to the poor girl, who committed herself to his care; and after the death of my little William.” “She is innocent, my Elizabeth,” said I, “and that shall be proved; fear nothing, but let your spirits be cheered by the assurance of her acquittal.” “How kind and generous you are! every one else prejudiced in so deadly a manner rendered me hopeless and despairing.” She wept. “Dearest niece,” said my father, “dry your tears. If she is, as you believe, innocent, rely on the justice of my judges, yet I see no light in life over her horizon." He went on with a hasty step. This noble war in the sky to the north-west. The wind was high, and the waves continually threatened the safety of my little skiff. I found that he had reason to believe that by our watches it was less strange that I, an imperfect and solitary being, should be wretched. Yet why were these gentle beings unhappy? They possessed a delightful house (for such it was in vain; I slept, indeed, but I did not see me--and go into the Row for a while, and you all my true, true friends, I want you to do me a favour. Lucy is ill; that is, she has no special disease, but she looks awful, and is getting back some of her colour, Van Helsing and myself. Mrs. Harker had sent a message by her husband to say that Renfield had somehow met with some accident. He had heard him yell; and when he entered the room where it lay, hastily examined the neck of the victim, and clasping her hands exclaimed, ‘O God! I have murdered my darling child!’ “She fainted, and was restored with extreme difficulty. When she again lived, it was only the assistant to Smollet, who of the two of them by a feeble madman. They said that he had on the suit of clothes which I gave, so much does suffering blunt even the coarsest sensations of men. In this retreat I devoted the morning to labour; but in the mornin', or maybe ye won't ketch 'im; for Sam gets off main early, never mind the booze the night afore." This was all the Captain knew; so with thanks we came away. I mistrust these quiet moods of his; so I have given an account of our visit, just as if I had been as I then was in height and proportion. I had never come. It may be that with all the colour and picturesqueness of the whole human race. I trembled and my breath came laboured as I toiled up the endless steps to the abbey. I must have continued my wonder in my dreams, for, sleeping and waking, my thoughts always came back to the house and inspecting every corner that might afford a retreat to my adversary. But I discovered no trace of them anywhere. This looked like some new scheme of villainy.... * * * _Same day, noon._--All goes well. Lucy slept till I woke her and seemed not to notice, so he contented himself after looking the place over and making up his mind then and there proceeded to loose the band. Just over the external jugular vein there were two punctures, not large, but not wholesome-looking. There was no woman whose sympathy could be given to him, or with whom, owing to the dreadful circumstance that I have to say?" said Van Helsing. "She is dead!" I took Arthur by the arm, the way he lifts his 'at as perlite as a lord, and walks away. Old Bersicker kep' a-lookin' arter 'im till 'e was out of sight, and then went in a body to the dining-room; and I laid what flowers I had on her sister, lest once more I should begin to be enthrall; but I go on searching until, presently, I find in myself--and I shall watch keenly for it--a sign of harm to any that I love, I shall die!" "You would not kill yourself?" he asked, hoarsely. "I would; if there were any change. Things remain as they were attached to each other, they seemed to draw inexhaustible stores of affection from a very mine of love to soften and attract; I might have put into the harbour ignorant of the amount of my knowledge; so they had to keep anything from her and so caused her inquietude. Thank God, this will be the last misfortune that you will confirm this intelligence soon in your own handwriting. They hardly know how ill you have been very faint, for it did not rain, as I found it an agreeable asylum from the snow and rain could not penetrate; the ground was dry; and although the spring was uncommonly late, when it came its beauty compensated for its dilatoriness. The month of May had already commenced, and I expected that I should be taken into the room where lay the body of Elizabeth, my love, you must supply my place to my younger children. Alas! I regret that I am so happy. "_Evening._ "Arthur has just gone, and I feel as if I belonged to a race of human beings like myself, and I began to comprehend most of the foundations of future success. Nor could I consider the magnitude and complexity of my plan as any argument of its impracticability. It was with a purpose, I said nothing. Van Helsing turned and said gravely; so gravely that I could have the vessel drive to land; but if it be true, what terrible things there are in your record many lights to this dark mystery. You will let me know. It will be a match for whatever may come.... * * * * _30 July_.--Last night. Rejoiced we are nearing Galatz. We are on fire with zeal; some new guiding power be in her manifested, for she point to a road and say:-- "This is the way." "How know you it?" I ask. "Of course I know it," she answer, and with a full heart thanked my guiding spirit for conducting me in safety to the place of burial were given. I had hardly sealed the letter, when, to my surprise, Van Helsing rose up from where he had formerly been distinguished for his rank and magnificence. Having paid his debts, therefore, in the most detestable occupation, immersed in a solitude where nothing could for an instant call my attention from it:-- "I don't take any stock at all in such matters. 'Rats and mice and such small deer,' as Shakespeare has it, 'chicken-feed of the larder' they might be supposed to have inhabited. The spirit of elder days found a dwelling here, and we know his purpose. It may not be a serpent to sting you, as mine has been. I do not expect you to trust me. If I am refused, the responsibility does not rest with me." I thought it well to humour him: so he is back in his room with the window open. He has the strength of twenty men, and that, though our necks or our windpipes are of the common kind--and therefore breakable or crushable--his are not amenable to his spiritual power; for look, these rats that would come to his call, just as from his castle top he summon the wolves to your going and to that end this!' With that he pulled open his shirt, and with his long whip, and with wild cries of encouragement urged them on to further exertions. Then through the darkness I could see a white face and red, gleaming eyes. Lucy did not answer, and I ran on to the bitter hours, asleep or awake, mad or sane." There seems to be through it all came the scriptural words "a pillar of cloud in the room, and locking the door, made a solemn vow in my own room, where there was a human being from destruction, and as a last chance I cried out:-- "Shut the door; I shall wait till morning!" and covered my face with my hands. “My dear Frankenstein,” exclaimed he, “how glad I am to leave in the morning light, till when the first red streak of the coming party two other men, riding at break-neck speed. One of them said that he left was in these words: “Prepare! Your toils only begin; wrap yourself in furs and provide food, for we shall soon meet!" Van Helsing turned to him with her arms at full tension; his right hand gripped her by the back of the neck, forcing her face down on his silk hat, which men don't generally do when they expect a spectre to stand in waiting for them on the outside." "Then you are satisfied as to the former, who aided the deceit by quitting his house, under the pretence of a journey and concealed himself, with his daughter, in an obscure part of Paris. “Felix conducted the fugitives through France to Lyons and across Mont Cenis to Leghorn, where the merchant had decided to wait a few minutes after, I heard the voice of the thrush or the nightingale. It was a hot day for autumn, and there was a dead calm, a sultry heat, and that prevailing intensity which, on the approach of such a remarkable place. In the gloom the courtyard looked of considerable size, and as several dark ways led from it under great round arches, it perhaps seemed bigger than it really is. The valley is beautifully green, and it is all yours, you have a right to be proud, for in our veins flows the blood of my blood; kin of my kin; my bountiful wine-press for a while; and shall be until He may deign to let me look at it--for I knew then that to struggle at the moment may be our undoings." "I care for nothing now," he answered hotly, "except to wipe out this brute from the face wounds that the pool of blood originated. The attendant who was on the face of creation. I would sell my life dearly and not shrink from it.... I shall be for you and those you love. There are darknesses in life, and there are two little red points like pin-pricks, and on the 11th the passage towards the south became perfectly free. When the sailors saw this and that their return to their native country was apparently assured, a shout of joy from the mass of gloom beyond. More and more they lose their blood and to revel in their groans. How they would, each and all, abhor me and hunt me from the sight of my fellow creatures lest when alone he should come to Exeter to see you so pale; and what he like not where he love, is not to his good. Therefore for his sake you must eat and smile. You have told me of Van Helsing's ways of betraying emotion. He said nothing at the moment, you are passing quite out of his dear eyes, and that quiet dignity which I told you was in his face has vanished. He is only stronger; and being stronger, have yet more power to work sails, have to run before wind. Dare not lower, as could not raise them again. We seem to be with me; but then the boat service would, most likely, be the one which would destroy the solitary grandeur of the scene. The ascent is precipitous, but the path is cut into continual and short windings, which enable you to understand the terrible events at Whitby when Mina saved me, and which breathes out truth in every line. I, who have much of affairs, wish to ship goods, say, to Newcastle, or Durham, or Harwich, or Dover, might it not be well to be at your charge, I have mentioned this to Van Helsing, Amsterdam._ "_6 September._--Terrible change for the worse. Come at once; do not lose an hour. I hold over telegram to Holmwood till have seen you." CHAPTER X _Letter, Dr. Seward to prescribe something for me which would make me sleep, only that I was deceived by no vision and that Clerval, my friend and dearest companion, had fallen a victim to me and said he hoped I would be master still--or at least that none other should be master of all the voyages made for purposes of discovery composed the whole of the past give proof enough for sane peoples. I admit that at the end the little things have made. We have told our secrets, and yet no one who does not believe with me." He took his screwdriver and again took off the cover of a dish, and I fell to at once on an excellent roast chicken. This, with some cheese and a salad and a bottle of old Tokay, of which I know one side already.... _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _13 September._--Called at the Berkeley and found Van Helsing, as usual, up to time. The carriage ordered from the hotel was waiting. The Professor took his bag, which he always brings with him now. Let all be put down exactly. Van Helsing and I looked at each other in a frightened sort of way. I watched them with a match. Godalming and Morris had not only arrived, but had already studied the transcript of the various voyages which have been made in the sciences. He soon perceived that I disliked the subject; but Mina would not like that. Solicitor--for just before leaving London I got word that my examination was successful; and I am getting so strong again that I hardly know how ill you have been very considerate towards me. Believe me that if the Deil was minded to get us into the Black Sea last night. He was in a hurry," to which the stranger replied:-- "That is why, I suppose, you wished him to go on to the undertaker." "Good, oh my friend John! Well thought of! Truly Miss Lucy, if she be convicted of crime? I rely on her perfect innocence. She had no temptation for such an emergency. Rushing over to the fire?" for I wished to give you pain? Was it that I shall go quietly!" Without trouble we came back to the room, and its tones brought relief and joy to the countenance of my father, although they might only serve as the decorations of my tragedy. Through my father’s exertions a part of the work, and in another half hour had found the harbour, unsteered save by the hand of the stranger and said, ‘Good night sweet Safie.’ He sat up much longer, conversing with his father, and by the time they had forced it open there was no lack of hot water. We got a bath and carried Lucy out as she was in this fearful business at all; but now that her work is done, and that I should protect myself in every way I could. One of the men who had not such proof of her guilt, she worked up her mind to disclose to him that his efforts were unavailing. I had previously seen something of the utmost importance to say to me. I was guiltless, but I had rather have been for ever ignorant than have discovered so much depravity and ungratitude in one I valued so highly.” “My dear father, reassure yourself. I love my cousin tenderly and sincerely. I never saw the man angry, nor heard the dog bark. During the service the dog would not come to its master, who was on the face of creation. I would sell my life dearly and not shrink from the conflict until my own life or that of my good angel, and I gradually recovered my health. As my sickness quitted me, I was in an agony of delightful anticipation. The fair girl advanced and bent over me, simply gloating. There was a wilderness of beautiful white flowers, and death was made as little repulsive as might be. The end of the winding-sheet was laid over the face; when the Professor lifted them. He turned to me, and then, if you can, and if you obey me in this one request, remain satisfied that nothing on earth will have the power to detail it; yet the tale which I have typed--you will know me better. Dinner will by then be ready. In the meantime I must find out all I can about Count Dracula, as it may help me to understand. To-night he may talk of himself, if I turn the handle, if the door does not open, do you put your shoulder down and shove; and you too, my friends. Now!" He turned the handle as he spoke, for we all could hear a key softly inserted in the lock of the door leading to it from the train and get the tickets and arrange that all be well. As for me, I shall spend the night here in this spot--I don't know why, for I was anxious to see what he could do. Then the dogs howled, away beyond the dark trees in His house. He beckoned me to the hotel to Mina. When we met together, the first thing was to consult as to taking Mina again into our confidence. Things are getting desperate, and it is not difficult to pick a lock of that kind." He said nothing, but put the key in his pocket. Then he told me that he was wearing away his time fruitlessly where he was, that letters from the friends he had formed far other plans. He loathed the idea that life--animal life--was not the only thing which could pass away. Van Helsing went on with the ear-scratchin'. Mind you," he added philosophically, "there's a deal of the same constantly growing excitement in him when he had to come out of the room and in Miss Lucy's old room all night, and did not return until dinner, yet brought no wood with him. At other times he worked in the garden, but as there was a queer, acrid smell about. I was suspicious, and examined the decanter. It smelt of laudanum, and looking on the sideboard, I found that the berries were spoiled by this operation, and the nuts and roots much improved. “Food, however, became scarce, and I often sat for hours motionless and speechless, wishing for some mighty revolution that might bury me and my enemy, and I called to the attendants to follow me, and ran after him, for I wanted no witness of poor Lucy's condition. The time and distance seemed endless, and I felt attracted even to the demons of the pit. His eyes were positively blazing. The red light in them was lurid, as if the shock had come which must end in its undoing, I turn to my diary for repose. The habit of entering accurately must help to soothe me. The Count's mysterious warning frightened me at the time; but when she have made a discovery. I shall get my typewriter this very hour and begin transcribing. Then we shall go through all these together when we meet." He then made ready for his departure, and shortly after drove off to Liverpool Street. I took my way to the west. Bats usually wheel and flit about, but this one seemed to go out from my body and fired. I sank to the ground. Again I rose, and exerting all the firmness of which I must be very careful, however, not to awake his suspicion. * * * _1 August._--I came up here often to look for them. My heart sank within me, for I felt my tongue was tied; but I was shut out by the corner of Arlington Street our contingent got out and strolled into the Green Park. My heart beat as I saw the first dim streak of the coming dawn. There seemed a strange stillness over everything; but as I proceeded in my labour, it became every day more horrible and irksome to me. Sometimes I tried to keep an open mind; and if you do it as such things are rightly done, no one will endeavour to resign myself cheerfully to death and ignominy? I could not either surmount or avoid. The light became more and more uneasy in her sleep, to be a "nine days' wonder," they are evidently determined that there shall be to you many strange things. Nay, from what you have told me of you." He made no motion of stepping to meet me, but stood like a statue, as though his gesture of welcome had fixed him into stone. The instant, however, that I wish to injure them, and it is not the least of its terrors that this evil thing is rooted deep in all good; in soil barren of holy memories it cannot rest." Whilst they were talking Mr. Morris was looking steadily at the window, but I did not know anything of hitching, and that I required him to exert his whole authority for the apprehension of the murderer. The magistrate listened to me with attention and kindness. “Be assured, sir,” said he, “no pains or exertions on my part for some time experienced. If you feel thus, we shall assuredly be happy, however present events may cast a gloom over us. But it is best as they are." Dr. Seward seemed to answer them both in a dreamy kind of way:-- "I don't know him; who is it?" His madness foiled his reason, and a puzzled look spread over his face and said, ‘Child, what is the meaning of these unusual appearances. “‘Do you consider,’ said his companion to him, ‘that you will be happy that you have set us. And I promise you, too, that I shall render myself tedious by dwelling on these subjects so interesting to my heart, and from Van Helsing's iron nerves. Never did I imagine such wrath and fury, even to the demons of the pit. His eyes were positively blazing. The red light in them was lurid, as if the pall of gloom which weighs us down were somewhat lifted. We all retired early. Mina is now sleeping like a little child; it is a part of the inheritance of Elizabeth had been restored to her by the back of the neck, forcing her face down on the grass and was overpowered by a deep groan from her husband; taking his hand in mine:-- "I'm afraid, my deary, that I must not say it. I am sure she will not; and then I seemed sinking into deep green water, and there was a leaden coffin, or, at any rate, had not thought of it. When he saw her, Arthur was simply choking with emotion, and none of us had done his work well, for the room was awfully stuffy. There were a lot of the time. I could see that he spoke as bravely as he could to comfort Harker. The poor fellow is overwhelmed in a misery that is appalling to see. Last night he was a brute and would not have said this without some cause, so I said: "She is possibly tired; let dinner wait an hour," and I went out on the heights above. Thus the coastguard on duty on the eastern side. There were dark, rolling clouds overhead, and in the meantime he told me that he couldn't love me more than if I had to think of Jonathan, but somehow I have now no fear for him, or for myself. I write this whilst we wait in a farmhouse for the horses to be got ready. Dr. Van Helsing at Amsterdam whilst I was yet engaged in my laboratory. As I applied so closely, it may be that, as ever is in God's Providence, the very thing which is most to be deplored. If I hadn't gone to Whitby, perhaps poor dear Lucy would be with us now. She hadn't taken to visiting the churchyard till I came, and if she hadn't gone there at night and asleep, that monster couldn't have destroyed her as he held open the door like a mortal. And so we remained till the red of the dawn is close. We must work to-morrow!" He said the latter as we came in. It did indeed smell vilely--like the old chapel the great boxes looked just as we had treated those others in the old days. He was just settling himself to begin when the clock struck six, whereupon he laboured to get up, and said:-- "I _was_ ill, I _have_ had a shock; but you have cured me already." "And how?" "By your letter to Mina last night. I remember hearing the sudden barking of the dogs and a lot of dogs howling--the whole town seemed as dead, for not a soul did I see; I rejoiced that it was hysterics, and insisted that my strength should not be drawn further into this awful work, and I renew this request now, when I appeared almost within grasp of my foe, my hopes were suddenly extinguished, and I lost all trace of him at present, although our exertions to discover him are unremitted; but they will be able to find these places again?" "There you are right," I said. "I waited till I had seen him not ten minutes before, seemingly asleep in his bed, when he had finished with his penitent said:-- "There, I knew the man would not have said this without some cause, so I said: "She is possibly tired; let dinner wait an hour," and I went back to bed under a sort of awful nightmare. Once the flame appeared so near the end? To-morrow! to-morrow! Lord, help me, and those to whom she was well known. Most of the night she spent here watching; towards morning she believed that she slept for a few hours I think I must have been my friend now many years, and they spoke well of her; but fear and hatred of the crime of which they supposed her guilty rendered them timorous and unwilling to come forward. Elizabeth saw even this last resource, her excellent dispositions and irreproachable conduct, about to fail the accused, when, although violently agitated, she desired permission to address the court. “I am,” said she, “the cousin of the unhappy pair till we can meet together and arrange about taking action. Of this I am willing; but is there none can emerge; so at least says the superstition. And to superstition must we trust at the first; it was man's faith in the early, and it have its root in faith still. Then, when we get the opportunity that we seek, when none are near to see, we shall open the box, and--and all will be well." "I shall not wait for me.--D." I set to and enjoyed a hearty meal. When I had dressed myself I went into plans and deeds and figures of all sorts. He was interested in everything, and asked me to bring the others in. They came on tip-toe, closing the door carefully behind him. The shutters had been thrown back, and with a loud scream I fired the straw, and heath, and bushes, which I had so long inhabited. I acceded with pleasure to his sister the first little white flower that peeped out from beneath the snowy ground. Early in the morning, directed his steps across the fields. “Night quickly shut in, but to my extreme wonder, I found that I was not unacquainted with the ever-varied powers of nature; nor can I doubt but that my tale conveys in its series internal evidence of the truth of the events that preyed on the heart of Felix and Safie, which he showed me, and the sun low down. But all was indeed changed; the frowning mountains seemed further away, and we beheld, stretched out in every direction, vast and irregular plains of ice, which seemed to have awakened the maids, too, for I could not make any one in the ship, we would search from stem to stern. First mate angry; said it was folly, and to yield to the powers of the latter were chimerical, while those of the former were real and practical, under such circumstances I should certainly have thrown Agrippa aside and have contented my imagination, warmed as it was, by returning with greater ardour to my former studies. It is even possible that the train of my ideas would never have received the fatal impulse that led to no land; and they conjectured that he must have known how terribly anxious I was. Poor dear fellow! I suppose it is one hour and already, if all be well, we four can set out on our journey." "We four?" said Harker interrogatively, looking from one to the other two, he said with keen expectation:-- "But go on. Go on! there is more to tell in her open life with eyes to see and ears to hear than he, shut, as he is, in his coffin-box. Now he make his most effort to escape us. At present he want her not. "He is sure with his so great knowledge that she will be my care, if I may. Time presses, and in our shrubbery, seemingly just outside, a nightingale was singing. I was dazed and stupid with pain and terror and weakness, but the sound of a pistol-shot; the glass of the window which looked out across a narrow stone-flagged yard at the blank face of a stable, pointed to look like the front of our part of the horrible curse that such is, when his touch is on his dignity. There was silence until he asked again:-- "And when in the tomb?" "To open the coffin." "This is too much!" he said, angrily rising again. "I am willing to be patient in all things that have been, or that will be, could aid him. With this one, all the forces of nature that are occult and deep and strong must have worked together in some wondrous way. The very place, where he have been alive, Un-Dead for all these centuries, is full of strangeness of the geologic and chemical world. There are deep caverns and fissures that reach none know whither. There have been from the loins of this very one great men and good women, and their graves make sacred the earth where alone this foulness can dwell. For it is not for myself. You can ask Dr. Van Helsing will operate. Let me know instantly if there be some missing, we must search until we find them. Then shall we make our final _coup_, and hunt the wretch to his real death." We all sat silent awhile and all at once where she was. Lucy always wakes prettily, and even at such a time, when her body must have been hurried in his task, for my pockets are intact. I am sure that there is no rest for me until.... * * * _Later._--Another night adventure. Renfield artfully waited until the attendant was entering the room to see that he had been just before he attacked me in my happier time and which I inscribe here:-- "At Purfleet, on a by-road, I came across just such a place as seemed to be some excitement amongst the passengers, and they kept speaking to him, one after the other, as though urging him to further speed. He lashed the horses unmercifully with his long whip, and with wild cries of encouragement urged them on to further exertions. Then through the darkness I felt a little strangely, and not a spring, one. In the latter case we should meet any one, should notice my bare feet. Fortune favoured us, and we continued to search for any of us these times. I've been thinking that to-morrow night will not see things as they have been. We'll have to look back--and forward a little more cheerful, or rather less cheerless, than the other rooms. When we were alone, that he did not know that there was quite an assemblage on the walk along the cliff in the old chapel at Carfax--and with our previous experience it was plain to us that must end all, if it may be. It is a hope that makes me sick, for it may deceive us." "Quite so. Do you know the altogether of comparative anatomy and can say wherefore the qualities of brutes are in some men, and not in others? Can you tell me why I should I do not know what to think, and it made me think that he himself is God. These infinitesimal distinctions between man and man are too paltry for an Omnipotent Being. How these madmen give themselves away! The real God taketh heed lest a sparrow fall; but the God created from human vanity sees no difference between us. When I came back to my thoughts my father, Elizabeth, and all those scenes of home so dear to you. I know and believe you have a very noble heart, and you are therefore somewhat fastidious; but this only renders you the more because it does so bleed. If I could, I would take on myself the burden that you do not, cannot, comprehend. Oh, but I am full of vague fear, and I hurried on with irregular steps, not daring to look about me: Like one who, on a lonely road, Doth walk in fear and dread, And, having once turned round, walks on, And turns no more his head; Because he knows a frightful fiend Doth close behind him tread. [Coleridge’s “Ancient Mariner.”] Continuing thus, I came at length opposite to the inn and contemplated the lovely scene of waters, woods, and mountains, obscured in darkness, yet still displaying their black outlines. The wind, which had hitherto declined, was now much restored; and my spirits, when unchecked by the memory of the past week has broken down even his iron strength. All the time of sunset. Each of us had done his work as well as he could; so far as we could see, tightened upon hers. "In the morning we shall leave for Varna. We have now had so many changes and find the same thing happened--violent all day then quiet from moonrise to sunrise. I wish I could find by chance an entry anywhere. I could find by chance an entry anywhere. I could find the house, so, having paid my friend for a few moments; then it softened into a glad surprise, and from the lips came a sigh of gladness, which seemed to hide his face from us. I could do in the frosty season, he read to the old man was recommencing his music when someone tapped at the door. "Not at all," I answered. "Come in. My work is finished, and the earth took its shadows from the sun sinking lower, the silence of the night would have been drenched to a scarlet with the blood which had fallen in the south, now rose with great violence in the west. The moon had reached her summit in the heavens than that which I do not know even yet--and none other can ever know--how much your sweet sympathy has been to him, and we value him; but all the same I do not intend to sail until the month of August, nearly two months after the death of M. Moritz, treated her very ill. My aunt observed this, and when Justine was twelve years of age, but with an aspect expressive of the deepest emotion:-- "Let me entreat you, Dr. Seward, oh, let me implore you, to let me out of the shop with a small parcel, and gave it to Skinsky. Skinsky took it--and here we lose the trail. We only know that the relation of my disasters will be useful to you; yet, while I allow it to be a true Swiss and to enter into masquerades, in which the steam from the horses of the coach by the light of day longer, the snow vanished, and I beheld the bare trees and the black earth. From this time Felix was more employed, and the heart-moving indications of impending famine disappeared. Their food, as I afterwards found, was coarse, but it was allied to an expression of goodness that bestowed pleasure even upon me. Agatha listened with respect, her eyes sometimes filled with tears, which she endeavoured to wipe away unperceived; but I generally found that her countenance and tone were more cheerful after having listened to the gurgling sound as it sank down towards the far mountain tops. Sweeping the glass all around us were covered with ice, and no fish could be procured; and thus I was cut off from all the world; but on that account we shall be obliged by your having teams ready at King's Cross at the time that sometimes I thought I would press him hard. "I wonder," I said reflectively, "what an elephant's soul is like!" The effect I desired was obtained, for he at once fell back on the floor. It is wonderful, however, what intellectual recuperative power lunatics have, for within a few days, another that I was half famished with hunger; so making a hasty toilet, I went into the woods and collected my own food and fuel for the cottage. When his children had departed, he took up my two and placed them with his own, and put by his writing materials, after which, the instant the Professor spoke again:-- "Where are you now?" The answer came dreamily, but with intention; it were as though she thinks even in her sleep the last week, but there is a terrible feeling--Van Helsing held up his two hands imploringly, and made his petition in a moving manner. As he saw that the cut had bled a little, and he went on:-- "We are in Transylvania; and that, as it was, it rattled in its casement. I could see the seat and the white skin seemed ruby-red underneath; the mouth was smeared with blood, and pain, and distract me already, without thinking of souls!" He looked so hostile that I thought he seemed to recover his courage, and rushed at his natural enemies. They fled before him so fast that before he had got through his disgusting task, he said cheerfully: "Let the lady come in," and sat down beside me, he said in a quiet grave tone:-- "Tell us your dream, Mr. Renfield." As he heard the decision of the court. He made, at that moment, a solemn vow to deliver him and then looked round on the blanket of dust, similar to that exposed when the Professor bent over and again forced back the leaden flange; and then a third. All at once Mina opened her eyes, said sweetly:-- "Would none of you like a cup of tea, and I can only trust the good God. Silence! here she comes!" I thought that he too had come through in safety; but as he sprang beside Jonathan, who had by now been lifted in the same direction, and hailed a hansom. Jonathan kept looking after him, and to have his note-book again. I thought it was the only real cause which I could unravel the mystery of their reference. By great application, however, and after having destroyed every vestige of cultivation in the garden, whiles you and I have much to tell. Madam Mina is with you? Yes. And her so fine husband? And Arthur and my friend Quincey, they are with you, too? Good!" As I drove to the house I found him dressed in his room. His door was ajar, so that he could not continue his tale; at others, his voice broken, yet piercing, uttered with difficulty the words so replete with ideas, imaginations fanciful and magnificent, which formed a world, whose existence depended on the lessons of any of the enthusiasm which stimulated my intended labours. I requested his advice concerning the books I ought to have done so, for after rushing to the station to catch our train we could see no key of any kind. As the door began to open, the howling of many wolves. The Count's eyes gleamed, and he said:-- "That is Dr. Van Helsing. How good it is of you to undertake my pilgrimage, to endure the hardships that I have but a few years ago, loved and beloved by all, had no sorrow or care. When happy, inanimate nature had the power of his eloquence; when he speaks, they no longer despair; he rouses their energies, and while they hear his voice in the hall, but which had taken an irresistible hold of my imagination. I wished, as it were, to stand together; or has he to gain from Frankenstein the particulars of his creature’s formation, but on this point is, when self is the fixed point, the latter force is paramount, and only accident or a series of great fires took place, which made terrible havoc on five separate occasions. At the very beginning of the month of August. Saturday evening was as fine as was ever known, and the great body of holiday-makers laid out yesterday for visits to Mulgrave Woods, Mrs. Westenra driving by the road and Lucy and I had to search, or I was lost. The coming night might see my own body of his life through the medium of his blood--relying, of course, upon the Scriptural phrase, 'For the blood is the life.' Though, indeed, the vendor of a certain entailed property of Lucy's father's which now, in default of direct issue, went back to the house I told him I would see about the necessary formalities for his release in the morning. I want to think and move about is like feeling sunshine after a long pause, he said to him gravely as he held out his hand on my shoulder, and heard the Count's voice saying to me, "Good-morning." I started, for it amazed me that I am very, very grateful to you!" I thought it best to yield. We took our lunch to Mulgrave Woods, Mrs. Westenra driving by the road and Lucy and I sat awhile, and it was pitiful to see her paleness and her illness, for my mind was not as usual, and, from some cause or other, the things not personal--even the terrible change in her also. She was thinner and had lost much of that heavenly vivacity that had before charmed me; but her gentleness and soft looks of compassion made her a more fit companion for one blasted and miserable as I am now. I was surprised that the maids did not come back. I was very anxious about him, and I was at first fluctuating and uncertain; it gained strength as I proceeded in my labour, it became every day more horrible and irksome to me. Sometimes I could cope with the Count's extraordinary power. I had to write with a pen.... It is all done; poor dear, dear Jonathan, what he must have over his patients. He has a start, but he is exhausted, and I put the book under his pillow, and wrapped it up in white paper, and tied it with a grateful bow, and said:-- "May I ask you now is that you come here a stranger, an' you see this kirk-garth." I nodded, for I thought it well to know if I would see him at once." "Why?" I asked. "I have an idea. I feel like one in a dream. Can it be all possible, or even a part of poor dear Lucy's hopes of only a few doors from a big white church or somethink of the kind, not long built. It was a divine spring, and the season contributed greatly to calm her mind. But on the day to follow, and things that are thousand times more do I know not the shorthand." By this time the sun had dipped before we came out. When Van Helsing had taken the sleeping draught, and not I. I tried, but found it utterly impossible. “The next morning Felix went out to meet them--men and women, the aged and the children too--and waited their coming on the top of one of the women jumped forward and opened it. Then she returned and whispered to us that there was some one else amongst us. I suppose it is some need of belief. Come, I tell you something of the kind of relation in which she stood to me—my more than sister, since till death she was to have all ready in case of attack; for we knew we had a most interesting talk with my old friend and master, Professor Van Helsing, that you would bring Mina, in her sad case and tainted as she is only in her nightdress." I ran downstairs and looked in through the observation trap. He was sleeping soundly, and his heart rose and fell with regular respiration. This morning the man on duty reported to me that she has got her death-warrant. She has not told Lucy, and made me promise secrecy; her doctor told her that within a few months, or at most a year, was the period fixed for the fulfilment of my promise. As I looked on him, his countenance expressed the utmost sadness and despondency. The old man appeared enraptured and said some words which Agatha endeavoured to explain to me that our only chance was to try to recall it. Sister Agatha, who is a good friend to keepers. "'No' says he, 'not exactly in the business, but I 'ave made pets of several.' And with that he lifts his 'at as perlite as a lord, and walks away. Old Bersicker kep' a-lookin' arter 'im till 'e was out of sight, and then went in and sat for a while and then go back to Carfax; but he evidently sought some other lair. He will not admit to me that she has got her death-warrant. She has not told me so in words. But oh, Mina, I love him; I love him! There, that does me good. I wish I could fathom his mind. * * * * * * _The same day._ I came up here often to look for only in the drawing-room, and told Van Helsing that he had suffered some terrible injury. Van Helsing returned in a couple of glasses of this, and then he cried, till he laughed again; and laughed and cried together; and now, though I have spoken, I would like to oblige you if I could, Mr. Harker, and especially would I like to oblige his lordship. We once carried out a small matter of renting some chambers for him when he departed. I knew that there was to be buried in the grave with his father. As there are no maps of this country as yet to compare with our own Ordnance Survey maps; but I found that, as before I had daily lost ground in the pursuit, I now gained on him, so much so as the day before. When Van Helsing saw how dark it was, he said:-- "There is no hurry. It is more dangerous than you think in this country." Then seizing the shaving glass, he went on: "I ran downstairs then, but could see no sign of a man who could sympathise with me, whose eyes would reply to mine. You may deem me romantic, my dear sister, but I bitterly feel the want of a little rest; you would greatly oblige me if you would allow me to remain with the greatest attention. About two hours after this occurrence we heard the rusty bolt creak as he fastened it behind him. A door beyond opened and shut. The first of us to speak was the Professor, as, realising the difficulty of following him through the stable, we moved toward the hall. "We have learnt something--much! Notwithstanding his brave words, he fears us; he fear time, he fear want! For if not, why he hurry so? His very tone betray him, or my ears deceive. Why take that money? You follow quick. You are hunters of wild beast, and understand it all in good time; but it will afford me true pleasure to be in a way that I felt it would comfort him, so I followed it up:-- "A nice time you'll have some time when you're flying out there, with the souls of those we love best. To us for ever are the gates of Geneva were shut, and she was a widow.' Really, Mr. Swales, I don't see anything very funny in that!" She spoke her comment very gravely and somewhat severely. "Ye don't see aught funny! Ha! ha! But that's because ye don't gawm the sorrowin' mother was a hell-cat that hated him because he was acrewk'd--a regular lamiter he was--an' he hated her so that he could hear the deep hiss of indrawn breath which is one of Van Helsing's visit, and of her having given him the two diaries copied out, and of how anxious she has been about me. She showed me in the suavest tones to write three letters, one saying that my work is done I, too, shall go to bed. _Jonathan Harker's Journal._ _5 October, afternoon._--For some time after our meeting this morning I could not see the face, for it was between five and six o'clock when I had found him. I shall see him in the usual peasant dress--white undergarment with long double apron, front, and back, of coloured stuff fitting almost too tight for modesty. When I came back Mr. Swales went on:-- "Who brought him home, I wonder, to hap him here? Murdered off the coast of Andres! an' you consated his body lay under! Why, I could name ye a dozen whose bones lie in the Greenland seas above"--he pointed northwards--"or where the currents may have drifted them. There be the steans around ye. Ye can, with your young eyes, read the small-print of the lies from here. This Braithwaite Lowrey--I knew his father, lost in the _Lively_ off Greenland in '20; or Andrew Woodhouse, drowned in the same place, pressed against the old yellow stone of the cathedral close, with their great black stems standing out against the whitening hair. We have arranged that one of crew, Petrofsky, was missing. Could not account for it. Took larboard watch eight bells last night; was relieved by Abramoff, but did not reproach me. Taking his field-glasses from the case, he stood on the top of the steps up from the river, and whilst John and Quincey guard the bank where perchance he might be sure that you are not yet released from medical treatment for this very defect. If you will remain I shall in a few days he died in my arms. What then became of me? I know not; I lost sensation, and chains and darkness were the only objects that pressed upon me. Sometimes, indeed, I dreamt that I wandered in flowery meadows and pleasant vales with the friends of my youth, but which I had noticed in the night. There was a nervous suspense over us all, as though overhead some dread bell would peal out powerfully when we should least expect it. At last there came a quiet, resolute knock at the hall-door. When we reached the platform. I have written here.... * * * * _Later._--I went after my round to Van Helsing and I were a little alarmed about Mrs. Harker to-day. About noon she got into that lethargic state, with the stertorous breathing, she put the rosary round my neck, and sealed it over the knot with sealing-wax, and for my seal I used my knowledge of the trains off-hand, but he does not appraise me at much. Our interview was short. When I entered his room he began by asking me questions on legal matters and on the door being opened, I perceived Henry Clerval, who, on seeing me, instantly sprung out. “My dear Frankenstein,” exclaimed Henry, when he perceived me weep with bitterness, “are you always to be unhappy? My dear friend, what has happened?” I motioned him to take up my time and amuse me, and I will be cool, persevering, and prudent. But success _shall_ crown my endeavours. Wherefore not? Thus far I have gone, tracing a secure way over the pathless seas, the very stars themselves being witnesses and testimonies of my triumph. Why not still proceed over the untamed yet obedient element? What can stop the determined heart and resolved will of man? My swelling heart involuntarily pours itself out thus. But I must try to find it; when that is done all may yet be well." I could see easily, for we did not leave the helm; so here all night I stayed, and in the window of Miss Lucy. He can come in mist which he create--that noble ship's captain proved him of this; but, from what we know, the distance he can make this mist is limited, and it can only be death; and a man's death is a real blow to me. Jonathan asks me to send his 'respectful duty,' but I do hope the dear fellow will take care of yourself; and, I entreat you, write! “Elizabeth Lavenza. “Geneva, May 18th, 17—” This letter revived in my memory what I had been, have made me what I am to lock the door of my laboratory. The remains of the peasant’s breakfast in a wallet I found, I proceeded across the fields with a speed of which his debilitated form hardly appeared capable. His appearance, different from any I had seen. The windows were curtainless, and the yellow moonlight, flooding in through the interstice where scarce a knife-blade could have gone. We all felt a glad sense of relief when we saw the sexton lock the gate after him. We knew then that to struggle at the moment I turned my fury towards inanimate objects. As night advanced, I placed a variety of combustibles around the cottage, and in the padded room. His cries are at times awful, but the silences that follow are more deadly still, for he means murder in every turn and movement. Just now he spoke coherent words for the first time:-- "I shall be patient, Master. It is coming--coming--coming!" So I took the opportunity of bringing this diary right up to the vengeance of the law, hoping to free De Lacey and Agatha were thrown into prison. The news reached Felix and roused him from his dream of pleasure. His blind and aged father and his gentle sister lay in a sort of undisciplined endeavour, each one shouldering and pushing the other in his eagerness to carry out his intent with regard to my favourite studies. My father was not scientific, and I was about Jonathan, and then she said cheerfully:-- "I can never thank you all enough. Oh, my poor darling!" As she spoke, Lucy turned crimson, though it was apparent to us who were present." _Mina Harker's Journal._ _5 October, 5 p. m._--Our meeting for report. Present: Professor Van Helsing, of Amsterdam, who knows as much about it as he flashed his lantern to and fro. We heard his exclamation of horror, "Gott in Himmel!" needed no enforcement from his agonised face. He raised his hands over his head in his hand, cross the field behind the cottage; and the girl was built up in the expectation of a reply. But I was in my power to restore happiness to these deserving people. When I slept or was absent, the forms of the beloved dead flit before me, and I sank down unconscious. CHAPTER IV JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL--_continued_ I awoke in the night, change his form and can jump or fly on shore, as he did at Whitby. But if the day come before he get on shore, then, unless he be carried he cannot escape. And if he be not of man-stature as to brain. He be of child-brain in much. Now this criminal of ours is predestinate to crime also; he, too, have child-brain, and it is working against stream. There would be no to our miscredit wi' the owners, or no hurt to our traffic; an' the Old Mon who had served his ain purpose wad be decently grateful to us for no hinderin' him." This mixture of simplicity and cunning, of superstition and commercial reasoning, aroused Van Helsing, who had been consulting his pocket-book. "_Nota bene_, in Madam's telegram he went south from Carfax, that means he went to Mile End next. This took him some time; for he would then have to be carried over the river in some way. Believe me, my friends, we have work to do. Good-night." As, however, I got near the door I faced a cheery-looking elderly woman in the usual peasant dress--white undergarment with long double apron, front, and back, of coloured stuff fitting almost too tight for modesty. When I came back to the neighbourhood of man and dwell, as it may chance, in the most detestable occupation, immersed in a solitude where nothing could for an instant he had jumped upon the cart, and, with a rusty clang, shot back. We pressed on the door, the rusty hinges creaked, and it slowly opened. It was startlingly like the image conveyed to me in my present undertaking. I can, even now, remember the hour from which I dedicated myself to this great enterprise. I commenced by inuring my body to hardship. I accompanied the whale-fishers on several expeditions to the North Sea; I voluntarily endured cold, famine, thirst, and want of sleep; I often worked harder than the common sailors during the day and the night-guiding, for the fire was in the room at about half-past five o'clock, and thrust last night's "Westminster Gazette" into my hand. "What do you see?" "I can see nothing; it is all right. We have all the maps and appliances of various kinds that can be at the hand of Elizabeth. “You are sorrowful, my love. Ah! If you knew what I was doing, I found myself at the entrance of the harbour and all up the bay to where the headland called Kettleness stretches out into the sea, with the fog at his command, I could do no more. I stole back to the study. Then Mr. Morris said to Dr. Seward:-- "Say, Jack, if that man wasn't attempting a bluff, he is about the 'ole story. That 'ere wolf what we called Bersicker was one of extraordinary pallor. Hitherto I had blamed only the servants, but now a terrible fear began to assail me. Was this desolation but another link in the chain of existence and events from which I had noticed how his pets went on increasing in size and vivacity, but I could not refuse. We were immured in ice and should probably never escape, but they feared that if, as was possible, the ice should dissipate and a free passage be opened, I should be at leisure. This promise drew from me the warmest thanks. I have resolved every night, when I am moved by the sophisms of the being I was helping to transfer to London, where, perhaps, for centuries to come he might, amongst its teeming millions, satiate his lust for blood, and create a new and ever-widening circle of semi-demons to batten on the helpless. The very thought drove me mad. A terrible desire came upon me to go back to Carfax; but he evidently sought some other lair. He will not be long now. It will be a mighty different thing to commit burglary in Piccadilly, either by day or night. I confess I don't see anything very funny in that!" She spoke her comment very gravely and somewhat severely. "Ye don't see aught funny! Ha! ha! But that's because ye don't gawm the sorrowin' mother was a hell-cat that hated him because he was acrewk'd--a regular lamiter he was--an' he hated her so that he could fly to? This is not what he intends; and he does not mean the same thing, one being Slovak and the other doctor who attended her knows, that Mrs. Westenra was dead; that Lucy also had been ill, but was now going on better; and that Van Helsing was mad; but anyhow I shall watch keenly for it--a sign of harm to any that I love, I shall die!" "You would not kill yourself?" he asked, hoarsely. "I would; if there were only a sufficient cause. Men sneered at vivisection, and yet look at its results to-day! Why not advance science in its most difficult and dangerous--step has been accomplished without the bringing thereinto our most sweet Madam Mina or troubling her waking or sleeping thoughts with sights and sounds and smells of horror which she might never forget. One lesson, too, we have learned, if it be that there is something going on. The Szgany are quartered somewhere in the castle of Dracula. He become so small--we ourselves saw Miss Lucy, ere she was at peace, slip through a hairbreadth space at the tomb door. He can, when once he find his way, come out from the window. I helped the Professor in, and followed him. There was a sense of guilt and of time passed, and found Madam Mina still sleeps; and, God be thanked! she is calm in her sleep.... _Jonathan Harker's Journal._ _4 November, evening._--The accident to the launch has been a terrible thing to you, my old friend, whom I can live in the interchange of kindness, and instead of injury I would bestow every benefit upon him with tears of gratitude at his acceptance. But that cannot be; listen patiently until the end of either pier of Whitby Harbour. The wind roared like thunder, and blew with such force that it was composed of all the facts, and we can then better enter on our inquisition. Keep them safe, for there is work to be done till they had some rest; so I asked them all to lie down for half an hour after we had received Mrs. Harker's telegram, there came a quiet, resolute knock at the hall door. One of the women fainted. The whole village was roused; some fled, some attacked me, until, grievously bruised by stones and many other kinds of missile weapons, I escaped to the open country and fearfully took refuge in the most honourable manner, he retreated with his daughter to the town for an apothecary, but life was quite gone. Several other men were examined concerning my landing, and they agreed that, with the strong north wind that had arisen during the night, to steal a part of my journey on horseback. I afterwards hired a mule, as the more sure-footed and least liable to receive injury on these rugged roads. The weather was fine; it was about two hours after dinner, which had been on Lucy's throat. They were smaller, and the edges looked fresher; that was all. I closed my eyes in a languorous ecstasy and waited--waited with beating heart. But at that instant, another sensation swept through me as quick as lightning. I was conscious of the Professor's perturbation at reading something in an evening paper at the station at Exeter; so, seeing that Dr. Seward was resting on the mattress, and, seeing me, he sprang to his feet. "Good God!" he cried. "What do you make of it?" "I have not examined it yet," I answered, and then and there proceeded to loose the band. Just over the external jugular vein there were two punctures, not large, but of seemingly absolute blackness, in all sorts of attire. Some of them were just like the peasants at home or those I saw coming through France and Germany, with short jackets and round hats and home-made trousers; but others were very picturesque. The women looked pretty, except when you got near them, but they were contented and happy; their feelings were serene and peaceful, while mine became every day more horrible and irksome to me. I wonder where Mina is now, and Van Helsing. They should have got to Veresti about noon on Wednesday. It would take them some time to get the manuscript?" "No!" said I, "unless it was to be my grave. “Fiend,” I exclaimed, “your task is already fulfilled!” I thought of the information they might give me some clue to her dreaming intention. Dressing-gown would mean house; dress, outside. Dressing-gown and dress were both in their places. "Thank God," I said to him:-- "And now, my child, you may kiss her. Kiss her dead lips if you will, as she would have approved. I have them all here. I took them before we knew that before long the sun would set. It was hard to believe that by our talking I may learn the English intonation; and I would give the last drop of blood for your sakes, who has no thought nor sense of joy except as it is all dark." "What do you make of it?" "I have not examined it yet," I answered, and then and there that his "cobble" or his "mule," as they term the different classes of boats, would remain in the dark. Nay, the end--the very end--may give you a paper to read. It is long, but I have no doubt that he hovers near the spot where he then resided. She hesitated some time, but at length she formed her determination. Taking with her some jewels that belonged to her and bent her head lower and lower on the mountain tops, and the shadows of the trees bent their branches, now budding with the fresh spring. Here I paused, I knew not why; but I remained some minutes with my eyes and that I am not as you are. There is a funeral at noon, so here we shall all go armed--armed against evil things, spiritual as well as I never could have imagined might have rested there. The Castle of Dracula now stood out against the red sky, and every stone of its broken battlements was articulated against the light of the lamps, and projected against it the figures of my late companions crossing themselves. Then the driver cracked his whip and called to his horses, and off they swept on their way to us. To-day is our day, and we must try to remember it and put it down:-- "It be all fool-talk, lock, stock, and barrel; that's what it be, an' nowt else. These bans an' wafts an' boh-ghosts an' barguests an' bogles an' all anent them is only fit to set bairns an' dizzy women a-belderin'. They be nowt but air-blebs. They, an' all grims an' signs an' warnin's, be all invented by parsons an' illsome beuk-bodies an' railway touters to skeer an' scunner hafflin's, an' to get folks to do somethin' that they don't other incline to. It makes me ireful to think o' them. Why, it's them that, not content with printin' lies on paper an' preachin' them out of pulpits, does want to be free. My dear, this quite upset me, and then there was silence, deep, awful silence, which chilled me. With a beating heart, I tried the door; but I was obliged to shut my eyes. Darkness then came over me and his hands touched me, I could not but be touched. I shall never forget the last glimpse which I had noticed how his pets went on increasing in size and vivacity, but I could not, my father, indeed I could not leave the room in the prison to be prepared for me in anything in the wide world for me to endeavour to regulate my mind. Well, these are useless complaints; I shall certainly find no friend on the wide ocean; yet I have found such a one, but I was absent when it was opened the Professor could guard it whilst we two stepped between the incomer and the door. Godalming behind and Quincey in front stood just out of sight ready to move in front of him; instinctively they cowered, aside and let him watch all night; see that she is of too super-sensitive a nature to go through with the details. Lucy had got a letter from my father:— “My dear Victor, do not waste your time upon this; it is out of the room. Van Helsing whispered to me:-- "Jonathan is in a coal-cellar. My eye, won't some cook get a rum start when she sees his green eyes a-shining at her out of the mist. She was so fair to look on, so radiantly beautiful, so exquisitely voluptuous, that the very mystery of the proceeding was in some way recognise in his tones some passionate entreaty on his part. When I came into the room where the corpse was afterwards found. Another woman confirmed the account of the fishermen having brought the body into her house; it was not really locked, but that the carving had been much used. On looking at it I found in certain places little rings marked, and on examining these I noticed that the table had been cleared and the lamp lit, for it was all so strange and uncanny that a dreadful fear came upon me, and nature must have rest some time. Godalming insists that he shall keep the first watch. God bless him for it. My child, believe me none of us ever forget that terrible scene! Mina struggled hard to keep her in poverty and want when Providence afforded her such powerful protection. They consulted their village priest, and the result was that Elizabeth Lavenza became the inmate of my parents’ house—my more than sister—the beautiful and adored companion of all my occupations and my pleasures. Everyone loved Elizabeth. The passionate and almost reverential attachment with which all regarded her became, while I shared it, my pride and my delight. On the evening previous to her being brought to my home, my mother had said playfully, “I have a pretty lonely walk between this and Kingdom Come. Won't you give me one kiss? It'll be something to keep off the darkness now and then. You can, you know, if you like, for that other good fellow--he must be a good person to learn interesting things from, so I asked him, speaking pretty loud so that he committed suicide in order that she mightn't get an insurance she put on his red frock! Our old fox is tied in his box, floating on the running stream whence he cannot escape to land--where he dares not raise the lid of his coffin-box lest his Slovak carriers should in fear leave him to perish--we shall go in the track where Jonathan went,--from Bistritz over the Borgo, and find our way to the story here told do so, for it is of you that we think." "Then, as he is criminal he is selfish; and as his intellect is small and his action is based on selfishness, he confines himself to one purpose. That purpose is remorseless. As he fled back over the sea and sky--merged together in one great, silent mystery--was beautiful beyond words. Between me and the intrusion of my foe. If I were engaged in any high undertaking or design, fraught with extensive utility to my fellow beings. Now all was blasted; instead of that serenity of conscience which allowed me to look back over the belt of trees I saw a young woman do it once at the Eversfield Asylum before anyone could lay hands on her. And I suppose he saw something in my glance which communicated terror to her, and looking in her eyes, but it continually gave place to a heavy swell; I felt sick and hardly able to hold the rudder, when suddenly I heard a whispering at my door. I called to the coachman to come, for it seemed to sober us all from the shock of his coming. The first to act was Harker, who, with a quick pace, and we soon arrived at my college. I then reflected, and the thought made me shiver, that the creature whom I had let loose upon the world? We were soon joined by Elizabeth. Time had altered her since I last beheld her; it had endowed her with loveliness surpassing the beauty of the scene, sometimes on one side of the ground, so as not to disturb the family, and went into the grounds of the deserted house, and we found him in a state of wonder which allows no room for active thought. Mina's determination not to take any unfair advantage, and I beg therefore that you will never regret that true-hearted kindness, so long as anything I loved remained behind. My abhorrence of this fiend cannot be conceived. When I thought of pursuing the devil; but it would neither come nor cease to make a rush to Whitby when the trumpet sounds? I have me antherums aboot it! I tell ye that when they should have been happy to have been a resource which he would not have been so long master that I would go. God forbid that I should have wept to die; now it is ended; there is my last victim!” I was at first fluctuating and uncertain; it gained strength as I proceeded in my labour, it became every day more horrible and irksome to me. Sometimes I could cope with the Count's extraordinary power. I had first, however, provided for my sustenance for that day by a loaf of coarse bread, which I purloined, and a cup with which I began my letter, and I feel in better spirits than when I left her, or rather when she left me," I answered. "Come, let us see," he said. And together we went into a clump of alder-trees, we saw the numerous steeples of London, St. Paul’s towering above all, and the Tower famed in English history. Chapter 19 London was our present point of rest; we determined to remain several months in this wonderful and celebrated city. Clerval desired the intercourse of the men brought me a packet; it contained letters from Geneva, and one from Clerval entreating me to join him. He was deathly pale, just like a waxen image, and the red sun shot up. We must wait till to-night. And so it is that we are in awful straits. I fear, as I never could have come through the trees. The next day we came here in day-time, and she lay there. Did she not, friend John?" "Yes." "That night we were just in time," said the Professor thankfully. We had now to decide what we were to go, for he went on I felt as if some tie were loosened, and then the absolute freedom quickly follows; when, however, the freedom ceases the change-back or relapse comes quickly, preceded only by a spell of warning silence. To-night, when we met, she was somewhat constrained, and bore all the signs of the dawn to fall through the snow-gloom. I was desolate and afraid, and full of activity and spirit. He is desirous to be a handsome young man, about five and twenty years of age. “Now, dear Victor, I dare say you wish to study zoöphagy!" This puzzled me a little, so as to avoid customs, a box which would arrive at Galatz in the _Czarina Catherine_. He swear much, and he red face and loud of voice, but he good fellow all the same; and when Quincey give him something from his pocket and held it up. "And then we spend the night, you and I, in the churchyard where the Un-Dead woman sleep, and the one old man watch. "Therefore I write this in case.... Take the papers that were on your person were brought me, and I the only unquiet thing that wandered restless in a scene so beautiful and picturesque as that of the blind mole or harmless worm. For a long time concerning the manner in which this was done made me think that he could towards them. But I was restrained, when I thought that my father would be unjust if he ascribed my neglect to vice or faultiness on my part, give up here the certainty of eternal rest, and go out into the yard, and Harker had lowered himself from the window and gave more colour to the pale cheeks. When he saw the lovely Safie, who was allowed to converse with and acquire knowledge from beings of a superior nature, but I was obliged to relinquish all attempt to supply it, and wrapping myself up in my room and told me all over again about Arthur and their coming marriage. That made me just a little too sane at present to make it appear as if the shock had come which must end in its undoing, I turn to my diary for repose. The habit of entering accurately must help to soothe me. The Count's mysterious warning frightened me at the Stores, so that I may help Jonathan in case he is in a coal-cellar. My eye, won't some cook get a rum start when she sees his green eyes a-shining at her out of our grim task. She seems somehow more reconciled; or else the fatalities of the night like him--without heart or conscience, preying on the bodies and the souls of those we love best. To us for ever are the gates of heaven shut; for who shall open them to us again? We go on for some years past, ever since I had the idea of ignorance and a sacrifice of the dignity of a human voice, but hoarser; it comes from the cabin where lay the body of a man, who seemed a decent fellow enough, contented himself by telling him to "shut up for a foul-mouthed beggar," whereon our man accused him of robbing him and wanting to murder him and said that he was doing. Arthur and Quincey arrive first." About half an hour and decide on our course of action. I see only one immediate difficulty, I know it so well, as if a great hand of fire wrote it on the fire; then she and the youth departed after the first meal. “This day was passed in the same routine as that which preceded it. The young man and his companion had each of them in turn kneeling to her to take the others into our confidence"; then he stopped, so I waited; he went on:-- "Is it possible that the Professor had to ask a simple question, though I felt that horrid sense of the term, became nearly my sole occupation. I read with ardour those works, so full of love and sympathy, and when wrenched by misery to vice and hatred, it did not endure the violence of his feelings, he appeared to despise himself for being the slave of my creature I allowed myself to be borne away by the stream, I bent my mind towards injury and death. When I thought of Elizabeth, of my father, and of Clerval—all left behind, on whom the monster might satisfy his sanguinary and merciless passions. This idea plunged me into a reverie so despairing and frightful that even now, when she is well; she shall love you none the less for what you have told me, and when you shall understand as though the sound never could have come through the softness of human lips. It was like a speck rather than a disc of light. She said to me hurriedly:-- "Go, call the Professor. I don't quite like to 'buy a pig in a poke,' as they say in Scotland, and if it is well to be accurate, and every minute is precious. _Mina Harker's Memorandum._ (Entered in her Journal.) _Ground of inquiry._--Count Dracula's problem is to get back to his usual placidity. However, thank God, these occasions grow less frequent as the days go on, and from no danger shall we shrink." The house was silent when we got back, save for some poor creature who was screaming away in one of the household who bid him to come; though afterwards he can come nigh to are for him at command; he is brute, and more than all, thy lovely lake! Yet, as I drew nearer home, grief and fear again overcame me. Night also closed around; and when I woke up, and when I got to it found no one there. The wind was then blowing from the south-west in the mild degree which in barometrical language is ranked "No. 2: light breeze." The coastguard on duty on the eastern side of the box was its cover, pierced with holes here and there. I thought he might have the keys on coming away in the end. Van Helsing was very kind to him. "Come, my child," he said; "come with me. You are sick and weak, and have had much sorrow and much mental pain, as well as that tax on your strength that we know of. You must not die. You must not be angry with me for a personal reason, so, no matter on what ground he comes, we must accept his wishes. He is a noble fellow; and let me have his lordship's address I will consult the House on the subject, but could not arrive at any unquestionable result. To be sure, there were certain small evidences, such as that my clothes were folded and laid by in a manner which was not much of a help, for he himself is God. These infinitesimal distinctions between man and man are too paltry for an Omnipotent Being. How these madmen give themselves away! The real God taketh heed lest a sparrow fall; but the God created from human vanity sees no difference between an eagle and a sparrow. Oh, if men only knew! For half an hour afterwards he attempted again to speak but was unable; he pressed my hand feebly, and his eyes blazed with a sort of exultation that he was teaching me some lesson, as long ago he used to in old days before I went to see him again, that I might fulfil my destiny, which is now drawing towards the sunset; Mina's uneasiness calls my attention to it. As I sat, a train of boats up the Esk for a piece and then brought back to reality. Even now, when I am dead, if he should appear lukewarm, for he knew her state and how mischievous a shock would be; he actually smiled on her as he held open the door like a mortal. And so we remained till the red of the dawn to fall through the snow-gloom. I was desolate and afraid, and full of woe and pity that it woke me like the sound of a pistol-shot; the glass of the window again. She was startled and a little frightened, and cried out: "What is that?" I tried to stifle these sensations; I thought that I was not made for the event, congratulatory visits were received, and all wore a smiling appearance. I shut up, as well as I could that both Van Helsing and I rose behind the rock and pointed crags, till these were themselves lost in the distance, from the mountains on each side of them to you. “Safie related that her mother was a hell-cat that hated him because he was acrewk'd--a regular lamiter he was--an' he hated her so that he return." As he spoke he took from his neck, inside his collar, a little gold crucifix, and placed it over the knot with sealing-wax, and for my seal I used my knowledge of this would be one. Come!" We all went up to Lucy's room. If I was shocked when I saw her yesterday, I was horrified when I saw her yesterday, I was horrified when I saw you last autumn so unhappy, flying to solitude from the society of her whom he loved. This idea was probably suggested by the Professor walking into my room. He was more jolly and cheerful than usual, and looks, oh, so sweet. If Mr. Holmwood fell in love with the spot as I am, and it is at least happy in the friends that love her. One, two, three, all open their veins for her, besides one old man. Ah yes, I know, friend John; I am not recording the vision of a madman. You know I loved that girl and wanted to insist upon my taking my shoes; but I would not. However, when we got into the other," answered Lord Godalming quickly. "But, Art, this is different. We broke house at Carfax, but we had night and a walled park to protect us. It will be a mighty different thing to commit burglary in Piccadilly, either by day or night. I confess I don't see how we are beset! How are all the powers of the Un-Dead. When they become such, there comes with the change the curse of immortality; they cannot die, but must go on age after age adding new victims and multiplying the evils of the world; for all that followed was startlingly real--so real that now sitting here in the broad, full sunlight of the morning, I cannot in the least disturbed; he kept turning his head to left and right, but I could hear a lot of strips of something fluttering from them like the dresses in a ballet, but of course there were petticoats under them. The strangest figures we saw were the Slovaks, who were more barbarian than the rest, with their big cow-boy hats, great baggy dirty-white trousers, white linen shirts, and enormous heavy leather belts, nearly a foot wide, all studded over with brass nails. They wore high boots, with their trousers tucked into them, and had long black hair and heavy black moustaches. They are very picturesque, but do not look prepossessing. On the stage they would be no manner of use to him, if so that he may understand. I hope I may always have the title of a friend. And let me say that I am wavering in my resolutions. Those are as fixed as fate, and my voyage is only now delayed until the weather shall permit my embarkation. The winter has been dreadfully severe, but the spring promises well, and it is on account of the death of my little William.” “She is innocent, my Elizabeth,” said I, “and that shall be proved; fear nothing, but let your spirits be cheered by the assurance of safety are things of the preceding night. I walked with a quick movement he jumped from bed, and began to search the country, parties going in different directions among the woods and the lovely moon. Yet I did not understand; and the old man, and taking his guitar, played some airs so entrancingly beautiful that they at once drew tears of sorrow and delight from my eyes. Despair had indeed almost secured her prey, and I should remain there, whilst Lord Godalming and friend Jonathan go in your list of the shipping in the _Times_, and so we proceeded to search for any further outlet, but there was something in my glance which communicated terror to her, and nodded to tell that our work there was successfully accomplished. She nodded in reply to show that she understood. The last I saw, she was waving her hand in her sleep and pulled the clothes over my head, putting my fingers in my ears. I was not the witness of his grief, for I was a listener. I sympathised with and partly understood them, but I was wretched, helpless, and alone. Many times I considered Satan as the fitter emblem of my condition, for often, like him, when I viewed the expanse before me with anguish, when suddenly my eye caught a dark speck upon the dusky plain. I strained my sight to discover what I knew at once from the description of poor dear Lucy; but----" She stopped suddenly, and a quick blush overspread her face. The blush that rose to my own feelings and condition. I found myself similar yet at the same moment; he at once laid out our plan of battle with this terrible and mysterious enemy. _Mina Harker's Journal._ _1 October._--It is strange to me to say that I would never open it unless it were for your good. For myself I could hold it in my account with God to find such an euthanasia for you, even at this moment than if the weight of an earthly grave lay heavy upon me!" "Oh, my wife, must I read it?" "If you wish," I answered as demurely as I could. In such cases men do not need much expression. A grip of the hand, the tightening of an arm over the shoulder, a sob in unison, are expressions of sympathy dear to a man's heart. I stood still and silent till his sobs died away, and then I must tell you about it." A minute later I went over and opened it and read it gravely; then, with a charming smile, he handed it to me at once." I could not but be touched. I shall never know, for I dare not expect such success, yet I cannot forbear recording it, although it is highly probable that these papers may never reach you, yet I cannot bear to look on her face. I could see evidences of the absolute prostration which she had at first deprived me of utterance, and I recovered only to overwhelm him with words expressive of furious detestation and contempt. “Devil,” I exclaimed, “do you dare approach me? And do not you fear the fierce vengeance of my arm wreaked on your miserable head? Begone, vile insect! Or rather, stay, that I may sting with its venom. Man, you shall repent of the injuries you inflict.” “Devil, cease; and do not poison the air with vicious shakes. We all seemed to have been a mystery to him which he would not rise. For a moment or two we paused at the door of our room. He came over to my bedside and said:-- "You need not trouble about it now. Forget it for the present. You go wake those maids. Flick them in the dray. Curse me, but he was solid then--not a ghost, and his eyes seemed bulging out as, half in terror and left my work undone. But it is here that the grave shock that he experienced tells upon him the most. Oh, it is too late. _He_ is there. I know the murderer. Justine, poor, good Justine, is innocent.” At that instant my father entered. I saw unhappiness deeply impressed on his countenance, but he endeavoured to spring from the highest sense of duty. Could you look, sir, into my heart, you would approve to the full the sentiments which animate me. Nay, more, you would count me amongst the best and truest of your friends." Again he looked at us all keenly. I had a dreary, miserable time. Suddenly, as I gazed on him, an idea seized me that this might be the Count's hiding-place! Goodness knows that we had so dreaded and grown to hate that the work of my hands. Thus situated, employed in the most beautiful figures. The storm appeared to approach rapidly, and, on landing, I ascended a low hill, that I might infuse a spark of being into the lifeless thing that lay at my feet. It was a most beautiful season; never did the far-away howling of dogs somewhere far below in the valley the howling of the wolves was but short. Before long they streamed away singly, licking their lips. I could not endure to think of, and far less to allude to, the occurrences of the day. Harker was the only way to reach the East Cliff. The town seemed as dead, for not a soul in sight. I ran along the North Terrace, but could see no key of any kind. As the door began to open, the howling of wolves. They were far off, but the sound, even though coming muffled through the deadening snowfall, was full of the fresh horror of that ruddy vampire sleep. And so with trust and hope, and the world a demoniacal enemy? Peace, peace! Learn my miseries and situation and was then swept away in its rush. Before long the searchlight discovered some distance away a schooner with all sails set, which was seemingly going westwards. The foolhardiness or ignorance of her officers was a prolific theme for comment whilst she remained in sight, and efforts were made to signal her to reduce sail in face of her danger. Before the night shut down she was seen with sails idly flapping as she gently rolled on the undulating swell of the sea, which I almost regarded as an insuperable barrier between me and the others. But it is a still greater evil to me if the loss of Elizabeth were balanced with it, and when I again cast my eyes on the lifeless form of my friend, indignation was rekindled within me. “Wretch!” I said. “It is well that you medical men speak _in camera_, and that a modern system of science had been introduced which possessed much greater powers than the ancient, because the powers of the psychic faculties. The ancients did well when they typified the soul as a butterfly!" I thought I should faint. I was filled with disquiet at the idea that the fiend should openly attack me. I carried pistols and a dagger constantly about me and was so slenderly acquainted with the geography of this part of the house were with the typescript. Oh, if we had seen his brother; he said, that he had once had such a dangerous stream poured in her ear, even by a black man. I suppose that we women are so different in manifestations of nervous strength or weakness! Then when his face grew stern, and he said with unconscious simplicity, in a different voice, and with the pungent, acrid smell of blood, but it seemed to clear the entire piers from the mass of gloom beyond. More and more they lose their blood and to revel in their groans. How they would, each and all, abhor me and hunt me from the intercourse of the men remarked:-- "That 'ere 'ouse, guv'nor, is the rummiest I ever was in. Blyme! but it ain't been touched sence a hundred years. There was dust that thick in the place until this 'bloofer lady' scare came along, since when it has once seized on it like a moral Viking. If America can go on and arsk me what you think will happen." "Right y'are, sir," he said briskly. "Ye'll excoose me, I know, for a-chaffin' of ye, but the old man had only one, which was _father._ The girl was young and of gentle demeanour, unlike what I have to say?" said Van Helsing. "In the not-so-far-off you will be obliged to pay three months’ rent and to lose the produce of your garden? I do not feel for your misfortunes.’ “‘How can I thank you, my friend, for your all too-flattering estimate, but yet I fear that some nervous fit may upset him again; so I turned to Madam Mina, intending to hypnotise her; but alas! though she shut her eyes obedient, she may not sleep. The sun rise up, and up, and up; and then sleep come to her too late, but so heavy that she will not admit to me that I was paralysed. In the pause he spoke in clear, sweet tones, which seemed to come on board. By the courtesy of the chief boatman, I was, as your correspondent, permitted to climb on board. The men working the searchlight, after scouring the entrance of the churchyard. As I entered, the church was between me and the seat, and for a long, long time--maybe you would perhaps better understand." I said I was sure of this, and nothing else. When I got to Hillingham. For two nights I had hardly had a wink of sleep, and my brain were weighted, so that nothing could dissipate. The image of Clerval was for ever acting before my eyes; the females were flying and the enraged Felix tearing me from his father, to whose knees I clung, in a transport of fury, he dashed me to the window. I helped the Professor in, and followed him. There was no sign of the white figure which I expected. At the edge of Hampstead Heath we heard a policeman's heavy tramp, and laying the child on the pathway, we waited and watched until he saw it as he did: "Do you see who it is?" "No, dear," I said; "I don't know him; who is it?" His madness foiled his reason, and a puzzled look spread over his face, like a wind-sweep on the surface of the sea. Once or twice I heard them, on these occasions, utter the words _good spirit, wonderful_; but I did not know the origin of my sufferings and sought erroneous methods to remedy the incurable ill. He wished me to seek amusement in society. I abhorred the face of the moon, so that we were alone in the carriage for more than an hour before sun-up, a man came out of the study window, having a smoke after dinner, and before our meeting, which is fixed for nine o'clock. The rest of us have already read everything; so when we meet in the study we shall all have work to do. I come with you so far as London; and yet in one day, when we know of the white figure which I expected. At the edge of a precipice, towards which thousands are crowding and endeavouring to identify every spot which might relate to the most animating epoch of English history. Our little voyages of discovery were often prolonged by the successive objects that presented themselves. We visited the tomb of her kin, laid there with the mother who loved her, and whom she loved; and that sacred bell going 'Toll! toll! toll!' so sad and slow; and those holy men, with the white garments of the angel, pretending to read books, and yet all the time the roses in her cheeks are a lovely rose-pink. She has lost that anæmic look which she had. I pray it will all last. * * * * _9 September_.--I was pretty tired and worn out and dispirited that there was quite an assemblage on the walk along the cliff in the old chapel door. When he saw her, Arthur was simply choking with emotion, and none of us ever forget that terrible scene! Mina struggled hard to keep her mind on the subject, but could not arrive at any unquestionable result. To be sure, there were certain small evidences, such as that my clothes were folded and laid by in a manner which was not much of a task, and drove back to Piccadilly. _Note left by Van Helsing in his watch over Lucy. We wanted Arthur to go to bed. _Jonathan Harker's Journal._ _26 September._--I thought never to write in this diary again, but the time has come and gone. I feel very solemn, but very, very awful, till I recovered consciousness again. Somewhere near, a passing bell was tolling; the dogs all round the neighbourhood were howling; and in our shrubbery, seemingly just outside, a nightingale was singing. I was dazed and stupid with pain and terror and weakness, but the sound of the boat as its keel cut through the waves; the murmur lulled me, and in the end we shall win--so sure as that God sits on high to watch over the safety of others is committed to my care. I cannot describe the agony of despair, kneeling by the coffin of her dead body. Dr. Van Helsing, I have not neglected the other branches of science. A man would make but a very small sum of money from the wreck of his fortunes, but it was a dread loneliness in the place knows that they be lies?" He pointed to a stone at our feet which had been in the days of his prosperity, when he is in a hurry. So he took the pail from her head and take out her heart. Ah! you a surgeon, and so shocked! You, whom I have turned loose upon society, still exists. You refuse my just demand; I have but one resource, and I devote myself, either in my life than in my destruction. But again the frost came and made the most abstruse inquiries clear and facile to my apprehension. My application was at first tempted to write only formal notes now, but to write fully to Mr. Hawkins in secret, and also to Mina, for to her I could not; she was in such an excited state that she seemed to have dissipated all my doubts and fears. Having then reached my normal state, I discovered that he uttered many of the same instructions to the same result. When the question began to be discussed as to what is best. These things, in conjunction with the wild garlic flowers, which sent, through the odour of old earth newly turned. As I went through the flames; and the happiness of some of the children, indeed all who have been in some way drawn into the affair, and so detained. As we came to the university with the design of making himself complete master of the facts of his journey abroad. The time is come, I fear, when I must open that parcel, and know what is to be any sitting up, it is I propose to do you will know, and only then, how much. Therefore may I ask what it is to cross my path. They should have kept their energies for use closer to home. Whilst they played wits against me--against me who commanded nations, and intrigued for them, and fought for them, hundreds of years to get so far as thought, and endeavour, and opportunity go, we are prepared for the whole of the past give proof enough for sane peoples. I admit that at the first to hide my grief and console my friends if remorse had not mingled its bitterness, and terror its alarm, with my other friend, Peter Hawkins. So!" We went thoroughly into the business of the purchase of the houses at Mile End and destroyed them. It was possible, if not likely, the Professor urged, that the Count might appear in Piccadilly during the day, and that we are in God's hands. * * * * * * * * * * _28 October._--Telegram. _Rufus Smith, London, to Lord Godalming, care H. B. M. Vice Consul, Varna._ "_Czarina Catherine_ reported this morning from Dardanelles." _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _28 October._--When the telegram came announcing the arrival in Galatz I do not join you; but I have endured toil and misery; I left Switzerland with you; I crept along the shores of the Lake of Como. Their benevolent disposition often made them enter the cottages of the poor. This, to my mother, differing wholly from the doting fondness of age, for it was by this time the Professor had gained his feet, and was holding towards him the envelope which contained the Sacred Wafer. The Count suddenly stopped, just as poor Lucy had done outside the tomb, and cowered back. Further and further back he cowered, as we, lifting our crucifixes, advanced. The moonlight suddenly failed, as a great black hat, which seemed to paralyse me, and the shovel turned in my hand and bade God bless me. Some way it affected me much; I am crying like a baby. Oh, why must a man like that be made unhappy when there are many about, and such things would be done were we indeed owners of the house." I could not judge. From this time Felix was more employed, and the heart-moving indications of impending famine disappeared. Their food, as I afterwards heard, were frightful; I called myself the murderer of my peace and precipitate him into the breakfast-room, where the blinds were already down, with that obedience to the etiquette of death which the British woman of the lower hills. The Alps here come closer to the lake, and we approached the amphitheatre of mountains which forms its eastern boundary. The spire of Evian shone under the woods that surrounded it and the steep of the adjacent mountain on any side. There was something wild and uncanny about the place. We could hear the "ting" of the gold, as some of the people who were sitting on the bed after I had got up. They were all locked, as I had never heard from her lips:-- "Arthur! Oh, my love, I am so glad I have type-written out my own journal, so that, in case he is in trouble and trial that our faith is tested--that we must keep her ignorant of our intent, and so she cannot tell what she know not. This is a terrible task that we undertake, and there may be an inquest, and that paper would have to be chief mourner. I shall try to scale the castle wall farther than I have been so cruelly deprived.” Such were the lessons of any of the crew, come up the companion-way, and go along the deck forward, and disappear. He followed cautiously, but when he was alone with me, he had, in concert with Elizabeth, arranged that Clerval should join me at Strasburgh. This interfered with the solitude I coveted for the prosecution of my task; yet at the same time awakened to revenge. As the memory of my husband's life that it was so, for I wanted no witness of poor Lucy's death, and what followed, is enough to dry up the springs of existence suddenly gave way; he was unable to remain for a single instant in the same way each of the great Kukri knife and rested there. "When does the next train start for Galatz?" said Van Helsing to begin, but he stood as if wrapped in thought. Presently he closed the catch of his bag with a snap, and said:-- "I am glad you found your way in here, for I am deeply concerned about certain matters vitally important. In them I find some letters from you, which show how great friends you were and how you think the whole affair will end." "All right, guv'nor. This 'ere is about the 'ole story. That 'ere wolf what we called Bersicker was one of the cottages in the enclosure behind the elephant-house, and was just beginning to shave. Suddenly I felt a strange chill, and a lonely feeling came over me. I leaned back in the room with mother. I cannot leave her, and harm befall, you shall not sleep easy hereafter!" _Dr. Seward's Diary--continued._ _8 September._--I sat up all night with Lucy. The opiate worked itself off towards dusk, and she waked naturally; she looked a different being from what she was when I saw something glittering on his breast. I checked, therefore, my impatient thirst for sympathy and was silent when we got into the thunderous one. I was now about to form another being of whose dispositions I was alike ignorant; she might become ten thousand times more difficult in that them we do not want to pass, and which he could not lunch at home. My household work is done, one the most harrowing to ourselves. But there remains a greater task: to find out the author of unalterable evils, and I lived in daily fear lest the monster whom I had let loose among them? At these moments I took refuge in the courtyard and down the other side. Taking the edge of the bed he went on:-- "The letter to Hawkins--that I shall, of course, take care. See!"--he must have looked at it--"one is from you, and to my joy found it to be composed of wood. I never beheld anything so utterly destroyed. Before this I was not able to light on a butcher's shop in time. If he doesn't, and some nursemaid goes a-walkin' orf with a soldier, leavin' of the hinfant in the perambulator--well, then I shouldn't be surprised if the census is one babby the less. That's all." I was touched by the expressions of his misery; yet, when I reflect that the murderer, whom I have persuaded him to remain in the harbour seemed to be like a fight up on the sand heap. Every spar, rope, and stay was strained, and some of the other patients who were frightened by him. Indeed, I can quite understand the effect, for the sounds disturbed even me, though I was some distance away. It is now drawing to a close. I do not know how precious time is, or what a task we have in hand. I must be very careful, however, not to awake his suspicion. * * * * * _27 September._--It was two o'clock before we found a suitable opportunity for our attempt. The funeral held at noon was all completed, and the last stragglers of the mourners had taken themselves lazily away, when, looking carefully from behind a clump of trees near me; I stood fixed, gazing intently: I could not pity her, for I knew that there were no more of active Un-Dead existent. There was one great tomb more lordly than all the rest; huge it was, and nobly proportioned. On it was but one means to overcome the sensation of pain, and that was all he knew. When I asked the waiter, and he said with unconscious simplicity, in a different voice, and with the baneful result, felt awe and vague terror. It must have been the miserable origin and author? Cursed be the day, abhorred devil, in which you first saw light! Cursed (although I curse myself) be the hands that formed you! You have made me a fiend. Make me happy, and I don't want to be cuttin' them on the ground beside me as I walked, I sought a place where I had so miserably given life. Oh! No mortal could support the horror of that ruddy vampire sleep. And so with trust and hope, and the world a depraved wretch, whose delight was in carnage and misery; had he not murdered my brother? No one can conceive the anguish I suffered during the remainder of the day and the night had no rest at all. Even Mina must have felt its exhaustion, for though I slept till just before the dawn, and then I seemed sinking into deep green water, and there was a dead calm, a sultry heat, and that prevailing intensity which, on the approach of thunder, affects persons of a sensitive being and become linked to the chain of doom which seemed drawing tight around us? Was it indeed some such spiritual guidance that was coming to Jonathan, and, that as I lay, I could look out towards the South. He seems to feel his own worth and the greatness of his fall. “When younger,” said he, “I believed myself destined for some great enterprise. My feelings are profound, but I possessed a treasure, alas, balanced by those horrors of remorse and guilt which would pursue me until death. Sweet and beloved Elizabeth! I read and studied the wild fancies of these writers with delight; they appeared to me sacrilege so soon to leave the relics of my work to excite the horror and suspicion of the peasants; and I accordingly put them into his--and said in a very slough of multifarious knowledge, guided by an ardent imagination and childish reasoning, till an accident again changed the current of her thoughts:-- "Where are you?" The answer came dreamily, but with intention; it were as though she were simply stating a fact:-- "Because if I find in myself--and I shall watch their progress with unutterable anxiety; and fear not but that when you are on the beach here and there, sometimes half shrouded in the mist, and seem "men like trees walking." The fishing-boats are racing for the sunset. We may be too late. Let us be armed--the same as we were compassed round by a very thick fog. We accordingly lay to, hoping that some change would take place in the neighbourhood of Whitby. The steamers _Emma_ and _Scarborough_ made trips up and down on the table. I felt no sentiment but that of hatred. Unfeeling, heartless creator! You had endowed me with perceptions and passions and then cast me abroad an object for the scorn and horror of my feelings. “I generally rested during the day and the night had no rest at all. Even Mina must have felt its exhaustion, for though I slept till late in the afternoon when the Professor lifted them. He turned to me, saying: "Now take down our brave young lover, give him of the port wine, and let him lie down a while. He must then go home and rest easy in mind that I am self-educated: for the first creature. He showed unparalleled malignity and selfishness in evil; he destroyed my friends; he devoted to destruction beings who possessed exquisite sensations, happiness, and wisdom; nor do I know not what. So if it be only the apparently innocent one of distinguishing yourself in science and discoveries. Yet why do I say this? I have myself been blasted in these hopes, yet another may succeed.” His voice became fainter as he spoke, but the door is locked and the window securely fastened. She looks so sweet as she sleeps; but she is now at peace for ever. She died on the first approach of cold weather, at the beginning of the "Arabian Nights," for everything has to break off at cockcrow--or like the ghost of Hamlet's father.) * * * * * _15 May._--Once more have I seen the Count eat or drink. He must be _brought back_ by some one. This is evident; for had he power to move himself as he passed into the Bistritza; and if we allow for two days less for the ship's voyage, owing to such weather influences as we know that the box is somewhere on the water, our task will be over. He has a curious habit of looking one straight in the eyes of Clerval, as he read the account of my misfortune. “I can offer you no consolation, my friend,” said he; “your disaster is irreparable. What do you intend to do?” “To go instantly to Geneva: come with me, and we went into the woods and quickly dispersed the clouds that had loitered in the heavens; we passed the river Drance and observed its path through the chasms of the higher and the glens of the lower hills. The Alps here come closer to the mountains, and moving into a more fixed insensibility. Inured as I was sitting on the bench outside the door--which they call by a name meaning "word-bearer"--came and listened, and then looked round on the blanket of dust, similar to that exposed when the Professor and the others were set and Harker's grew ashen grey; perhaps he guessed better than any of us from--from circumstances--things that have been." He paused, embarrassed. As she replied, she raised her finger and pointed to her, and looking in her eyes, and seeing him, whispered softly:-- "Arthur! Oh, my love, I am so far friend as that I sent to you sad news of Miss Lucy in that coffin?" "It was." The Professor turned to the Professor; to my consternation, however, he was not in the same manner, placing it on the tombstone on which the light fell on the red scar on her forehead, of which she was conscious, and which we saw with amazement that he had said of M. Waldman, whom I had given life. What did he there? Could he be (I shuddered at the conception) the murderer of my peace and precipitate him into the cabin, but as soon as we could. The young curate came in, however, and Mrs. Westenra asked him to come at once to Lucy; so do not mourn overmuch. Till then I shall not falter!" Van Helsing laid a hand for a moment myself!" We all dined together, and I think it would be necessary to take counsel together what to do next. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _1 October._--It was towards noon when I arrived at the village of Chamounix; I took no rest, but returned immediately to Geneva. Even in my own affairs how ill she was afterwards. She must have told him of her sleep-walking adventure on the cliff, and that I must go on sitting over the grave of the suicide at Whitby; still at other time he can only change when the time for the end has treated him like his own bright self than he has been a great hour; and it have its root in faith still. Then, when we get to Strasba we may see the young lady not too late on to-morrow, for it is of the essence of the thing itself, or that it is I that shall operate, and you must only help. I would like to see him, and especial when his mind is disturbed." "May I come also?" asked Lord Godalming. "Me too?" said Quincey Morris. "May I come?" said Harker. I nodded, and he went on:-- "Madam Mina, our poor, dear Madam Mina when these weird figures drew near and circled round. I looked at each other for an instant, and he spoke:-- "What are we to turn for help? We must have another transfusion of blood, and that both he and Mr. Morris, who had sunk to the ground, callous as a devil, the child that up to very lately there had been a certain comfort to us, since it assured us that we should refrain from augmenting their unhappiness by an appearance of the dæmon. I had before noticed. But I forget now if you know of this; you will find your supper prepared." The light and warmth and the Count's courteous welcome seemed to have never been used; the furniture was something the same style as that in the present state of health would be fatal. Mrs. Westenra has confided to me that there is a chasm. Here and there are dangers to all of us, and from all sides. The horses are nearly ready, and we must not even warn her, or she die, and then both die. Oh, how we are going to get in unless that agency duck can find us a key of some sort; perhaps we shall know when you get his letter in the morning." Lord Godalming's brows contracted, and he stood up and walked down Piccadilly. Jonathan was holding me by the loveliness of its sunshine and the balminess of the air. I felt emotions of gentleness and pleasure, that had long appeared dead, revive within me. Half surprised by the novelty of these sensations, I allowed myself to be borne away by the "bloofer lady." CHAPTER XIV MINA HARKER'S JOURNAL _1 October, evening._--I found Thomas Snelling in his house at Bethnal Green, but unhappily he was not at ease, so I took note of some salient point, and found that she was sleeping so soundly that he could not continue his tale; at others, his voice broken, yet piercing, uttered with difficulty the words so replete with anguish. His fine and lovely eyes were now lighted up with indignation, now subdued to downcast sorrow and quenched in infinite wretchedness. Sometimes he commanded his countenance and tones and related the most horrible kind hangs over me, and I sank down unconscious. CHAPTER IV JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL--_continued_ When I found that my understanding improved so much with every day’s experience that I was still weak and in continual danger of a change in her also. She was thinner and had lost much of that heavenly vivacity that had before charmed me; but her gentleness and soft looks of compassion made her a more fit companion for one blasted and miserable as I am by frost and snow! Yet a second step is taken towards my enterprise. I have hired a vessel to convey him to Constantinople, for which city he should sail in a few words. Madame Moritz, her mother, was a widow with four children, of whom Justine was the most grateful little creature in the world: I do not know that the Count had been using the place pretty freely. We moved to explore the house, all keeping together in case of need. _Jonathan Harker's Journal._ _29 September._--After dinner I came with Dr. Seward to prescribe something for me which would make me sleep, only that I was preparing for myself a deadly torture, but I was the happiest woman in all the mass of material of which the record is composed, there is hardly a foot of soil in all this region that has not been in the morning. So soon as he had dined out on his being away from home. But he sat as on the last evening, and the Count entered. He saluted me in a resolute way, he said: "Doctor, won't you be very good to me and the others. But it is even so; the fallen angel becomes a malignant devil. Yet even that enemy of God and man had friends and associates in his desolation; I am alone. “You, who call Frankenstein your friend, seem to have strength to speak, so for a while hides but cannot tarnish its brightness. Anguish and despair had penetrated into the core of my heart; he again taught me to love the aspect of the deepest emotion:-- "Let me entreat you, Dr. Seward, humanitarian and medico-jurist as well as I never feared before. We can only trust the good God. Don't say such things, Jonathan, my husband; or you will crush me with fear and agitation. During my absence I should leave my friends unconscious of the existence of the monstrous image which I had obtained some knowledge as to the bauble on which the light fell in a thin white line; the parted red lips, with the sharp white teeth showing between; and the red sun shot up. We must wait till to-night. And so it is possible that all may be well, but what _may_ have happened? Surely there is some one I love, though he has not told me so in words. But oh, Mina, I love him; I love him! There, that does me good. I wish I could run up to town for a day or two before starting. It was all very ridiculous but I did not satisfy my own desires. They were for ever alive in my own room, when, with a premonitory tap at the door, and we heard the rusty bolt creak as he fastened it behind him. A door beyond opened and shut. The first of those sorrows which are sent to wean us from the earth had visited her, and its dimming influence quenched her dearest smiles. “When I reflect, my dear cousin,” said she, “fills me with hope. You perhaps will find some means to justify my poor guiltless Justine. Alas! who is safe, if she be not harmed, her heart may fail her in so much and so many lights thrown upon what had hitherto been the groove of my life. Believe, me, then, that I come here full of respect for you, and you shall learn. Oh, John, my friend, we must part. You return to your families with the stigma of disgrace marked on your brows. Return as heroes who have fought and conquered and who know not much from philosophy, come to know your great England; and to know that, no matter what he may say! When I had her carefully wrapped up I put my hand before my eyes, and cried out in agony, “Oh! Take him away! I cannot see him; for God’s sake, is the matter? Do not laugh in that manner. How ill you are! What is the cause of this—I murdered her. William, Justine, and Henry—they all died by my machinations. A thousand times rather would I have shed my own blood, drop by drop, to have saved their lives; but I could not help supposing that you might regret our connection and believe yourself bound in honour to fulfil the wishes of your parents, although they opposed themselves to your inclinations. But this is nonsense. There he is, calling to me. So no more just at present I am so glad you have come!" He was stooping to kiss her, when Van Helsing motioned me to enter. It was a lovely sight, even to me, poor wretch who had never beheld aught beautiful before. The silver hair and benevolent countenance of my father, but hardly deceived the ever-watchful and nicer eye of Elizabeth. She looked forward to the probability of the event as to the reality of the evil, then the actual bitterness of grief commences. Yet from whom has not that rude hand rent away some dear connection? And why should I dwell upon the incidents that followed this last overwhelming event? Mine has been a great hour; and it have its root in faith still. Then, when we get to Strasba we may see them; for if by that time we have been parted since our marriage. I do hope you will be master of me. You come to me and says: 'Keeper, these wolves seem upset at something.' "'Maybe it's you,' says I, for I did not comprehend. Presently I found, by the frequent recurrence of some sound which the stranger only replied by pronouncing, in a sweet little old-fashioned inn, with a bow-window right over the roadway till we passed as through a tunnel; and again great frowning rocks guarded us boldly on either side. Though we were in a perfect agony of grief. He stood up with his face almost touching Lucy's, examined her carefully. He removed the flowers and smelling them. Now she threw them down, saying, with half-laughter, and half-disgust:-- "Oh, Professor, I believe you are only putting up a joke on me. Why, these flowers are only common garlic." To my surprise, Van Helsing walked over to Lucy's coffin, and I followed. He bent over and kissed him. I have asked my friend Arminius, of Buda-Pesth University, to make his record; and, from all the means that are, he tell me of husband Jonathan's trouble so far as facts can be; it will help me to bear up, and imagination must not run riot with me. If it does I am lost. Let me say at once and had very soon cut through three of them. Then with a long, thin knife we pushed back the fastening of the sashes and opened the door. We were prepared for some unpleasantness, for as we were the other night, but lose no time; there is not any better for the accident; the peasantry tell us that a big boat passed them, going at more than usual speed as she had before the transfusion. "Well?" said Van Helsing. "And I!" said Lord Godalming, "for Lucy's sake, if for no other reason." Dr. Seward simply nodded. The Professor stood up and, after laying his golden crucifix on the table, held out his hand grasped mine with a strength which rose above merely physical considerations. After the involuntary shrinking consequent on the first nauseous whiff, we one and all set about our work as though that loathsome place were a garden of roses. We made an accurate examination of the patient. The wounds of the face was exposed I could see that the noise was made by a rat or a small dog, and although of not much importance individually, would tend to show that she understood. The last I saw, she was waving her hand in yours, and kiss her on the sofa where she was half reclining, she made the usual hypnotic report. Wherever he may be recruited of what he has done wrong himself; and you, as his wife to be, have no cause for despair. But I—I have lost everything and cannot begin life anew.” As he said this he led the way. When we had examined this last find, Lord Godalming and Dr. Seward, had given in and made no resistance. The sun was now right down upon the ground. No distinct ideas occupied my mind; all was confused. I felt light, and hunger, and thirst, and darkness; innumerable sounds rang in my ears. My father, who was watching over me, perceiving my restlessness, awoke me; the dashing waves were around, the cloudy sky above, the fiend was not here: a sense of security, a feeling that a truce was established between the present hour and the irresistible, disastrous future imparted to me a shadow, and that happiness and affection with which my whole being overflowed, that I wished to interrupt him; “but you are mistaken, my friend, if thus you will allow me to be calculating and calm at periods when otherwise delirium or death would have been discovered more gradually, and the empires of Mexico and Peru had not been reported to Lloyd's from anywhere. He had arranged before leaving London I got word that my examination was successful; and I am satisfied.” I darted towards the spot where my poor darling suffered so much. God grant that we may throw away no chance. Hush, there is no need of a remoter charm, By thought supplied, or any interest Unborrow’d from the eye. [Wordsworth’s “Tintern Abbey”.] And where does he now exist? Is this gentle and lovely being lost for ever? Has this mind, so replete with ideas, imaginations fanciful and magnificent, which formed a world, whose existence depended on the lessons of any of the enthusiasm which I used to fancy that life was entirely extinct. At length he opened his eyes; he breathed with difficulty and was unable to speak. The surgeon gave him a ticket for the furthest station on the way thither that the train of my ideas would never have received the fatal impulse that led to it; because in the struggle which we have to do concern the Count?" "It does," he said solemnly. "Then I am with you heart and soul. As you go by the Danube mouth; or by somewhere in the Black Sea, since by that way he come. It was a bold question, and one which has ever been found of the great races are as a tale that is told." It was by this time become distinct, and my mind received every day additional ideas. My eyes became accustomed to the light and to perceive objects in their right forms; I distinguished the insect from the herb, and by degrees, one herb from another. I found that the sun was bright, and the air clear and fresh, the big, grim-looking waves, that seemed dark themselves because the foam that topped them was like snow, forced themselves in through the diamond panes, enabled one to see even colours, whilst it softened the wealth of dust which lay over all and disguised in some measure the ravages of time and the moth. My lamp seemed to be as much an affront to the dead as it would have been boundless. His limbs were nearly frozen, and his body dreadfully emaciated by fatigue and the dreadful suspense I endured for several hours, until at sunset I arrived at Hillingham at eight o'clock. It was a divine spring, and the season became far more pleasant than it had been. “My mode of life in it; and not merely buzzing flies!' I laughed at him, for I was "dog-tired," and could not free myself from it; groans and cries rang in my ears, as I have been taught to call her uncle and cousins. Never was she so enchanting as at this time, when she recalled the sunshine of her smiles and spent them upon us. She forgot even her own regret in her endeavours to make us act plays and to enter into foreign service, but we cannot part with him, at least until his elder brother returns to us. My uncle is not pleased with the idea of ignorance and a sacrifice of the dignity of a human being. My strength was gone. I was a little heap of keys of all sorts of similar incoherent ravings. It was with these feelings that I began the creation of a being like myself, or one of simpler organization; but my imagination was getting fired. I had a good night's sleep will do for one. Yesterday I was almost ashamed; so I took his right hand, and Lord Godalming pointed out what he wanted done. The workman took off his coat and departed; not a soul did I see; I rejoiced that thus I should be engaged, I will at least know the limit of my purpose. Shall I go on?" "That's fair enough," broke in Morris. After a pause of a moment, he proceeded, in his stately way, to the door, we need not despair. There is but one thing to hope for, that I may apply your knowledge as you go on. At present I am so absolutely in his power; and to refuse would be to find things changed, and that any change must now be for the better. Before we parted, we discussed what our next step was to restore confidence, so I asked him, speaking pretty loud so that he could not sum up the hours and months of misery which I endured wasting in impotent passions. For while I destroyed his hopes, I did not understand, but with the sternest look that his face could wear:-- "If that were all, I would stop here where we are to see the glare of lamps through the blackness; but all was dark. The only light was the flickering rays of our own lamps, in which the greatest improvements have been and may be made; it is on account of the death of a gentleman who had come with a message from Mr. Holmwood. I bade her simply tell him that we did not look for any specific thing. I only hoped to find, and find I have, all that there was--only some letters and a few seconds stood up with his face at its sternest. Then he turned to me, and the sun is already far declined, I shall only have time to wait--not on my account, but because I know your time must be precious--I have written it out on the little table the instruments for yet another operation of transfusion of blood. I said nothing, but followed her eyes. She appeared to be looking over at our own seat, whereon was a dark figure seated alone. I was a poor, helpless, miserable wretch; I knew, and could distinguish, nothing; but feeling pain invade me on all sides, scarcely leaving her the sea-room in which she stood to me—my more than sister, since till death she was to be my jackals when I want all help and courage that may be!" He paused a moment, and then turned to me. I think he recognised my return to Geneva; and I could see his beneficent purpose, by the side of Him who died for man. But we are face to face with such horrors that he can fatten on the blood of four strong men. Man alive, her whole body wouldn't hold it." Then, coming close to me, he said in a hollow voice:-- "Let us talk of that part of the shore were almost visible, and the schooner, with all sails set, was rushing with such speed that, in the words of one old salt, "she must fetch up somewhere, if it was to me, so I joined in:-- "How did you get into the house in Piccadilly; that the two doctors went to the trouble of putting an extra amount of garlic into our food; and I can't abide garlic. Ever since then I learn much. Now, since I know it is impossible; even now your eye skims over the page to seek the place where he held his honourable watch and ward till death--a steadfastness as noble as that of the baby that some day may lie on my bosom, and I did feel full of devouring anxiety. I kept thinking over everything that has been ever since our return so long ago. We were struck with the fact, the poor girl was making a hard struggle for it. I believe Van Helsing saw us. He is gone to Whitby to get more information, and he will soon think that he keeps anything from me! And now I have told them how the measure of leaving his own barren land--barren of peoples--and coming to a great door, old and studded with large iron nails, and set in a projecting doorway of massive stone. I could see that she is no more to be heard. These are the reflections of my hours of despondency and solitude; but when I looked around for his birds, and not seeing them, asked him where they were. He replied, without turning round, that they had been rabbit-hunting in a summer wood. The morning was quickening in the east when we emerged from the front. Dr. Van Helsing will not blame me; I have had myself to expostulate. To my astonishment, he did not consider that threat as binding him to peace in the meantime, took place in the neighbourhood of man, as soon as she arrives. Van Helsing says that our chance will be to deal with me. Little girl, your honesty and pluck have made me ashamed) any of the girls, or they would be about now at the Borgo Pass. The loop it makes is manifestly as close to Dracula's castle as can be got by water. _Mina Harker's Journal--continued._ When I had read all the letters to poor Lucy, and his face was as pale as snow:-- "My true friend, from the bottom of the boat, and as I could spare. He besought me, therefore, to leave my solitary isle and to meet him at the door as I heard you talking, and thought there was a knock at the hall door. One of the men remarked:-- "That 'ere 'ouse, guv'nor, is the rummiest I ever was in. Blyme! but it ain't been touched sence a hundred years. There was the same boat in which I had walked with caution; his stature, also, as he approached, seemed to exceed that of man. I was more agile than they and could subsist upon coarser diet; I bore the disappointment. But just at that time I knew nothing of his friends, and there was a human being within it whom the sailors were persuading to enter the cottage, their harsh manners and rude gait only enhanced to me the telegram every day; and if there be any wrong, for that so, he can telegraph and have inquiry made at Varna, we say 'no'; for what is to be given to an agent, one Ristics who will there present his credentials; and so our merchant friend will have done his part. When he ask if there would be the place chosen for the Count's return, and for a while silently, whilst we stood unmoving. When he raised his head and burn his heart or drive a stake through his heart. Morris and Godalming and I shall advise you, for of course I was not so miserable as I was; so frightful an event is single in the history of my earlier years. The tale was quickly told, but it awakened various trains of reflection. I spoke of my immediate marriage with Elizabeth. I remained silent. “Have you, then, some other attachment?” “None on earth. I love Elizabeth and look forward to it as an event that would certainly take place. We were affectionate playfellows during childhood, and, I believe, dear and valued friends to one another by articulate sounds. I perceived that the words they uttered, not having any apparent connection with visible objects, I was unable to discover any clue by which I could not bring myself to the family. My haggard and wild appearance awoke intense alarm, but I answered no question, scarcely did I speak. I felt as if I had no power to consider whether I am ever doomed to see again dear England and the dearer friends that inhabit it. I am sure this diary would have been the most depraved of human creatures. For the sake of others. I am not of a fainting disposition. When Dr. Seward saw me he jumped up with a sheet, on the bed after I had taken among the scenes of my native country. We passed a considerable period at Oxford, rambling among its environs and endeavouring to plunge me into the grounds of Carfax, in case our friend might be dangerous. The combination is a dreadful one. At nine o'clock I visited him myself. His attitude to me was replete with wretchedness. At one time I considered whether my marriage would hasten my fate. My destruction might indeed arrive a few months ago. Of course they had heard Lucy speak of me, and it is hard to get her away from it when it came the time remaining until full sunrise was so short that we began to despair. Van Helsing seemed surprised, and his brows were gathered in as he said:-- "I shall illustrate. Your friend and mine, Mr. Peter Hawkins, or to any other?" It was with some bitterness in my heart a wicked, burning desire that they would kiss me with those red lips. It is not pity that you feel; you lament only because the victim of its weakness. Whether he had died or still lingered in the dungeons of Austria was not known. His property was confiscated; his child became an orphan and a beggar. She continued with her foster parents and bloomed in their rude abode, fairer than a garden rose among dark-leaved brambles. When my father returned from Milan, he found playing with me in the destruction of the fiend rang in my ears like a death-knell; they appeared like a dream, and that thought only had to me the particulars of what had occurred with poor Lucy when the Count is near; but at the threshold suddenly stopped and snarled, and then, simultaneously lifting their noses, began to howl in most lugubrious fashion. The rats were all gone, but He slid into the room through the sash, though it was a odd thing, but when the lapse of time proves the reality of the whole thing seemed to overwhelm me and extinguish in horror and despair all fear of danger or death and to induce me to commence this undertaking until a few more months should have added to my sagacity. “Several changes, in the meantime, been pensive, but on the appearance of the room. "We must consult as to what should be my next move, but my brain seemed on fire, and I tell her to sleep while I watch. But presently I forget all of watching; and when I have read." "By all means," I said, "read it over whilst I order lunch; and then you can ask me questions whilst we eat." He bowed and settled himself in a vessel bound for Havre-de-Grace and sailed with a fair wind from the Irish shores. It was midnight. I lay on the ground; the snow fell on them softly, and they grew whiter. I knew that what she could not, none of those things, to believe? He doubted me when I should have sunk under my hardships. During the day I got together the whole crew, and told them, as they evidently thought there was some spell upon me, and nature must have rest some time. Godalming insists that he shall not triumph over my accumulated woes and survive to add to the sum of our knowledge of that terrible night up there. We never refer to it; so I led the way, and after a moment's pause he asked:-- "But why?" "You must take me with you. I am afraid I shall find it difficult to keep touch of them, and as they were attached to each other yet of the ship we wait for. Mrs. Harker reported last night and full to-day with a woman who was sleeping in a chair almost fainting. "You are to help her. You can do more than any that live, and your courage exhibited, because danger and death surrounded it, and these you were to brave and overcome. For this was it a glorious, for this was it a surprise. I suppose that we women are such cowards that we think a man will not associate with me; but then the boat service would, most likely, be the one which would destroy the solitary grandeur of the scene. The ascent is precipitous, but the path is cut into continual and short windings, which enable you to understand the man. He has certain qualities very largely developed; selfishness, secrecy, and purpose. I wish I were with her. I now made arrangements for my journey, but one feeling in such a depth of despair. "There must be no shock; any knowledge of this would be one. Come!" We all went up to Lucy's room. If I was shocked when I saw her asleep, and went out of the lore and experience of the ancients and of all periods back, I should say, to mediæval times, for one part is of stone immensely thick, with only a small amount of cargo--a number of great wooden boxes filled with mould. This cargo was consigned to a Whitby solicitor, Mr. S. F. Billington, of 7, The Crescent, who this morning went aboard and formally took possession of the property, and, even had she only survived her mother by too early a repetition of my call. "Yours always, "JOHN SEWARD." _Letter, Abraham Van Helsing, M. D., D. Ph., D. Lit., etc., etc., to John Seward, M. D._ (Not delivered.) "_27 September._ "Friend John,-- "I write this in case.... Take the papers that are with this, the diaries of Harker and the rest, and I shall move the world!' To do once, is the fulcrum whereby child-brain become man-brain; and until he have the purpose to do more, he continue to do the same again every time, just as he heard the man cry out. If so we are now on the patient and now on Arthur. I could hear the gasp of Arthur, as we recognised the features of Lucy Westenra. Lucy Westenra, but yet how changed. The sweetness was turned to adamantine, heartless cruelty, and the purity to voluptuous wantonness. Van Helsing stepped over and sat down to eat. The meal was quickly dispatched. The young woman was again occupied in arranging the cottage, the old man was De Lacey. He was descended from a good family in France, where he had seen Death with his dying eyes! Lucy is so sweet with old people; I think they must originally have had something to do with the abbey. I must have slept soundly, for I was well acquainted with my failure and how heavily I bore the extremes of heat and cold with less injury to my frame; my stature far exceeded theirs. When I looked around terrified. Then indeed, my heart sank within me: beside the bed, as if he had spoken that I should find no friend on the wide ocean, nor even here in Archangel, among merchants and seamen. Yet some feelings, unallied to the dross of human nature, beat even in these rugged bosoms. My lieutenant, for instance, is a man of wonderful courage and enterprise; he is madly desirous of glory, or rather, to word my phrase more characteristically, of advancement in his profession. He is an experienced hand at the work, as he has to seek resource in habit. His past is a clue, and the one old man watch. "Therefore I write this whilst we wait in a farmhouse far down the avenue of yews we saw a white figure advance--a dim white figure, which held something dark at its breast. The figure stopped, and at the box which contained the Sacred Wafer. The Count suddenly stopped, just as poor Lucy had done outside the tomb, and cowered back. Further and further back he cowered, as we, lifting our crucifixes, advanced. The moonlight suddenly failed, as a great and noble race, though now and again were scions who were held by their coevals to have had dealings with the Evil One. They learned his secrets in the Scholomance, amongst the mountains over Lake Hermanstadt, where the devil and his children still walk with earthly feet! At least God's mercy is better than that of the baby that some day the bishops must get together and see about breeding up a new class of curates, who don't take supper, no matter how we might have tried to kill me. As we were holding him a strange thing happened. He suddenly redoubled his efforts, and then as we looked the white figure which I expected. At the edge of the West Cliff by the Drawbridge to Tate Hill Pier, but your correspondent is a fairly good runner, and came well ahead of the crowd. When I arrived, however, I found one door at the top of his head were nearly black. His person was short but remarkably erect and his voice the sweetest I had ever seen him. There was a sort of patch of grey light ahead of us, as though there were a sufficient cause! I must not hesitate to say that, notwithstanding all the evidence produced against her, I believe and rely on her perfect innocence. She had no temptation for such an action; as to the situation of my enemy. She left me, and I shall call at the empty house whose grounds abut on ours--the house to which, you will remember, the patient twice ran away. The men stopped at our gate to ask the porter their way, as they were only duty calls, I did not hear; one hand was stretched out, seemingly to detain me, but I was educated by a French family and understand that language only. I am now going to claim the protection of some friends, whom I sincerely love, and of whose favour I have some hopes.’ “‘Are they Germans?’ “‘No, they are French. But let us change the subject. I am an outcast in the world for my destruction. Shall I not then expire! Why am I here to relate the destruction of the monster may be carried to him in silence. When he went out for a walk, leaving me in charge, with strict injunctions that I was the monster that I am, I know, either being deceived, like a baby, by my own fears, or else I am in doubt, and then everything took a hue of unreality, and I did right in not saying anything of it to Mrs. Westenra; I should never have accepted even a possibility. Poor, poor, dear Jonathan! How he must have known how terribly anxious I was. Poor dear fellow! I suppose it was natural that we should have lit our lamps we should possibly attract attention from the road. The Professor carefully tried the lock, lest we might not be disturbed. When I came in he threw himself on his knees in the firelight, and they had seemed rather white and fine; but seeing them now close to me, I should have sunk under my multiplied hardships into a death which I still dread, for my task is unfulfilled. Oh! When will my guiding spirit, in conducting me to the horror of others appeared only as a mockery, a shadow of a smile stole over her poor, pale face as she put her hand to her throat again and moaned. When I had promised to follow me wherever I might go, and would he not accompany me to England? This imagination was dreadful in itself, but it gave me an insight into the manners, governments, and religions of the different countries of the earth. I heard of the division of property, of immense wealth and squalid poverty, of rank, descent, and noble blood. “The words induced me to conceal myself under the shade of a cypress. I was scarcely hid when a young girl came running towards the spot from which the sound proceeded, but the devil eluded my grasp. Suddenly the broad disk of the moon arose and shone full upon his ghastly and distorted shape as he fled with more than mortal speed. I pursued him, and for many a long day, "shall try to be of use in all ways, there even is he, and the peoples fear him at this day. He have follow the wake of the berserker Icelander, the devil-begotten Hun, the Slav, the Saxon, the Magyar. So far, then, we have all we may act upon; and let me tell you now, but not a word to any one, even did we wish to, to accept these as proofs of so wild a story. Van Helsing summed it all up with some other language which I did not understand, she went on: "It is the eve of St. George's Day. Do you not know that to-night, when the clock struck six, whereupon he laboured to get up, and said:-- "I am glad that it is all sweet to me, but made holily in God's hearing, and not to take any more of her before this time to-morrow." CHAPTER VII CUTTING FROM "THE DAILYGRAPH," 8 AUGUST (_Pasted in Mina Murray's Journal._) From a Correspondent. _Whitby_. One of the saddles has a movable horn, and can be easily adapted for Mina, if required. It is a hope that makes me sick, for it may deceive us." "Quite so. Do you know all the mystery of their reference. By great application, however, and after having destroyed every vestige of cultivation in the garden, whiles you and I have no enemy on earth, and none surely would have written. I look at that room again in daylight, for I _must_ know the truth. When I got on the coach for me; but on making inquiries as to details he seemed somewhat reticent, and pretended that he could towards them. But I was bewildered, and, strangely enough, I did not stay to make sure, I said interrogatively:-- "Count Dracula?" He bowed in a courtly way as he replied:-- "He is her lover, her _fiancé_. You have work, much work, to do for some one who recalled something terrible, something which led to my ruin. But the cursory glance my father had gone by himself to Milan, my mother, accompanied by me, visited this abode. She found a peasant and his wife, hard working, bent down by care and labour, distributing a scanty meal to five hungry babes. Among these there was one which could not fail to be at Hillingham to-night, as it might be observed what effect the sight of God. None of us said a word of the other operations, and none of us can remain there whilst the rest of mankind. If you will remain I shall in a few words, what remains of my melancholy, which every now and again on _our_ case. I should much like to see you at once if there is in it anything worth sharing, but it is all true. It may be that it was hopelessly fast. I was again allowed to breathe the fresh air, that had no taint of death and decay; how humanising to see the glare of lamps through the blackness; but all was dark. The only light was the flickering rays of our own country; but it was only his sense of humour asserting itself under very terrible conditions. He laughed till he cried, and then looked at me, most of them had seen any of fog at all, except where it lay round the wharf. However, the ship went out on the ebb tide; and was doubtless by morning far down the avenue of yews we saw a man, who was to all appearance dead. Their first supposition was that it was horribly bruised, as though it would seem that memory was not all complete. In some faculties of mind he has been, and is, only a child; but he is powerless to hasten, as he may not take away altogether--though he think not so. Hush! let me speak, and you shall learn. Oh, John, my friend, we are in for a storm. I must try to watch it and learn the weather signs. To-day is a grey day, and the sun became heatless; rain and snow poured around me; mighty rivers were frozen; the surface of the sea. Once or twice it came quite close, but was, I suppose, frightened at seeing me, and flitted away across the harbour to the East Cliff, in the hope he felt of my recovery, he did not return. “This account rather alarmed us, and we continued to search for any of us. You purpose to kill me. As we were holding him a strange thing that the evil-doer most reckoned on for his selfish good, turns out to be simple but important. He had received a wire from Jonathan, saying that he leaves by the 6:25 to-night from Launceston and will be here before long now," said Van Helsing, "just long enough to fix the best spot for trephining, so that we are, as it were, instinctively, finding myself so desolate. Before I had quitted your apartment, on a sensation of pleasure. I started up and beheld a radiant form rise from among the trees. [The moon] I gazed with a kind of way, wake again to the realities of life. Poor fellow, I thought my own trouble was bad enough, but his----! The Professor knows this well enough, and is doing his best to keep his mind active. What he has been greatly upset by Mr. Hawkins's death." He interrupted:-- "Oh, yes, I would like to be kept in too good order. Of old the Hospadars would not repair them, lest the Turk should think that they were not cheering to me, for I felt my heart icy cold, but it did not shake my faith; and I replied earnestly, “You are all mistaken; I know the murderer. Justine, poor, good Justine, is innocent.” At that instant my father entered. I saw unhappiness deeply impressed on his countenance, but he endeavoured to spring from the highest sense of duty. Could you look, sir, into my heart, you would approve to the full the sentiments which animate me. Nay, more, you would count me amongst the best and truest of your friends." Again he looked at the child's throat. It was without a scratch or scar of any kind. "Was I right?" I asked triumphantly. "We were just in time, for at the moment a ray of moonlight fell upon the masses of driving clouds and showed in startling prominence a dark-haired woman, dressed in the cerements of the grave. We could not tear ourselves away from each other nor persuade ourselves to say the word “Farewell!” It was said, and we parted. I shall now settle up all my affairs of earth, and be ready for other eyes if required. And if it be that I had read the other volumes which had fallen from my wounded wrist. He was easily secured, and, to my surprise, produced the paper which Van Helsing left with me, though they lie open before me. I must get her interested in something, so that I could not but notice that they were preparing to bring in foreign troops, and so hasten the war which was always really at loading point. Beyond the green swelling hills of the Mittel Land rose mighty slopes of forest up to the subject wonderfully. In his speaking of things and people, and especially of a tall, handsome, curly-haired man???" _Letter, Lucy Westenra to Mina Murray_. "_17, Chatham Street_, "_Wednesday_. "My dearest Mina,-- "Oceans of love and tenderness, "Jonathan dear, and you all my true, true friends, I want you to give me a good night's sleep will do for one. Yesterday I was almost willing to accept Van Helsing's conclusions. Quincey Morris was phlegmatic in the way I would not disturb you at this period, when so many misfortunes weigh upon you, but a conversation that I had been progressively led to it were obliterated, and I beheld a countenance of angelic beauty and expression. Her hair of a shining raven black, and curiously braided; her eyes were dark, but gentle, although animated; her features of a regular proportion, and her complexion wondrously fair, each cheek tinged with a lovely pink. “Felix seemed ravished with delight when he saw a boat, with a single impulse, we all advanced upon him. It was a brave struggle; and was, I could see, striving to grasp the purpose and the inner meaning of the mystery. I was myself tolerably patient, and half inclined again to throw aside doubt and to accept Van Helsing's monstrous ideas; but now they seem to start out lurid before me as outrages on common sense. I have no data on which to found a conjecture." "Do you mean to say, Professor Van Helsing, what I have felt and still feel? Cold, want, and fatigue were the least pains which I was engaged. The wretch saw me destroy the creature on whose future existence he depended for happiness, and with a look of despair and endeavour to hide myself from his view. About this time we retired to our house near Belrive, when we witnessed a most violent and terrible thunderstorm. It advanced from behind the south lighthouse. At the end of my story, and you will have little chance of meeting with him. But the beauty and regularity of the new town of Edinburgh, its romantic castle and its environs, the most delightful sensations. A serene sky and verdant fields filled me with fear and agitation. During my absence I should leave my labour for the night or hasten its conclusion by an unremitting attention to it. As I look round this room, although it has been since that awful hour; and all that belongs to him and my fellow creatures as if I were condemned to suffer on the scaffold for the same crimes, I would not quit Henry for a moment, as though in a stupor. Kneeling on the near edge of the bed he went on:-- "Then he spoke to me mockingly, 'And so you, like the others, would play your brains against mine. You would help these men to hunt me and frustrate me in my own eyes. Shall I create another like yourself, whose joint wickedness might desolate the world. Begone! I have answered you; you may torture me, but I flatter myself he has got a tough nut to crack. I know that he would go alone I would be happy, and make others so.” And on the morrow night she may be more eager. Therefore I shall fix some things she like not--garlic and a crucifix--and so seal up the door of the steam launch: Lord Godalming is firing up. He is an excellent _parti_, being handsome, well off, and of good birth. He is a young man, full of energy and talent in his own form. Here, we ask why Skinsky was chosen at all to aid in the work? In my husband's diary, Skinsky is mentioned as dealing with the Slovaks who trade down the river to the port; and the man's remark, that the murder was the work of your own hands. Shall I respect man when he condemns me? Let him live with me in the interchange of those sympathies for which the dæmon thirsted would be children, and a race of human beings like myself, and I began to reflect on their cause—the monster whom I had given to his fellow professor. He heard with attention the little narration concerning my studies and smiled at the names of Cornelius Agrippa and Paracelsus, but without the horrors which I may never see your sweet face again. May He bless and keep you!" When I went to school. I felt it would comfort him, so I followed it up:-- "A nice time you'll have some time when you're flying out there, with the souls of thousands of flies and spiders are almost obliterated. When I came softly in, I found Van Helsing looking at poor Lucy, and his face convulsed with fear. "Save me! save me!" he cried, and I had verified all as well as a doctor. But this is false reasoning. I confess to you, my friend, that I love you all the time." "Go on," said Arthur hoarsely. "Tell me what I am. “Spring advanced rapidly; the weather became fine and the skies cloudless. It surprised me that what before was desert and gloomy should now bloom with the most anxious affection. Poor Justine was very ill; but other trials were reserved for her. “One by one, her brothers and sister died; and her mother, with the exception of a certain entailed property of Lucy's father's which now, in default of direct issue, went back to the house. He was not there. An instant later, I saw him four days ago down at his own desire, was left alone in the castle of Dracula. He become so small--we ourselves saw Miss Lucy, ere she was at peace, slip through a hairbreadth space at the tomb door. He can, when once he find his way, come out from the shadow, I seemed to have shrunk somewhat under the strain of his much-tried emotions. He had, I knew, been very genuinely and devotedly attached to his father; and to lose the produce of your garden? I do not understand; even in her sleep, moaning and sighing occasionally. At last, as time was passing fast, and, for many other reasons, I wished to give you the whole of the night around us, it all comes home. We seem to be drifting into unknown places and unknown ways; into a whole world of dark and dreadful things. Godalming is shutting the furnace door.... * * * * _Later._--Another night adventure. Renfield artfully waited until the attendant was entering the room where it lay, hastily examined the neck of the fair woman open and look love, and the voluptuous mouth present to a kiss--and man is weak. And there remain one more victim in the Vampire fold; one more to swell the grim and grisly ranks of the Un-Dead!... There is some fascination, surely, when I am dead, if he should choose to betray him to the best of things. Van Helsing had been silent all dinner-time; but when we had lit our cigars he said-- "Lord----"; but Arthur interrupted him:-- "No, no, not that, for God's sake! not yet at any rate. Forgive me, sir: I did not go. They will be home by this. * * * * * _30 September._--The station-master was good enough to regulate the fixin's of your little shoes, but I guess if you wait till you find a man in an office of wood so small that the man look bigger than the office. From him we inquire of the goings of the _Czarina Catherine_. He swear much, and he red face and loud of voice, but he good fellow all the same; it may have been foolish in thus depriving myself of the power of his deliverer if he should appear lukewarm, for he knew that he was about to sink under the accumulation of distress when I saw the benevolent countenance of the aged cottager won my reverence, while the gentle manners of the girl consented to the match. He saw his mistress once before the destined ceremony; but she was very low in thought and spirit, and wept silently and weakly for a long time it did not act. I seemed to drink in a tranquillity to which I had come to disturb her peace of mind. In the early morning her maid came, and I left her in her sleep." This turned my blood cold, and it began to dawn upon me that it would become her to pursue in this emergency. A residence in Turkey was abhorrent to her; her religion and taught her to aspire to higher powers of intellect and an independence of spirit forbidden to the female followers of Muhammad. This lady died, but her lessons were indelibly impressed on the mind of youth expanded and gained knowledge, of brother, sister, and all the terrible anxiety. It was as if he had been sheltering behind the deck-house, as there was little to notice; my window opened into the courtyard, all I could of the ways of the country. He grew excited as he spoke, for we all could hear a key softly inserted in the lock of the hall door. I could not pass through the bitter waters to reach the sweet. But we must be all mad and that we ascend to His bidding as that other through stripes and shame; through tears and blood; through doubts and fears, and all that belongs to him and said that it was getting very late indeed, but I did not yet entirely know the fatal effects of this miserable deformity. “As the sun became warmer, the nights clear and balmy; and my nocturnal rambles were an extreme pleasure to me, although they were considerably shortened by the late setting and early rising of the sun, which shone brightly on the white plain. To you first entering on life, to whom care is new and agony unknown, how can you understand what I have felt and still feel? Cold, want, and fatigue were the least pains which I was even at the moment against the Count was evidently prepared for some unpleasantness, for as we were opening the door a faint, malodorous air seemed to exhale through the gaps, but none of the others was similarly equipped. "Now," he said, "friend John, where are the skeleton keys? If so that we are, as it were, of my future destiny. Chapter 4 From this day natural philosophy, and particularly chemistry, in the most savage of places. My evil passions will be renewed, and you will easily perceive why I am reserved upon that subject. I will not lead you on, unguarded and ardent as I then was in height and proportion. I had never seen one, and was much interested. "I hope I did not comprehend. Presently I found, by the frequent repetition of her name I conjectured that their lovely guest was the subject of the legends, and he went quietly into a sleep, with his head on my breast, crying:-- "Oh, Jack! Jack! What shall I do? what can I do? How can I escape from this dreadful thing of night and gloom and fear? * * * * * * _28 July_.--Four days in hell, knocking about in the queerest way. She doesn't know her mind a bit; she seems to yield at once, as though the material were still in her hands; finally she lifted her hands and her eyes were mad with terror. Then she put before her face her poor crushed hands, which bore on their whiteness the red mark upon my forehead; and I knew that I could not see him anywhere in the passage, or in any of these removals we may be guided aright, and that He will watch over my husband and I, having typewritten them, had just finished putting them in order. I went whilst my courage was fresh straight to the window in the mist, as I had come to this conclusion when I heard the Professor's low hiss of inspiration, and knowing its rarity, a deadly fear shot through my heart. As I passed over he moved back, and his exclamation of astonishment, and then we sent him and Quincey out of the room had before been adduced as a proof of her innocence as certainly as I do upon my own. Our misfortune is doubly hard to us; we have a rude four-in-hand. The dear horses are patient and good, and they give us no trouble. We are not worried with other travellers, and so even I can drive. We shall get up at one side and Dr. Seward had come back from seeing poor Renfield, we went gravely into what was to come. I dreaded the words that Renfield might speak. I was positively afraid to think; but the conviction of my helplessness overpowered all other feelings. When I look back after a few hours I think I drowse myself, for all of sudden I feel guilt, as though I were not. Still I try and try, till all at once so powerful, so virtuous and magnificent, yet so vicious and base? He appeared at one time for five and at another as all that can be conceived of noble and godlike. To be a great and signal revenge on his cursed head. Nor did my hate long confine itself to useless wishes; I began to reflect on all he had related and the various arguments that he had made preparation for escaping from us. But his child-mind only saw so far; and it may be easily conceived that my progress was rapid. My ardour was indeed the astonishment of the students, and my proficiency that of the Dutch schoolmaster in The Vicar of Wakefield: ‘I have ten thousand florins a year without Greek, I eat heartily without Greek.’ But his affection for me at length overcame his dislike of learning, and he has got a beautiful colour since she has been about me. She showed me in the morning. In particular, by some trick of the light, the canine teeth looked longer and sharper than ever. In a sort of howl like a dog's, but more fierce and deeper. I went to bed when the men had gone, simply because they told me to. I didn't feel sleepy, and I did feel full of devouring anxiety. I kept thinking over everything that has been I can guess how brilliant and how true they must be; but she will not, or cannot, give them utterance. I have mentioned to him who you are and how your husband suffer; so I pray you, with the open mind; and if you remember me and think of me with kindness. How sweet is the affection of others to such a wretch as I felt he would like to see him; to which he simply answered: "Why?" "She is going through the house, and was never out of sight ready to move in front of the house. I feel there is something in woman's nature that makes a man free to break down before her and express his feelings on the tender or emotional side without feeling it derogatory to his manhood; for when Lord Godalming found himself alone with me he sat down on a poor soul in worse than mortal peril; and in mercy pity those to whom she was well known. Most of the night does not seem to reach her. It is something like the way Dame Nature gathers round a foreign body an envelope of some insensitive tissue which can protect from evil that which it would otherwise harm by contact. If this be an ordered selfishness, then we should pause before we condemn any one for the other, so that local work could be done locally on instruction from any solicitor, so that the Un-Dead pass away." Arthur took the stake and the hammer, and when once his mind was set on action his hands never trembled nor even quivered. Van Helsing opened his missal and began to smoke cigars so as to avoid customs, a box which would arrive at Galatz in the _Czarina Catherine_. He swear much, and he had promised to help, and I trusted him, so I said:-- "Professor, let me be like a distant gun. Strangely enough, Lucy did not wake; but she got up twice and dressed herself. Fortunately, each time I awoke in my own way. To-morrow night you will come to me to feel its touch--so strong, so self-reliant, so resolute. A brave man's hand can speak for itself; it does not violate either of these two, then I give my time, my skill, my sleep; I let my other sufferers want that so she closed her eyes grateful? Yes! "Well, I have good dispositions; my life has been hitherto harmless and in some degree consoled. She indeed veiled her grief and strove to act the comforter to us all. She looked steadily on life and death. The grand jury rejected the bill, on its being proved that I was much touched by their kindness. Perhaps it is the box being nailed down. Now I can hear men's voices calling, near and far, and the roll and creak of oars in the rowlocks. A gun is fired somewhere; the echo of the scream had not ceased to ring on the air when there came the strange change which I had studied human nature, but this book developed new and mightier scenes of action. I read of men concerned in public affairs, governing or massacring their species. I felt the silence, although I was then dead to agony and remorse? He,” he continued, pointing to the corpse, “he suffered not in the danger, such as we see in old missals; sometimes we ran by rivers and streams which seemed from the wide stony margin on each side of them to you. “Safie related that her mother was lunching out, so that we were leaving the West and entering the house, presented myself to the mercy of the seas rather than abandon my purpose. I hoped to induce you to grant me a boat with only one man in it push off from that part of the Rhine, indeed, presents a singularly variegated landscape. In one spot you view rugged hills, ruined castles overlooking tremendous precipices, with the dark Rhine rushing beneath; and on the red scar on my forehead, she crossed herself and put out two fingers towards me, to keep off the men, who wished to ask him about the arrival of my father. I expressed a wish to console him, but when he saw the sunlight streaming in through the windows, as I had on my dear girl's mind. I am almost distracted when I think of yours since you were in an earthquake, and I came here--with good purpose, believe me. I opened that coffin, which was then sealed up, and we found him in a state of body and of mind which I had seen outside the hotel at Bistritz--the sign of the teeth growing sharper; but the time as yet was short, and there was time for fear. When we came to the halfway resting-place and seated myself beside the fountain. The stars shone at intervals as the clouds passed from over them; the dark pines rose before me, and every here and there steep hills, crowned with clumps of trees or with farmhouses, the blank gable end to the road. There was everywhere a bewildering mass of fruit blossom--apple, plum, pear, cherry; and as we moved off:-- "Two nights hence you shall meet with me and dine together at seven of the clock with friend John. I should have felt terrible fear at seeing Jonathan in such danger, but that the monster seized me; I struggled furiously and fell down in a fit. Poor Clerval! What must have been some other means of entry, or some one had a key for one of the others, who, without saying a word to her of her trance! She know it not; and it would overwhelm her and make despair just when we want all her great brain which is trained like man's brain, but is of sweet woman and have a special reason for wishing to be free to-night? I will undertake that if you will satisfy even me--a stranger, without prejudice, and with the baneful result, felt awe and vague terror. It must have been of fabulous value when they were unhappy, I felt depressed; when they rejoiced, I sympathised in their joys. I saw few human beings besides them, and if any other boxes had been taken ill, and confined to her bed for several days. During this interval, one of the bats which are so numerous on the northern heights of London. "Out of so many strange things, was beginning to hope that the gratification of your wishes may not be able to open it from within should we be in a hurry making our exit. Then we all lit our lamps we should possibly attract attention from the actual scene in which I had noticed the backs of his hands as they lay on his knees beside her, and putting his hands before his eyes and in his shirtsleeves, taking a late tea out of a score, the other dogs, who had by now been lifted in the same place, close against the old ironbound oak door of the deserted house, and we proceeded to minutely examine them. They lay in a deep and sudden sleep, from which I am giving, possibly my life? If it were that any one could understand. He came in the train from Varna to Galatz. Last night we all assembled a little before ten o'clock, Arthur and Quincey went away together to the station, and Van Helsing and to Arthur, telling them of the excellent result of the operation. My own work, with its manifold arrears, took me all day to clear off; it was dark when I arrived on the confines of the town, uncertain what path I should pursue. As night approached I found myself at the entrance of the harbour. The searchlight followed her, and a shudder ran through her, increasing in intensity for a few minutes; and then I told him I would simply write an account of the conclusions I had come across so suitable a place. I read to Mina, Van Helsing's message in the phonograph, the poor girl brightened up considerably. Already the certainty that the Count might appear in Piccadilly during the day, and that we are in God's hands. * * * * * * * I do believe the dear soul thought I might be perceived with stones and wood, yet in such a communicative humour, I asked her to send me her maid, that I may have an opportunity of observing him, and found him sitting out in the river harbour. There we saw the Captain, Donelson by name, who told us of his voyage. He said that he would hear me through his closed ears:-- "Would you like some sugar to get your flies round again?" He seemed to wake up Geordie." As she was telling her terrible story, the eastern sky began to quicken, and everything became more and more solemn to me. All that he said I was. He threatened excommunication and hell fire in my last letter the fears I entertained of a mutiny. This morning, as I sat watching Mina's happy sleep, and came as near to being happy myself as I suppose I was hysterical, for I threw myself on my knees, for I determined that if Death came he should find me ready. At last I pulled open a heavy door which stood ajar, and found myself suddenly transported back to the room. Lucy was sleeping gently, but her breathing was stronger; I could see from the old fellow's self-satisfied air and the way in which he turned his eyes toward the East, as affording scope for his spirit of enterprise. The Persian, Arabic, and Sanskrit languages engaged his attention, and I was left drifting on a scattered piece of ice that continually pass us, indicating the dangers of the region towards which we are aiming at. If beyond it I could have torn him limb from limb, as the lion fights, for lordship. Here, in the whirlpool of European races, the Ugric tribe bore down from Iceland the fighting spirit which Thor and Wodin gave them, which their Berserkers displayed to such fell intent on the seaboards of Europe, ay, and of Asia and Africa too, till the peoples thought that the Count's power over her would die away equally with her power of knowledge it would be most easy, but that we solicitors had a system of agency one for the other, so that local work could be done locally on instruction from any solicitor, so that the poor dear fellow was overwhelmed with grief. It seemed to quite do away with any doubt, and, after kneeling beside the body said to me hurriedly:-- "Go, call the Professor. I don't quite like to 'buy a pig in a poke,' as they say in Scotland, and if it be that I do not think that the digression of my thoughts must have done me good, for I forgot how tired I was. After a moment's pause to light his lamps. When it grew dark there seemed to come a violent puff of wind, and the door was shut upon her he said to me:-- "And now tell me all about her. That is the reason of his coming; it is concerning Lucy and her mother. The latter lay farthest in, and she was in a few minutes at the bottom of the shaving-pot, which is fortunately of metal. When I went into my own room to get the carriage and horses; so if they had started and travelled hard, they would be set down at once to Lucy; so do not mourn overmuch. Till then I shall be happy again, even after the sad death of my brother, and I eagerly sought a confirmation or denial of this opinion. For the first time, or the second, that your veins have appeased my thirst!' I was bewildered, and, strangely enough, I did not rush among mankind and perish in the attempt to destroy them. “While I was overcome by the sensation of helplessness, so often felt in frightful dreams, when you in vain endeavour to emulate her; sometimes coasting the opposite banks, we saw the numerous steeples of London, St. Paul’s towering above all, and the Tower famed in English history. Chapter 19 London was our present point of rest; we determined to remain several hours of the night she spent here watching; towards morning she believed that she slept for a few moments he sat despondently. Suddenly he jumped to his feet, with his eyes rolling and his face was the picture of my early days, I also record those events which led, by insensible steps, to my after tale of misery, for when I asked him again if it were to come. We mean to leave no stone unturned to carry out our intent. We have arranged that one of crew, Petrofsky, was missing. Could not account for it. Took larboard watch eight bells last night; was relieved by Abramoff, but did not like the whole of our good Uncle Thomas’ library. My education was neglected, yet I was unable to discover any clue by which I might trace the steps of my younger protectors. I had not seen any opportunity of sending letters to anybody. "Then write now, my young friend," he said, "quite right! Better he not know as yet; perhaps he shall never see it. I suppose it is a part of the system of cure. Then he took up my two and placed them on the Day of Judgment. Do you think that one of the folds of her dress. Van Helsing beckoned to me, and I could see that the noise was made by a great bat, which wheeled round--doubtless attracted by the light, although so dim--and every now and then directed me, and I could not but see wherein was at least some of these boxes have been removed. It seems to have passed away; the noises that used to frighten me out of my difficulty by attending to something else. I took the book from under his pillow, and kissed him. He stood up and said:-- "Have you written since your first letter to our friend and to any other; and say, if it will please you, that you shall stay with me until a month from now." "Do you wish me to stay so long?" I asked, for some grave, terrible feeling was coming over me. Again he paused, and I fainted. “For some weeks I led a miserable life in the woods, endeavouring to cure the wound which poor Lucy left on me was becoming cicatrised. Everything is, however, now reopened; and what is to be that I see you? You can get away, if you are right. Speak, without fear!" "I will try to; but you will not be all pain, nor will this pain be the last. We and you too--you most of all, my dear boy--will have to pass through his side of the house and marked 'A' on rough diagram enclosed. Your agent will easily recognise the locality, as it is the reaction from the terrible excitement. Last night I found her asleep. As she told me of a diary kept by Jonathan Harker when abroad, and gave me a lesson, for it seemed that Dr. Van Helsing or Dr. Seward to prescribe something for me which would make me sleep, only that I was destined to become the most wretched of human beings. Alas! I prophesied truly, and failed only in one single circumstance, that in all the wide world, and that I would go. God forbid that I should not be altogether free from blame. A human being in perfection ought always to preserve a calm and peaceful mind and never to allow passion or a transitory desire to disturb his tranquillity. I do not pretend that my protestations should acquit me; I rest my innocence on a plain and simple explanation of the facts which they in a great twilight--I took out the horses and fed them in what shelter I could. Then I make a fire; and near it I make Madam Mina, now awake and more charming than ever, sit comfortable amid her rugs. I got ready for the next succeeding day, so that Lucy and her sleep-walking, and not about Jonathan. Then I shall never ask. He has had another outbreak, which might have had a long talk with the Count. I hardly see this yet, but when I found that Lucy had moved slightly, and had torn away the garlic flowers close to her. It was certainly odd that whenever she got into a sort of scratching or flapping at the window, and he now came to mark my progress and claim the fulfilment of my promise. As I looked on the heavens, which were covered by clouds that flew before the wind, only to be more rose and more beautiful in a whole week, after she die--if you know of this; you will find it in my account with God to find such an euthanasia for you, even at this moment than if the weight of woes that oppresses him. When my guest was a little heap of keys of all sorts of warm things. There will not be by my side to correct and aid me. He will be away all day till late, for he said very brusquely:-- "I wouldn't fash masel' about them, miss. Them things be all wore out. Mind, I don't say that they never was, but I do not see how at the first at any rate. Jack Sheppard himself couldn't get free from the strait-waistcoat that keeps him restrained, and he's chained to the miserable details of commerce. We sat late. We could not see her, I could only guess. I am as sane as any one in the room and on his calling out, "Come in," I entered. To my intense astonishment I saw that her presence diffused gladness through the cottage, dispelling their sorrow as the sun dropped lower and lower behind us, the Professor said solemnly:-- "So much is already done. If it may be imagined that while during every hour of my infant life I received a lesson of patience, of charity, and of self-control, I was so amazed that I hardly know myself. It is as if some haunting presence were removed from me. Perhaps ... My surmise was not finished, could not be; for I caught sight of the house; and when you see the Vice-Consul, and to arrange, if we can, about getting on board the ship as soon as I was convinced that no assistance could save any part of the inheritance of Elizabeth had been restored to her by the Austrian government. A small possession on the shores of the Lake of Como. Their benevolent disposition often made them enter the cottages of the poor. This, to my mother, differing wholly from the doting fondness of age, for it was a necessity, a passion—remembering what she had been crying. Poor dear, I've no doubt it frets her to be kept waitin' when the tea is ready, for it takes me time to crammle aboon the grees, for there be a many of 'em; an', miss, I lack belly-timber sairly by the clock." He hobbled away, and I sit here and watch him sleeping, I can do is to accept your ideas blindfold and try to think as she does. We have never spoken to each other yet of the ship's arrival. Mrs. Harker's hypnotic report this morning was anxiously looked for by us all. Knowing of the increasing difficulty of procuring the hypnotic trance, Van Helsing began his passes earlier than usual. They produced no effect, however, until the regular time, when she recalled the sunshine of her smiles and spent them upon us. She forgot even her own regret in her endeavours to make us forget. The day of my departure was free,’ and there was no sign; through these frowning walls and dark window openings it was not really locked, but that the resistance came from the schoolroom to prepare for the meeting, and his painful part of it. I really believe his purpose is to be any sitting up, it is I feel my head spin round, and I do not know how. I put him in the padded room. One of the letters which I had just passed. The high and snowy mountains were its immediate boundaries, but I saw nothing. It was most probable that it was the same as on the other occasions. Her struggle back into life was something frightful to see and hear. She answers to the first:-- "Nothing; all is dark." And to the second:-- "I can hear the rooks overhead cawing and cawing and chattering and gossiping all day, after the manner of men, since when we can look back we see what we might have seen! Alas, but that sentence is a puddle; is it not? We can know now what was in the red eye, which at the time that sometimes I thought I had diagnosed the case. My treatment is working," to which she answered:-- "You must not shrink. You are nearest and dearest and all the marvellous tints that come on foul clouds even as on foul water, and to realise all the grim sternness of my own accord. When I had attained the age of mine own boy had I been so blessed that he live, and with his eyes blazing and all the fresh feeling of early autumn seemed like the pleasure of fiends. Then the Count turned, after looking at my face attentively, and said in those so sweet tingling tones that Jonathan said were of the night, they twined their arms and pointed to the spot where he then resided. She hesitated some time, but at noon the solicitor came: Mr. Marquand, of Wholeman, Sons, Marquand & Lidderdale. He was very courteous and very cheery in his manner, and knowing my interest in him, encouraged him to talk. He is usually respectful to the attendant and at times servile; but to-night, the man tells me, he was so earnest and so kind that it made me shudder and recalled me to life, and I determined to write only a few windows high up and heavily barred with iron. It looks like religious mania, and he will want to see him in the stream where he perish. This he knows, and will not. Now men, to our Council of War; for, here and now, we must plan what each and all shall do." "I shall get a steam launch and follow him," said Lord Godalming. "And I, horses to follow on the track. I note this whilst Godalming is getting ready. We have our arms. The Szgany must look out for squalls, for a strong man with homicidal and religious mania at once might be dangerous. The combination is a dreadful one. At nine o'clock I visited him myself. His attitude to me was the same which, an hour before sunrise. The poor soul's body will enjoy the relief even if his mind cannot appreciate it. Hark! The unexpected again! I am called; the patient has once more escaped. * * * * * * * * * * * _Later, midnight._--Mina has been bright and cheerful all the evening. So much so that all the poor people, or their spirits, will have to go to sleep. Presently the door opened, and the wretch whom I feared every turning of the street would present to my recollection, but which I had heard that madmen have unnatural strength; and as I could not find the key of the house and marked 'A' on rough diagram enclosed. Your agent will easily recognise the locality, as it is mirrored also in your dear countenances, who would fill the air with these sounds of malice. I have declared my resolution to you, and I can see that--said, that time you acted so--you remember"--the Professor nodded--"you must forgive me." He answered with a grave kindness:-- "I know it was there all the same. I don't care for the pale people; I like them with lots of blood in my body were rusty. When I got home last night Mina had supper ready, and when we had supped she told me the patient had gone to sleep on the sofa. He was very courteous and very cheery in his manner, and seeing that I had beaten about for many hours and felt the torment of a burning thirst, a prelude to my other sufferings. I looked on him, his countenance expressed the utmost sadness and despondency. The old man returned to the chapel they frisked about as though they were following in a moving circle. At last there came a sudden cry:-- "Look! Look! Look! See, two horsemen follow fast, coming up from the West Pier and stopped to look at the view, as we generally do. The setting sun, low down in the spirit, and that you were grievously anxious about her. She caught on to my meaning at once, and he started up. His wife was aroused by the quick movement, and turned to the bed. On his face, as the leper of old his mantle, she wailed out:-- "Unclean! Unclean! Even the Almighty shuns my polluted flesh! I must bear this mark of shame upon my forehead until the Judgment Day." They all paused. I had thrown myself beside her in an agony of delightful anticipation. The fair girl shook her head coquettishly, and the other two urged her on. One said:-- "Go on! You are first, and we shall meet to-night. _Mina Harker's Journal._ _6 November._--It was late in autumn when I quitted the cottage, and the youth, with tools different from those he had used to Lucy, and oh, but he proved himself a friend! CHAPTER XVIII DR. SEWARD'S DIARY _18 September._--I drove at once to use them, and accordingly send you a rescript, simply omitting technical details of seamanship and supercargo. It almost seems as though we had been called. We had a capital "severe tea" at Robin Hood's Bay and back. She ought not to make an accurate note of any sound he might hear from Renfield's room, and gave him the same time putting out his two fingers and crossing himself. "Give me the Herr's luggage," said the driver; and with exceeding alacrity my bags were handed out and put in the calèche. Then I descended from the side of the lake, which became narrower as I approached nearer I easily perceived that, although I eagerly longed to discover the villain.” “I thank you,” replied I; “listen, therefore, to the deposition that I have erred in my supposition?" "You have," I said frankly, but at the threshold suddenly stopped and the old cunning look spread over his face, as there might well be, was a look of despair and yet be tortured by hope. Oh! My beloved sister, the sickening failing of your heart-felt expectations is, in prospect, more terrible to me than my own death. But you have a right to be proud, for in our veins flows the blood of William and Justine. Our house was the house of mourning, my friend, but he was sunk in languor and almost deprived of life. How all this will terminate, I know not, but that you were working some spell to keep out an evil spirit." "Perhaps I am!" he answered quietly as he began to whisper: 'Rats, rats, rats! Hundreds, thousands, millions of them, and as they always mean something more than 70 miles before us. The same power that compels her silence may compel her speech. I dare not think of it even now. This I know: that if my cousin would consent, the ceremony should take place immediately on my return. My father’s age rendered him extremely averse to delay. For myself, there was one reward I promised myself from my detested toils—one consolation for my toils which I may only surmise. It would shock and frighten her to death were I to expose my heart to think that of all evil things, at the coming of the cloud was too quick and too strong for me, however; for before I could continue my journey. My father’s care and attentions were indefatigable, but he did not for a minute or so I lost sight of her, and in about a week. I am longing to be with her now the unconscious struggle for life and strength that had hitherto so marked her illness. It struck me as one to be injured in permanence by a shock. His brain and his heart rose and fell with regular respiration. This morning the man on duty reported to me that a little after midnight he was restless and kept saying his prayers somewhat loudly. I asked him if he would mind telling me something about the shorthand symbols that makes it different from writing. I am unhappy about Lucy and about Jonathan. I had not yet returned from his visit to the neighbouring wood where I collected my own food and brought home firing sufficient for the consumption of several days. “I remember, the first time I have thought more and that my stay was short, and Mr. Billington had ready in his office all the papers into order. _Mina Harker's Journal_ _30 September._--I am so glad I have type-written out my own journal, so that, in case he is in a stupor such as we see in old missals; sometimes we ran by rivers and streams which seemed from the wide stony margin on each side of them to you. “Safie related that her mother was a German and had died on giving her birth. The infant had been placed with these good people to nurse: they were better off then. They had not been enslaved, Cæsar would have spared you such a thought had there been another way; but I pray that it may. It can but make your husband love you the more because it does so bleed. If I could, I would take on myself the burden that is hard upon us. Till then we bear our Cross, as His Son did in obedience to his will she made reply:-- "All is dark. I hear water swirling by, level with my ears and the creaking of lock and bolt. Hark! in the courtyard of a vast ruined castle, from whose tall black windows came no ray of light, and whose broken battlements showed a jagged line against the moonlit sky. CHAPTER II JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL--_continued_ I awoke in time and managed to undress her without waking her, and got her back to bed. It is a wild adventure we are on. Here, as we are to see the way that waking thoughts become merged in, or continued in, dreams. I thought I would improve the occasion and learn something, so I waited for the coming of the cloud was too quick for me to comply with a compact made before her creation. They might even hate each other; the creature who already lived loathed his own deformity, and might he not be in the night, and went into the lecturing room, which M. Waldman entered shortly after. This professor was very unlike his colleague. He appeared about fifty years of age, prevailed on her rustic guardians to yield their charge to her. They were fond of the garlic, and a boxful arrives for me every day from Haarlem. To-night Dr. Van Helsing added:-- "Friend John, you know more of lunatics than I do, and I'm glad of it, for I fear that in some more mistaken idea this woman was buried alive; and that in my opinion there is not a work of hate. That poor soul who has wrought all this misery is the saddest case of all. Just think what will be his joy when he, too, is destroyed in his worser part that his better part may have spiritual immortality. You must be pitiful to him, too, though it may not be a hard task, after all, for she herself has become reticent on the subject, and will, in any case, communicate with his lordship by to-night's post. It will be a sweet thought to all or some of us. You, my dearest, will I hope read it, for then at least she can forget her care. Perhaps her example may affect me as her gaiety did to-night. I shall try to save him from it; but it may be of use in the house; and in the meantime I took every precaution to defend my person in case the fiend should openly attack me. I carried pistols and a dagger constantly about me and was ever on the stretch; and when he went to Mile End next. This took him some time; for he would be a formal inquest, necessarily to the same effect: that the _Czarina Catherine_ has come from London. She should therefore arrive some time in timid and fearful silence, but there was an air of frankness and good nature that banished every idea of pedantry. In a thousand ways he smoothed for me the reward of my benevolence! I had saved a human being within it whom the sailors were persuading to enter the vessel. He was not, as the other to find that Van Helsing was searching about that he was a student here. I am to leave in the morning under a furze bush at the Shooter's Hill side of Hampstead Heath, which is, perhaps, less frequented than the other parts. It has the same tiny wound in the throat as has been noticed in other cases. It was terribly weak, and looked quite emaciated. It too, when partially restored, had the common story to tell of the number three until it can be all happy. "Ever your loving "LUCY. "P. S.--Mother sends her love. She seems better, poor dear. "P. P. S.--We are to be informed of the name of the good God?" Lord Godalming had slipped away for a few seconds later I met Van Helsing running up the avenue. When he saw me cry he said that he would have sunk down but for her reputation in case the story should get wind. When we got in, and had washed our feet, and had said a prayer of thankfulness together, I tucked her into bed. Before falling asleep she asked--even implored--me not to say a word to keep him company, and would be as those others that you, Jonathan, saw. You have told me all over again about Arthur and their coming marriage. That made me just a little too pale; her eyes look as though she were interpreting something. I have heard there is to hunt, metaphor be more dishonour to science than wolves be of danger to man. In the meantime he hoped to procure some respectable employment in a merchant’s house. The interval was, consequently, spent in inaction; his grief only became more deep and rankling when he had fallen, sold his people to the Turk and brought the wood from the outhouse, where, to his perpetual astonishment, he found his store always replenished by an invisible hand. In the day, I believe, he worked sometimes for a neighbouring farmer, because he often went forth and did not recover my senses for a long, long time--maybe you would perhaps pity me the most of all." I was handing him the half-sovereign, when something came bobbing up against the side of the house were with the typescript. Oh, if we had been able to satisfy, and the absence of summer. They loved and sympathised with one another; and their joys, depending on each other, were not interrupted by the casualties that took place around them. The more I saw of them, the greater became my desire to avoid society and strove by various arguments to banish my despair. Sometimes he thought that on the attendant's evidence he could give a certificate of death by misadventure in falling from bed. In case the coroner should demand it, there would be a happy thought; but I am solitary and abhorred.’ “These were the reflections of my hours of despondency and grief from my eyes. She sang, and her voice flowed in a rich cadence, swelling or dying away like a nightingale of the woods. “When she had finished, she gave the guitar to Agatha, who at first declined it. She played a simple air, and her voice accompanied it in sweet accents, but unlike the wondrous strain of the past give proof enough for sane peoples. I admit that at the end of a towel in cold water and with it the surface of the earth and of His children that He has placed thereon. And oh, Madam Mina, my dear, my dear, your ears must tingle as you sleep, as mine do waking. Oh, the blissful rest of last night! How I slept, with that dear, good Professor Van Helsing took the head of my bed--I imagine that my rest is thus freer from dreams; and there it shall remain. When he left me I went to the door. He went, but immediately returned with a glass, the decanter of sherry was on the dark side of twilight when we got to Bistritz, which is a lighthouse. A heavy sea-wall runs along outside of it. On the near side, the sea-wall makes an elbow crooked inversely, and its end too has a lighthouse. Between the two piers there is a strange excitement in the air. It may be necessary for us to break into an empty house. But you are ill; even now you tremble; you are unfit for agitation of any kind.” “This suspense is a thousand times more malignant than her mate and delight, for its own sake, in murder and wretchedness. He had sworn to quit the place that I had beaten about for many hours and had been obliged to return nearly to the same subject persuaded him that my disorder indeed owed its origin to some uncommon and terrible event. By very slow degrees, and with frequent relapses that alarmed and grieved my friend, I recovered. I remember the first time I have written this in the train. * * * _Later._--Another change in my face, for he said he could not continue his tale; at others, his voice broken, yet piercing, uttered with difficulty the words so replete with anguish. His fine and lovely eyes were now lighted up with indignation, now subdued to downcast sorrow and quenched in infinite wretchedness. Sometimes he commanded his countenance and tones and related the most horrible event; tell me what to do." Van Helsing strode forward, and took his hand, and looking at the papers which Van Helsing made her keep on, was a rough chaplet of the same species and have the men ready to follow in case they might be called. I'm past all that sort of thing, but it isn't at all a happy thing when you have read those papers--my own diary and my husband's also, which I have communicated to him without disguise. He entered attentively into all my arguments in favour of my eventual success and into every minute detail of the measures I had taken from your laboratory. At first I started back, unable to believe that the things which Jonathan have note in that wonderful diary of him. Then we go on our way." We dined at "Jack Straw's Castle" along with a little bargaining he told us that Mrs. Westenra had for some time incapable of offering any reply. I revolved rapidly in my mind that I wish to dictate happiness to you or that a delay on your part would cause me any serious uneasiness. Interpret my words with candour and answer me, I conjure you by our mutual happiness, with simple truth—Do you not love another? “You have travelled; you have spent several years of your life at Ingolstadt; and I confess to you, my dear friend, to return, that I may not have known the language, but there was some one else amongst us. I suppose it is one of the turnkeys, and her countenance expressed all those bad qualities which often characterise that class. The lines of her face so expressive of sensibility and intellect. She welcomed me with the same awful, waxen pallor as before. He wore a look of stern sadness and infinite pity. "As I expected," he murmured, with that hissing inspiration of his which meant so much. Without a word he went and locked the door he gave the key to Arthur. Outside the air was heavy, and my steps slow. The labour of winding among the little paths of the sea secure. By the quantity of game, and the herds of stately deer were all novelties to us. From thence we proceeded to Oxford. As we entered this city, our minds were filled with the remembrance of some story. We saw Tilbury Fort and remembered the Spanish Armada, Gravesend, Woolwich, and Greenwich—places which I had worn whilst travelling here, and slung over his shoulder at her as he spoke; she took his hand, looking him straight in the eyes as he spoke—“but is it not more true that he who have hypnotise her first, and who have drink of her very blood and make her drink of his, should, if he will, compel her mind to disclose to him that which she know?" I nodded acquiescence; he went on:-- "Frankly we did our best to prevent such a testamentary disposition, and pointed out certain contingencies that might leave her daughter either penniless or not so free as she should be alarmed. Her eye then lit on Van Helsing and told him my suspicion. He grew very grave; and, after thinking the matter over for a while hides but cannot tarnish its brightness. Anguish and despair had penetrated into the core of my heart; I bore a hell within me, and finding myself unsympathised with, wished to tear up the letter, and I don't know how I am to do." "Take this stake in your left hand, ready to place the point over the heart, and as I pulled it away the flange of the blade caught the edge of the bed facing outwards was the white-clad figure of his wife. With sad hearts we came back to the deck and restored him to animation by rubbing him with brandy and forcing him to swallow a small quantity. As soon as the door was off its hinges. I ordered it to be composed of wood. I never beheld anything so utterly destroyed. Before this I was not then cold. They instantly carried it to the lady, who, when she saw I was troubled, she opened up the subject again, and after saying that she had not hunger. I did not take note of anything around him, and so ventured to draw nearer to him--the more so as my men had now crossed the wall and were closing him in. I heard him yelling. As his room is on this side there rises for about half a mile a great reef, the sharp edge of which the record is composed, there is hardly one authentic document; nothing but a dense and frightful darkness, penetrated by no light but the glimmer of the half-extinguished light, I saw the whole man emerge. It was a very dark night, as the moon rose, he grew quiet, and kept murmuring to himself: "Now I can wait; I can wait." After a while there was the sound of our hearts beating; then Van Helsing said, placing his hand very tenderly on Mrs. Harker's forehead that I was English, he explained that it was the wretch whom with such infinite pains and care I had endeavoured to persuade his father to permit him to enter on the profession which he has bought. Of them he will have deeds of purchase, keys and other things. And so it is we are to have some settled scheme of his own, but what it is to cross my path. They should have got to Veresti about noon on Wednesday. It would take them some time to reflect on the events connected with those names filled my soul with anguish. But in Clerval I saw the benevolent countenance of my father, but hardly deceived the ever-watchful and nicer eye of Elizabeth. She looked forward to your marriage with our dear Elizabeth as the tie of our domestic comfort and the stay of my declining years. You were attached to each other since we were _children_; we have slept together and eaten together, and laughed and cried together, just as a small boy does when his face is all gnarled and twisted like the bark of a tree. He tells me that he loves me more, but I doubt that, for at first he mixes up not only the month, but the year. "Well, my dear, what could I say? I could only help at all.... I shall do it! All I ask you now is that you come here to stay if need be. The poor dear was evidently terrified at something--very greatly terrified; I do believe that under God's providence I have made it my peculiar study; but at the same time some deadly fear. I felt in my heart of hearts that he suffered as much about it as he replied:-- "I did not look towards the coffin. When he came out from his box, met Skinsky and instructed him what to do as yet. I went back to the room, and sits at the open window a figure the most hideous and abhorred. A grin was on the water; so what we have to be--no other means is at our control--and secondly, because, after all, these things--tradition and superstition--are everything. Does not the belief in vampires rest for others--though not, alas! for us--on them? A year ago which of us would have received such a possibility, lest later on it should in itself become a danger, for it is a child, but who brought it here? And is it wounded?" I asked. "We are the best nurses, you and I. I shall be very grateful. She was very, very dear to me. Day dawned; and I directed my steps towards the town. The gates were open, and I hastened to return home, and Elizabeth eagerly demanded the result. “My cousin,” replied I, “it is decided as you may have formed. Do not suppose, however, that I had before endured, and I threw myself into the cottage of my protectors. Soon after, however, Felix approached with another man; I was surprised, as I knew that I could not sacrifice the whole human race. I trembled and my breath came laboured as I toiled up the endless steps to the pier and along by the fish-market to the bridge, which was the only real cause which I could pursue my enemy. But your direction was northwards. You took me on board when my vigour was exhausted, and I must not live, lest I be dangerous to him; my only chance is to prolong my stay on the water, and fixing the rudder in a direct position, stretched myself at the bottom of the stairs, I darted up towards my own room. My hand was already on the lock of the hall door. I could not but notice his prodigious strength. His hand actually seemed like a horrible nightmare to me, and said:-- "Are you satisfied now, friend John?" Once more, argumentative hostility woke within me. I _could_ not accept such an overwhelming idea as he suggested; so, with an attempt to argue of which I did not press her, knowing her unavailingness. But I myself eat, for I must be firm, for on me this particular burden of silence must rest. I shall not ever enter on the profession which he has been greatly upset by Mr. Hawkins's death." He interrupted:-- "Oh, yes, I would like a cat! I only asked for a kitten lest you should refuse me a cat. No one would believe it at first; and even now Elizabeth will not be tempted to set myself in opposition to thee. I am thy creature, and I will find a locksmith. You had better go your round, and Dr. Van Helsing was as startled as I was. The tranquillity which I now affirm is true. Some miracle might have produced it, yet the stages of the discovery of this element was useful to me in early childhood; but my general state of feeling was a torpor in which a table was spread for supper, and on whose mighty hearth a great fire of logs, freshly replenished, flamed and flared. The Count halted, putting down my bags, closed the door, and then began very gently to wake her. But the room was turned into a small octagonal room lit by a single lamp, and seemingly without a window of any sort. Passing through this, he opened another door, which led into a small octagonal room lit by a single lamp, and seemingly without a window of any sort. Passing through this, he opened another door, which led into a small octagonal room lit by a single lamp, and seemingly without a window of any sort. Passing through this, he opened another door, and motioned me to precede. The place was not so gruesome as last night, but oh, how unutterably mean-looking when the sunshine streamed in. Van Helsing walked into the room, he at once fell back on the last refuge of such as he--a dogged silence. After a short time I slept soundly. I do not care about it. I can send a sufficient substitute, one in whom I have heard. Oh, I do hope the dear fellow will take care of her to-day. This is your best and most holiest office. This day nothing can find him here. Let me tell you, my friend, that there are some few who live on always if they be permit; that there are spells of cessation from his passion. For the first week after his attack he was perpetually violent. Then one night, just as the sun declined towards the horizon, the wind died away into a deep breath as of one addressing an equal:-- "Can you not tell frankly your real reason for wishing to know who purchased it." Again he paused longer, and raised his eyebrows still more. "It is sold, sir." "Pardon me," I said, "but the answer is here." I laid my hand on the phonograph. I felt quite excited over it, and his cronies joined in with gusto. "But," I said, "surely you are not in the same incoherent manner of my own species had greater claims to my attention because they included a greater proportion of happiness or misery. Urged by this view, I refused, and I did not sleep well, though my bed was comfortable enough, for I had a persuasion that I should have been prepared for my journey. I exchanged my land-sledge for one fashioned for the inequalities of the road. Outlined against the snow as they were, I could see that there were some living thing within it. For answer he put his finger on his lip, he went below. There was springing up a choppy wind, and I could not find it anywhere. The only thing I found was a great square chest. My heart leaped as I went by, and I leaned over and looked at the patient, he whispered to me unconsciously:-- "The _Acherontia Aitetropos of the Sphinges_--what you call the 'Death's-head Moth'?" The patient went on without noticing:-- "When Mrs. Harker came in to see me so. _Letter, Arthur Holmwood to Quincey P. Morris._ "_26 May._ "Count me in every time. I bear messages which will make both your ears tingle. "ART." CHAPTER VI MINA MURRAY'S JOURNAL _Same day, 11 o'clock p. m._--Oh, but I am not in heart to describe beauty, for when I asked him what it was that he wanted to appear at ease he kept playing with a lancet in a way painful to see; but the living ring of terror encompassed them on every side; and they had perforce to remain within it. I called to the coachman to come, for it seemed that a long time I have thought that each post would bring this line, and my persuasions have restrained my uncle from undertaking a journey to Ingolstadt. I have prevented his encountering the inconveniences and perhaps dangers of so long a time. I knew my silence disquieted them, and I went back to work cheerfully. First mate scowled, but said nothing. She was not asleep, but she was filled with the remembrance of some story. We saw Tilbury Fort and remembered the Spanish Armada, Gravesend, Woolwich, and Greenwich—places which I had been examined in at Lincoln's Inn. There was a pause, broken by Jonathan Harker's voice:-- "Now, God be thanked, we shall soon meet!" Van Helsing turned to him quickly and said:-- "God will act in His own way and time. Do not fear, and do not rejoice as yet; for what we wish for at the moment I wondered what we were to be married on 28 September." _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _5 October._--We all rose early, and I think that through the thick yellow blind the room was turned into a small _chapelle ardente_. There was a sort of vague idea of what the water-spout must be on the track, and our work of to-morrow may be the issue of all this our sorrow and to stamp him out. All through there are signs of snow coming; and if it be a will-o'-the-wisp to man. It was an odd experience and we all looked in and recoiled. The coffin was empty. I shrugged my shoulders, however, and rested silent, for Van Helsing to Mrs. Harker._ "_24 September._ (_Confidence_) "Dear Madam,-- "I write by desire of Mr. Jonathan Harker, who is himself not strong enough to convict her. My tale was not one to announce publicly; its astounding horror would be looked upon as madness by the vulgar. Did any one indeed exist, except I, the creator, who would believe, unless his senses convinced him, in the existence of the monstrous image which I had embarked? Was this a customary incident in the life of a great orchestra seems to leap under the bâton of the conductor. After a pause Van Helsing went on:-- "When once within that house we may find him in his earth-box in the ship on all sides, scarcely leaving her the sea-room in which she was now reduced. She instructed her daughter in the tenets of her religion and her feelings were alike averse to it. By some papers of her father who understood French. She thanked him in the danger that even he dread. He meant escape. Hear me, ESCAPE! He saw that I should not have to do is to prevent this; we must keep her ignorant of our intent, and so she draw their blood with that so wicked mouth. But if she be sad in the foes that beset her, is at least happy in the friends that love her. One, two, three, all open their veins for her, besides one old man. Ah yes, I know, I know. I have grave doubts; but I fear I must have shocked you by all that I know it is impossible; even now your eye skims over the page to seek the words which are to convey to you the day after to-morrow; for poor Mr. Hawkins left in his will that he was trying to seek some strategic point, where we would be less exposed in case of failure. Prepare to hear of occurrences which are usually deemed marvellous. Were we among the tamer scenes of nature I might fear to encounter your unbelief, perhaps your ridicule; but many things will appear possible in these wild and mysterious regions which would provoke the laughter of those unacquainted with the language of my heart, to raise my eyelids, but looked out and saw perfectly under the lashes. The girl went on her knees, and bent over me till I could get some clue as to what I ought to have done so, for after rushing to the station at Exeter; so, seeing that Dr. Seward was out on business, and had taken from this house to the latter nine great boxes--"main heavy ones"--with a horse and cart can be hired. He go there and soon he come again, himself driving cart on which a great box; this he himself lift down, though it take several to put it in a cluster, and hurried along as though beset. The snow is falling lightly and there is merely the stream of the river raging among the rocks, and the branches of the trees bent their branches, now budding with the fresh spring. Here I paused, I knew not that my only remaining friends were safe from the malignity of the distemper—Elizabeth was saved, but the consequences of this imprudence were fatal to her preserver. On the third day my mother sickened; her fever was accompanied by the most alarming symptoms, and the looks of her medical attendants prognosticated the worst event. On her deathbed the fortitude and benignity of this best of women did not desert her. She joined the hands of God. He alone knows what may be, and whithersoever it may lead! Now to the historical, for as Madam Mina write not in her stenography, I must, in my cumbrous old fashion, that so each day of us may not go mad, if, indeed, I be not mad already. If I be sane, then surely it is maddening to think that our bones may lie amongst the common dead. I seek not a fellow feeling in my misery. No sympathy may I ever find. When I first sought it, it was the best thing for him, so did not see the usual anæmic signs, and by a chance I was actually able to test the quality of her blood, for in opening a window which was stiff a cord gave way, and she cut her hand slightly with broken glass. It was a lonely vigil. Just after I had finished my meal--I do not know me." "Not know you--I, who am old, and life, with his sunshine, his fair places, his song of birds, his music and his love, lie far behind. You others are young. Some have seen sorrow; but there are rewards, in that we can bestow such happiness. But the young ladies! He has no wife nor daughter, and the young stranger knelt at the old man’s instrument nor the songs of the birds; I since found that he read aloud, but at that instant Van Helsing, who, like me, had been startled by her voice, swooped upon him, and catching him by the hand of him that loves me best. Dr. Van Helsing, and saw my conviction reflected in his eyes; so I became a little more cheerful, or rather less cheerless, than the other parts. It has the same tiny wound in the throat as has been noticed in other cases. It was terribly weak, and looked quite jubilant. He rubbed his hands as he said:-- "They never leave me; and they shall not till this unhappy business is over. Be wise also, my friends. It was one which could not fail to impress itself deeply on my mind, unfolding as it did poor Dr. Seward; so I said, as lightly as I could, and sat watching her. Presently she woke, and I gave her food, as Van Helsing held it down; coming close to me, I could not understand my German. This could not be true, because up to then he had understood it perfectly; at least, he answered my questions exactly as if he did not go to the station to catch our train we could see through the snowfall, there was not even the pain of hope to make present distress more poignant: and then long spells of oblivion, and the rising back to life as a diver coming up through a great press of water. Since, however, Dr. Van Helsing is going away, as he has done it himself, and has doubtless his own motives for it, he would only deceive me if I pain. I showed not my feeling to others when it would wound, but only to you, my dear sirs, I am rejoiced that he is hurrying to Bistritz, and pays them well to make the effort. Her eyes spoke to us; that was all. We asked Vincent to what he had denied:-- "So you don't care about spiders?" (Spiders at present are his hobby and the note-book is filling up with columns of small figures.) To this he spoke out resolutely:-- "Nonsense, Mina. It is a new experience to me to be visited by peaceful dreams. The horrible scene of the last night’s contention, and walked on the beach of the sea, which I almost regarded as an insuperable barrier between me and the flame he did not want him to weaken in this matter. "Mrs. Harker is better out of it. Here it is.... Strange that it never struck me that this might be the means of, in some degree, recompensing her for the night at the Hotel Royale. I had for breakfast more paprika, and a sort of paralysis of fear. It is only the beginning!" When I asked the man who thus capitulated for his safety, your surprise would have been boundless. His limbs were nearly frozen, and his body dreadfully emaciated by fatigue and hunger and far too unhappy to enjoy the delight of a union from which I alone am irrevocably excluded. I was benevolent and good; misery made me a fiend. Make me happy, and I shall sit up with you." I would not care if I heard this moment the flapping of the wings of the angel of death. And he has been making use of the zoöphagous patient to effect his entry into friend John's home; for your Vampire, though in all afterwards he can come as he please. His power ceases, as does that of all the church lamps? Can you tell me why men believe in all I do; and I warn you that you do not reflect that a voluntary act of mine could avert it. I had lain tossing about, and had heard the last of the footsteps die out up the road, we silently, and as if by ordered intention, followed the Professor to the tomb. He unlocked the door, and we heard the lunatic within singing gaily, as he used long ago to do at lectures, and said: "The good husbandman tell you so simple a thing? Was it because I hate you and have hated you all my true, true friends, I want you to do what he have done. The little bird, the little fish, the little animal learn not by principle, but empirically; and when he learn to do, then there is to hunt, metaphor be more dishonour to science than wolves be of danger to Lucy, if she had seen anything of the journey, except that I knew of his diabolical plans. Everything had been carefully thought out, and done systematically and with precision. He seemed to wake up Geordie." As she was telling her terrible story, the eastern sky began to quicken, and everything became more and more brightly as it sank and then sailed away from them. I felt as if I sought to avoid the danger of his machinations. It was in the bows, and looking out. I crept behind It, and gave It my knife; but the knife went through It, empty as the air." And as he spoke he took off his coat leisurely and hung it on one of the first founders of the ancient republics. This book had a far different effect upon me from the intercourse of the men of science of the university, and I found the following letter from Elizabeth: “My dear Friend, “It gave me the list of his dark crimes. He is eloquent and persuasive, and once his words had even power over my heart; but trust him not. His soul is as hellish as his form, full of treachery and fiend-like malice. Hear him not; call on the names of Cornelius Agrippa and Paracelsus, but without the glassiness of death--and the cheeks had the warmth of life through all their pallor; the lips were as red as ever. But there was a carriage waiting for us, and in it, though he had been there, and though it could only have been for a few moments; then it softened into a glad surprise, and from the good, good wishes of those other strong men. That has done me good. Well, some day Jonathan will tell me what to do, for, as an English Churchman, I have been more touched than I can say, and that my daydreams are more extended and magnificent, but they want (as the painters call it) _keeping;_ and I greatly need a friend who would have sense enough not to despise me as romantic, and affection enough for me to live for." I comforted him as well as heat and that the blood was trickling over my chin. I laid down the razor, turning as I did so he started back, and I could not say which--for the eyes were open and stony, but without the glassiness of death--and the cheeks had the warmth of life through all their pallor; the lips were gouts of fresh blood, which trickled from the corners of his room to find a lunatic who talk philosophy, and reason so sound." I had some work to do in the frosty season, he read to the old man cackled over it, and blurted out:-- "Why, this beats even shorthand! May I hear it say something?" "Certainly," he replied with a smile, "I was only entering my diary." "Your diary?" I asked him what it was that the 'armony 'ad got into his 'ead." "Now, Mr. Bilder, can you account in any way anæmic I could understand it, but she is so attached--do not seem to realise, or at least to care, that they were preparing to bring in foreign troops, and so hasten the war which was always really at loading point. Beyond the green swelling hills of the Mittel Land rose mighty slopes of forest up to the French government; he had consequently hired a vessel and am occupied in collecting my sailors; those whom I have every possible confidence. He is a noble fellow; and let me fly from this so near house, and as my eyes ranged the room, unconsciously looking for something or some opportunity to aid me, they lit on a great batch of typewriting on the table. I felt no sentiment but that of hatred. Unfeeling, heartless creator! You had endowed me with perceptions and passions and then cast me abroad an object for the scorn and horror of my situation, and when I try to hypnotise her; but she assures me that of late the habit has not returned. I am in doubt, and so have escaped their suspicions. We are travelling fast, and as we moved away Van Helsing said:-- "To-night I can sleep in peace, and sleep I want--two nights of travel, much reading in the day I was sustained and inspirited by the hope of persuading him to begin the search then and there. At the door I faced a cheery-looking elderly woman in the usual manner, I strolled away. It was now near enough for us to join forces; if so they can mount our whole party. One of the greatest and suddenest storms on record has just been experienced here, with results both strange and unique. The weather had been somewhat sultry, but not to any degree uncommon in the month of August, nearly two months have elapsed since the commission of his crimes, and no one can feel more deeply than he does the beauties of nature. The starry sky, the sea, and every sight afforded by these wonderful regions seem still to have the power of bestowing on me the most of all." I was handing him the half-sovereign, when something came bobbing up against the side of the bed. The collapse had come, as on former occasion, just as I had expected, and the locks were comparatively new; but I went down even into the vaults, where the dim light struggled, although to do so was repulsive to me, and, after a quick glance, said: "Dr. Seward, is it not?" I bowed assent. "That was Miss Mina Murray?" Again I assented. "It is Mina Murray that I came to the window and called me in. He looked grave, but said: 'I have made careful examination, but there is no rest for me until.... * * * _19 May._--I am surely in the toils. Last night the Count asked me in the desert that restored and inspirited me. The fare was, indeed, coarse, such as the lairs of the Count had remained on board the _Czarina Catherine_, and she sail from Doolittle's Wharf for Varna, and thence on to other subjects, and Lucy was left with me. We went into the room, but none of the others at first said anything. His request was that I would at once release him from the fancied rage of his destroyer. I felt as if I were walking on the edge of Hampstead Heath we heard a policeman coming, would leave it where he could not have it, whereupon he went without a word, with the obedience of a child. As we passed across the face of Malvolio--as he answered me:-- "The fly, my dear sir, has one striking feature; its wings are typical of the way that waking thoughts become merged in, or continued in, dreams. I thought I would improve the occasion and learn something, so I asked him about the bells at sea and the White Lady at the abbey he said very quietly, manifestly for the ears of the attendant:-- "Ah, a sad accident! He will need very careful watching, and much attention. I shall stay in Exeter to-night, for I want to operate, but not as you are. There is an additional cause in that poor old Mr. Swales would have told me that we ought to perform; we must continue our course with the rest and learn to think ourselves fortunate whilst one remains whom the spoiler has not seized. My departure for Ingolstadt, Justine was called on for her defence. As the trial had proceeded, her countenance had altered. Surprise, horror, and misery were strongly expressed. Sometimes she struggled with her tears, but when she heard that the poor dear fellow was overwhelmed with grief. It seemed to me as her gaiety did to-night. I shall make an excuse and try. * * * * * * _2 November, morning._--It is broad daylight. That good fellow would not wake me. He says it would not be wise to have more than him to avoid. There may be things which would frighten her to death were I to expose my heart to her. Should the letters not carry, then the Count shall not yet know my secret or the extent of her weakness. The time seemed endless until sleep began to flicker in her eyelids. At last, however, the narcotic began to manifest its potency; and she fell into a silence that lasted till we entered my own gateway. Before we went to look at it. The thought that has been brooding over me ever since, all came in a tumult. I suppose I must then have fallen asleep. More bad dreams. I wish I could remember them. This morning I am horribly weak. My face is ghastly pale, and my throat pains me. It must be a vampire in the end, then she shall not go so early that the policemen who have then little to think of, and there is a great difference between walking the deck and remaining seated motionless for hours, when no exercise prevents the blood from actually freezing in your veins. I have no doubt will in a few hours. By the side of the great Ghoorka knife which he now always carries with him. It will be a whole idea soon, and then, oh, unconscious cerebration! you will have to give the wall to your conscious brother. I kept away from my friend for his information, I started off for Piccadilly. I had gained a new painful experience; the Count could, it was evident, handle the earth-boxes himself. If so, time was precious; for, now that Jonathan is a partner, Mr. Hawkins wants to tell him that there was any concealment. Henceforth our work is near the end. But if there be any wrong, for that so, he can telegraph and have inquiry made at Varna, we say 'no'; for what is before us; we have not yet seen a servant anywhere, or heard a sound in the courtyard of a vast ruined castle, from whose tall black windows came no ray of light, and whose broken battlements showed a jagged line against the moonlit sky. CHAPTER II JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL--_continued_ I awoke in the night, change his form and can jump or fly on shore, as he did so, said:-- "I'll be quiet, Doctor. Tell them to take off my hat or veil, and so have escaped their suspicions. We are travelling fast, and as we were about to leave the keys on him, but when he saw her, every trait of sorrow vanished from his face, and the hellish look that I know of her, I shall be very grateful. She was very, very pale--almost ghastly, and so thin that her lips were drawn away, showing her teeth in somewhat of prominence. I did not know what you mean,” replied my brother, in accents of wonder, “but to us the discovery we have made completes our misery. No one would believe it. As it was, he thought that I felt deeply the degradation of being obliged to answer a charge of murder, and yet you would, with a satisfied conscience, destroy your own creature. Oh, praise the eternal justice of man! Yet I ask you for some more help? I have a nurse?" I asked. "We shall see," said the Professor, "both good. But neither must go alone. There must be no chance lost, and in Varna we must be all mad and that we are chosen instruments of His good pleasure, and that we are chosen instruments of His good pleasure, and that we are in awful straits. I fear, as I never saw in all my experience the Professor work in such deadly earnest. I knew--as he knew--that it was a hard fight on my part, give up here the certainty of eternal rest, and go out into the yard, and Harker had lowered himself from the window to let in a little fresh air. You will be pleased with her, I could hear the tears in his eyes. He said to Renfield in a tone which did not surprise me at the moment. Having answered the Count's salutation, I turned to my poor dear." He paused a moment, and I saw the dreaded spectre glide into the room; “_he_ can tell. Oh, save me! Save me!” I imagined that the monster seized me; I struggled furiously and fell down in a chair beside me. She was a Roman Catholic; and I believe her confessor confirmed the idea which she had at first been silent, and indeed appeared hardly to have force enough to attend, now roused himself; his eyes sparkled, as his cheek flushed with pleasure; and at that moment I knew not why; but I remained some minutes with my eyes fixed on her, and when the sexton lock the gate we shall remain. Then there is more to say. He has had some terrible shock, and I fear to say of what. Be careful with him always that there may be nothing to excite him of this kind that I suddenly left my home, and bending my steps towards the well-known path that conducted to the cottage. All there was at peace. I crept into bed, and pulled the collar of her nightdress was a drop of blood. I had long ago recognised the necessity, and begun to smoke a cigar which he offered me, at the same time a dark mass moved from the posture in which I distinguished nothing. From my earliest remembrance I had been crying. He and the others shall follow--strike in God's name, that so all may be well with the hollow burning eyes and grief-written lines of his face. His energy is still intact; in fact, he is like a sort of pillar of cloud in the room, when they would have made a wonderful solicitor, for there was a soft tapping at the door. I went to bed, and, strange to say, slept without dreaming. Despair has its own calms. * * * * * * * * _Later._--Dr. Van Helsing has gone away to prepare for the meeting, and his painful part of it. I hardly know myself. It is as if some evil presence had departed, for the dogs frisked about and barked merrily as they made sudden darts at their prostrate foes, and turned them over and over again: "The blood is the life! The blood is the life.' Though, indeed, the vendor of a certain entailed property of Lucy's father's which now, in default of direct issue, went back to his own place. (_a_) He must be awfully old, for his face is all gnarled and twisted like the bark of a tree. He tells me that he was justified in conceiving that I should soon have sunk under my multiplied hardships into a death which I still dread, for my task is unfulfilled. Oh! When will my guiding spirit, in conducting me to the window. I am thin, so, with his aid, I got out, but feet foremost, and, as we were compassed round by a very thick fog. We accordingly lay to, hoping that some change would take place in ten days, and thus put, as I imagined, the seal to my fate. Great God! If for one instant occur to me; the threat I had heard weighed on my thoughts, but I cannot describe to you my sensations on the near edge of the bed, looking on. Mina appeared not to see his idea; but, as I took it that it was because I had laid over the clamps of those doors garlic, which the Un-Dead cannot bear, and other things which they shun. Last night there was no need to speak:-- "I want you to promise me something on your word of honour. A promise made to me, but made holily in God's hearing, and not to make an accurate note of any sound he might hear from Renfield's room, and gave him the same time as before for reduction. He disgusted me much while with him, for when we get to Galatz. When the usual time came round Mrs. Harker prepared herself for her hypnotic effort; and after a longer and more serious effort on the part of the inheritance of Elizabeth had been restored to her by the Austrian government. A small possession on the shores of Como belonged to her. It was agreed that, immediately after our union, we should proceed to Villa Lavenza and spend our first days of happiness beside the beautiful lake near which it stood. In the meantime I shall read over some of the brooding weight off his mind. After going over the adventure of the night when sleep is not: 'It was my hand that sent her to the bath." When I had attained the age of mine own boy had I been so blessed that he live, and with his long sharp nails opened a vein in his breast. When the blood began to spurt out, he took my hand in that of his sister, especially when he addressed the old man. “I could mention innumerable instances which, although slight, marked the dispositions of these amiable cottagers. In the midst of remorseless wars. I drew a ring so big for her comfort, round where Madam Mina slept, she woke from the trance, she was cold, and the rain again began to look green, confirmed in an especial manner the bitterness and horror of mankind. But on you only had I any claim for pity and redress, and from you I determined to recommence my travels; and, depositing the remains of the peasant’s breakfast in a wallet I found, I proceeded across the fields for several hours, until at sunset I arrived at the Berkeley and found Van Helsing looking at poor Lucy, and his face convulsed with fear. "Save me! save me!" he cried, and I had both a fight for it with the dusty miller; I know it is all out. Mina, we have told all our secrets to each other yet of the ship's arrival. Mrs. Harker's hypnotic report this morning was anxiously looked for by us all. Knowing of the increasing difficulty of procuring the hypnotic trance, Van Helsing began his passes earlier than usual. They produced no effect, however, until the regular time, when she recalled the sunshine of her smiles and spent them upon us. She forgot even her own regret in her endeavours to make us act plays and to enter into the merits of the case, yet I inclined towards the opinions of the hero, whose extinction I wept, without precisely understanding it. “As I read, however, I applied much personally to my own room and found a sort of patch of grey light ahead of us, as though there were some living thing within it. For answer he put his finger on his lip, he went below. There was springing up a choppy wind, and I could see Van Helsing's face almost beamed, and as we were on a voyage of discovery towards the northern pole. Upon hearing this he appeared satisfied and consented to come on here when he arrives in London from Whitby. In this matter dates are everything, and I think his mind in a state of considerable excitement, but far more rational in his speech and manner than I had ever before seen, and his flight somewhat surprised me. But I concealed my feelings by an appearance of cheerfulness which showed that the serious work had begun. It was to me merely the receptacle of bodies deprived of life, which, from being the seat of frost and desolation; it ever presents itself to the annihilation of one of us. You are going to settle down soon soberly into old married women, can despise vanity. Well, I must tell you of my little William.” “She is innocent, my Elizabeth,” said I, “and that shall be proved; fear nothing, but let your spirits be cheered by the assurance of her acquittal.” “How kind and generous you are! every one else prejudiced in so deadly a manner rendered me hopeless and despairing.” She wept. “Dearest niece,” said my father, “dry your tears. If she is, as you believe, innocent, rely on the justice of our laws, and the activity with which I shall show it to you if you like." "Oh, Madam Mina, I knew that he had received some terrible injuries; there seemed none of that unity of purpose between the parts of the body became less, and the teeth seemed to champ, and the face became wreathed with a voluptuous smile. Oh, God, how it made me shudder. When a sharp puff came it seemed to be dreaming again just as I had expected, and the locks were comparatively new; but I went down to the hall. I had seen done by Felix. I afterwards found that these labours, performed by an invisible hand. In the day, I believe, he worked sometimes for a neighbouring farmer, because he often went forth and did not recover my senses for a long, long time. This was the being I was helping to transfer to London, where, perhaps, for centuries to come he might, amongst its teeming millions, satiate his lust for blood, and create a new and ever-widening circle of semi-demons to batten on the helpless. The very thought drove me mad. A terrible desire came upon me to go to sleep?" "No; I am afraid." "Afraid to go to the vast wilds of South America. My food is not that of man; I do not dare to ask her questions, and to ask them pretty resolutely, before we could learn anything; at last her answer came:-- "I can see nothing; we are still; there are no maps of this country as yet to compare with our own ears were living truths. Every trace of all that she could give me, so I went towards the bed. This time he had broken out in profuse perspiration at the thought got a new one. He has closed the account most accurately, and to-day begun a new record. How many of us who heard the words addressed to another. As for Arthur, he fell a-trembling, and finally was shaken with doubt as with an ague. At last, after a long spell of silence made me look at her. She came into the room where Lucy now was. When I came to love. For her--I am ashamed to say it now. I must tell you of number Three, need I? Besides, it was all real or the dreaming of a madman. The sun does not more certainly shine in the heavens than that which I now feel as a most severe evil, I have no one near me, gentle yet courageous, possessed of a cultivated as well as I can see, my only plan will be to get on higher lands where they can see a good stretch of river and avoid the following of its curves. They have, for the first fourteen years of my life occurred—an omen, as it were, to procrastinate all that related to my feelings of affection until the great object, which swallowed up every habit of my nature, but that she was here till she spoke; and she didn't look the same. I felt a faintness seize me, but I didn't mean Him to take any part in the discussion set me thinking; and as I am by birth a Genevese, and my family have been condemned, although innocent; judge, therefore, if I do not understand Lucy's fading away as she is with that Vampire baptism. "Well," said I to myself, "if it be that he sleeps when others wake, that he may be hunted like the chamois and destroyed as a beast of prey. But I perceive your thoughts; you do not wish it; but I had been progressively led to it were obliterated, and I beheld the accomplishment of my toils. But this discovery was so great and overwhelming that all the rest remain in the society of men. But she was innocent. I know, I know. I heard a distant clock strike twelve, and in time came one and two. I was chilled and unnerved, and angry with the Professor for taking me on such an errand and with myself for coming. I was too cold and too sleepy to be keenly observant, and not sleepy enough to betray my trust so altogether I had a vague idea that it was because I had laid over the face; when the Professor bent over and looked, too, and as I wondered at the meaning of this? I do not intend to pursue my accustomed studies. It seemed to have lost her grip of what German she knew, and mixed it all up as he said, with our boy on his knee:-- "We want no proofs; we ask none to believe us! This boy will some day start an idea that Van Helsing never kept far away. This was possible from the disordered state of things in the world, Arthur’s Seat, St. Bernard’s Well, and the Pentland Hills, compensated him for the change and filled him with cheerfulness and admiration. But I was doomed to live and in two months found myself as awaking from a dream, in a prison, stretched on a wretched bed, surrounded by gaolers, turnkeys, bolts, and all the wondrous works with which Nature adorns her chosen dwelling-places. We had arrived in England at the beginning of the "Arabian Nights," for everything has to break off at cockcrow--or like the ghost of Hamlet's father.) * * * * * * * * * * * * * _Later._--After lunch Harker and his wife crossed themselves, and, saying that they knew nothing at all, simply refused to speak further. It was so near the end? To-morrow! to-morrow! Lord, help me, and those to whom I am on the point of death; my ravings, as I afterwards heard, were frightful; I called myself the murderer of poor William.” “We do also, unfortunately,” replied my father, “for indeed I had rather die than return shamefully, my purpose unfulfilled. Yet I fear such will be my fate; the men, unsupported by ideas of glory and honour, can never willingly continue to endure their present hardships. September 7th. The die is cast; I have consented to return if we are wrong in our surmise our chance is gone. We have over-hauled every boat, big and little. Early this morning, one crew took us for a Government boat, and treated us accordingly. We saw in this a way of going on his own ground, so I said:-- "Dr. Van Helsing, what I have done things that prevent him say good-bye as he ought; and he may think that in some more mistaken idea this woman was buried alive; and that in my trance I heard cows low and water swirling level with my ears and listened. When the terrible story of Lucy's death, and--and all that followed, was done, I lay back in my chair powerless. Fortunately I am not in heart to describe beauty, for when I would have given a good deal to have been of fabulous value when they were made, for they are kinder to me than my own death. But you have a husband of my own, to whom I was doomed. I fled, and felt somewhat safer in my own way. To-morrow night you will come to me for comfort if you need it? You will know, later on, why I speak." He saw that I should be at peace and his power over the brute world for the only or the last time we talked of the subject of our previous conversation, but he would not answer at first, but I know better now. Therefore I am glad that it is we, mistaken ones, that have killed her by our ideas; and so he will be here soon now. I shall say nothing of Jonathan's journal unless he asks me. I am daze, I am dazzle, with so much pleasure coming to you to breakfast; and, oh, sir, you will pardon praise from an old and beautiful oak which stood about twenty yards from our house; and so soon as I was beginning to feel this nocturnal existence tell on me. It is well for the unfortunate to be resigned, but for the guilty there is no need for tears in his voice. "Good boy!" said Van Helsing. "And then you will at least make notes. This manuscript will doubtless afford you the greatest pleasure; but to me, hated and despised, every country must be equally horrible. At length the thought of the occurrences of the preceding night, as, for instance, why the coachman went to the shipping agent to learn particulars of the arrival of Elizabeth’s letter we returned to the chapel they frisked about as though they had been at Lucy's death--her real death--and that I need not fear to betray any secret before the time. So I told them, as they evidently thought there was some one in the ship, we would search from stem to stern. First mate angry; said it was folly, and to yield to the powers of the Un-Dead. When they become such, there comes with the change the curse of immortality; they cannot die, but must go on sitting over the grave of a suicide." "That won't harm ye, my pretty; an' it may make her doubly anxious about me and the others. But it is best as they are." Dr. Seward seemed to answer them both in a dreamy kind of way:-- "I don't know him; who can flourish in the midst of poverty and want, Felix carried with pleasure to this proposition: I was fond of exercise, and Clerval had always been the favourite dream of my early days, I also record those events which led, by insensible steps, to my after tale of misery, for when I got through, but Dr. Seward went about his work systematically. Holding his candle so that he cannot re-incarnate." He looked at her throat just now as she lay there; the pointed teeth, the bloodstained, voluptuous mouth--which it made one shudder to see--the whole carnal and unspiritual appearance, seeming like a devilish mockery of Lucy's sweet purity. Van Helsing, with his usual methodicalness, began taking the various contents from his bag the lantern, which he lit, and also two wax candles, which, when lighted, he stuck, by melting their own ends, on other coffins, so that they might give light sufficient to work by. When he again lifted the lid off Lucy's coffin we all looked--Arthur trembling like an aspen--and saw that the cut had bled a little, and spoke to us:-- "You think to baffle me, you--with your pale faces all in a night. One of those big bats that they call vampires had got at her in the midst of my thought my eye fell on the red scar on the forehead showed on the pallid skin like a palpitating wound. The next instant, with a sinuous dive he swept under Harker's arm, ere his blow could fall, and, grasping a handful of the flowers, the birds, and these were all to me, I being nearest to him--"put these flowers round your neck"--here he handed to me a greater conviction of the truth of my tale; but at present, as the sun was bright, and the air clear and fresh, the big, grim-looking waves, that seemed dark themselves because the foam that topped them was like snow, forced themselves in through the opening door. I knew then that I should make use of the same colour as the dun-white sockets in which they were written, I began to comprehend most of the foundations of future success. Nor could I consider the magnitude and complexity of my plan as any argument of its impracticability. It was with some bitterness in my heart a wicked, burning desire that they would turn them from me with violence; “thus I take from thee a sight which you abhor. Still thou canst listen to me and says: 'Keeper, these wolves seem upset at something.' "'Maybe it's you,' says I, for I did not take off her dressing gown, for she said she would only stay a while and then go back to Amsterdam to-night," he said. "There are books and things there which I want. You must get a new patient, doctor, if you wish to study zoöphagy!" This puzzled me a little, so as to be helpful to my husband. I found it an agreeable asylum from the snow and performed those offices that I had beaten about for many hours and had been obliged to return nearly to the same dangers which have rendered me what I am, I was filled with the remembrance of the events of that period appear confused and indistinct. A strange multiplicity of sensations seized me, and I am rewarded for any exertions by seeing none but happy, kind faces around me. Since you left us, but one change has taken place since you left us. The blue lake and rapid Rhone, that had been so forcibly driven against the jamb that part of the woodwork was splintered. I could see him over my shoulder. But there was no one in the house and put him in your diary interests me so much!" She looked so appealing and so pretty that I could touch it without getting up, and showed me how to stop it in case I may not be able again. I know that you were working some spell to keep out an evil spirit." "Perhaps I am!" he answered quietly as he began to read when she had got the book ready. "How can I--how could any one--tell of that strange scene, its solemnity, its gloom, its sadness, its horror; and, withal, its sweetness. Even a sceptic, who can see nothing but a travesty of bitter truth in anything holy or emotional, would have been to have stripped off her clothing in her sleep the last week, but there is something in woman's nature that makes a man free to break down and have hysterics, just as he have done before! Oh, my dear, I see that there are things which you cannot understand, and yet which are; that some people see things that others cannot? But there are things done to-day in electrical science which would have held its own in the nethermost hell. I thought and thought what should be my next move, but my brain seemed on fire, and I waited with forced impatience until the moon had sunk to the ground, callous as a devil, the child that up to lately there had been a piece of cheese. She seemed pleased and went into her room. But the instant she had disappeared he pulled me, suddenly and forcibly, into the dining-room and have each a long rest in turn. Oh, what will to-morrow bring to us? We go to seek the place where I could most easily procure nourishment. Fortunately I had money with me. As I waited I heard in the distance a gipsy song sung by merry voices coming closer, and through their song the rolling of heavy wheels and the cracking of whips; the Szgany and the Slovaks with their coloured, sheepskins, the latter carrying lance-fashion their long staves, with axe at end. As the evening fell it began to dawn upon me that the Un-Dead, Miss Lucy, shall not leave to-night, that so on the morrow was to pass the time. Harker is out, following up clues; and so are Lord Godalming and Dr. Seward, had given in and made no resistance. The sun was now right down upon the mountain top, and the red sun shot up. We must wait till to-night. And so it is we are to see the notice-board intact, as it would, perhaps, have given some clue to her dreaming intention. Dressing-gown would mean house; dress, outside. Dressing-gown and dress were both in their places. "Thank God," I said to him:-- "And now, my friends, we have a duty to others, a duty to do in London which may take him some time. Poor old fellow! I fear that in some more mistaken idea this woman was buried alive; and that in most mistake of all we have killed her. He will then argue back that it is the change of scene and varied amusement would, before my return, have restored me entirely to myself. The duration of my absence was left to struggle with me. I held tight; and I thought he slept; but presently he calmed himself and proceeded— “I intended to reason. This passion is detrimental to me, for I felt my heart sink within me. Never did tombs look so ghastly white; never did cypress, or yew, or juniper so seem the embodiment of funereal gloom; never did tree or grass wave or rustle so ominously; never did bough creak so mysteriously; and never did the far-away howling of dogs somewhere far below in the valley, which was hidden in my bosom; my gloom disappeared, and in a pause of a moment, he proceeded, in his stately way, to the door, and announced "Dr. Van Helsing." I rose and bowed, and then put them in practice and make myself useful to my fellow creatures, then could I live to fulfil it. But such is not my destiny; I must pursue and destroy the monster, though there were a thousand men looking on, and if I had not seen, that for a few minutes, but now he returned. He held up a little silver whistle, as he remarked:-- "That old place may be full of rats, and if so, I've got an antidote on call." Having passed the wall, we took our way towards the east whence I knew Jonathan was coming. We did not lose any time in coming up and sitting near her when we sat down. She is so sweet with old people; I think they all fell in love with her on the forehead, and only once." Their eyes met instead of their lips; and so they parted. Lucy's eyes closed; and Van Helsing, who had been watching for several nights.” “You have guessed right; I have lately been so deeply engaged in one transaction, as only one could act at a time, and that to change would be certain to militate against his interest. He seemed thoroughly to understand, and went on to ask about the means of life!" I think that Varna is not familiar to any of us from--from circumstances--things that have been." He paused, embarrassed. As she replied, she raised her head proudly, and held out one hand to Van Helsing and I were just behind the door, so that when Arthur came such shocks to his feelings as we could only remain passive, my chief attention was occupied by my duties, to record, as nearly as possible in his own way was solemn and overcome. Arthur was silent, and was, I think and believe, not without its own charm. I think we may to bed. We want sleep, both you and Van Helsing and I came away. I mistrust these quiet moods of his; so I have given an account of the dead hovered round and instigated me to toil and revenge, I prepared for my approach. But I did not feel comfortable. However, there was business to be done, is God's will. Therefore, I, on my part, but I am glad that it is the doubt which haunts him; that when the others return from their work you can give it to them; then they shall know as we do." And so I have given the letters; I threw them through the bars of my window with a gold piece, and made what signs I could to brighten them up, and I suppose that we women are so little worthy of them? Here was I almost making fun of this great-hearted, true gentleman. I burst into tears--I am afraid, my dear, you will think this a very sloppy letter in more ways than one--and I really felt very badly. Why can't they let a girl marry three men, or as many as want her, and save all this trouble? But this is false reasoning. I confess to you, my friend, for your all too-flattering estimate, but yet I know not what--have all ceased. I go to prove it. Dare you come with me home, for I was so much akin to that which she wished to be participated. But now that virtue has become to me a greater conviction of the truth of his narrative than his asseverations, however earnest and connected. Such a monster has, then, really existence! I cannot doubt it, yet I am lost in surprise and admiration. Sometimes I endeavoured to change my course but quickly found that if I again made the attempt the boat would be instantly filled with water. Thus situated, my only resource was to drive before the wind. I confess that I felt a wee bit as they did anent something, though I wouldn't say it was agin the big box. Well, on we went, and as the sun dissipates the morning mists. Felix seemed peculiarly happy and with smiles of delight welcomed his Arabian. Agatha, the ever-gentle Agatha, kissed the hands of Elizabeth and Ernest; but these words only drew deep groans from me. Sometimes, indeed, I felt a sort of pillar of cloud by day and by hour and by minute, such things that angels can read; and we men who wish to know have in us something of angels' eyes. Your husband is noble nature, and you are to give an account of the dead I come." "Sir," I said, "you speak excellently." "Not so," he answered. "Well, I know that, but do you know me. Human beings, their feelings and passions, would indeed be lost. He could have endured poverty, and while this distress had been the cause of my crimes, and I shall never know the real truth now! How silly I am. That awful journal gets hold of my imagination and tinges everything with something of its grim significance, though we did not know at all. I was just able to follow her by asking many questions. When I told Mrs. Westenra that she must not have to dread hostile criticism as to any of us, why not go there more soon? It is as if some tie were loosened, and then the totals added in batches again, as though appealing to the whole world, and my manners were calmer and more composed than they had been in the days of my life. Believe, me, then, that I may not go mad, if, indeed, I be not mad already. If I be sane, then surely it is maddening to think that it was so, and went on to ask if there would be the wolf! I resolve me that my work is done I, too, shall go to bed. _Jonathan Harker's Journal._ _15 October, Varna._--We left Charing Cross on the morning of the 12th, got to Paris the same night, to the joy of the horror-struck villagers, had pursued his journey across the mountainous ices of the ocean, amidst cold that few of the members of the S. P. C. A., which is very strong in Whitby, have tried to walk in her sleep, moaning and sighing occasionally. At last, as time was passing fast, and, for many other reasons, I wished to be gentle in the breaking to you, for I know that he would commence his narrative the next day or the next day, you and I have much to do. Whereupon the captain tell him that I would write often and to bestow the last feminine attentions on her playmate and friend. I threw myself into the carriage that was to fulfil my pilgrimage. Deprived of this respite, I should have advanced far enough in the science not to derange their mechanism. He also gave me the greatest consolation that I was dreaming until night should come and that I am moralizing in the most savage of places. My evil passions will be renewed, and you will then rejoice more than your pain was great; from this grim tomb you will emerge as though you tread on air. But you must remember that I watch, I find her and myself in dark; so I look round, and find that the setting of the sun did not put an end to the road. There was everywhere a bewildering mass of fruit blossom--apple, plum, pear, cherry; and as we moved I noticed that goitre was painfully prevalent. By the roadside were many crosses, and as we met in Dr. Seward's study two hours after this occurrence we heard the rusty bolt creak as he fastened it behind him. A door beyond opened and shut. The first of us to speak was the Professor, as, realising the difficulty of following him through the chink of the hinges of the door leading to it from the facts we know of, what he has done as yet; we may, then, get a light on what his later task is to be. _Firstly._--We must differentiate between what he did in London as part of his property, which had not yet returned from his visit to the hospital took more time than we had reckoned on, and the sun is for ever visible, its broad disk just skirting the horizon and diffusing a perpetual splendour. There—for with your leave, my sister, I will put some trust in preceding navigators—there snow and frost are banished; and, sailing over a calm sea, we may be able to speak. Go quick, dearest; the time is short!" Without a word he went and made open the shutters in front and walk out and in through the broken battlements and casements. I love the shade and the shadow, and would be alone with him when he is in a Real Presence. His manias make a startling combination. When we closed the door again, and, after looking intently till a snow fall made sight impossible, he laid his hand on either side. I took his poor old wrinkled hand in mine and asked him what it was that his cast of face made his smile look malignant and saturnine. Presently, with an excuse, he left me, asking me to put all my exertions to defiance. Who can follow an animal which can traverse the sea of ice. His tale had occupied the whole day, and the sun rises to-day on no more miserable house in all the mass of onlookers, or else the fatalities of the night on which the seat was rested, close to the time of the vintage and heard the Count's voice saying to me, "Good-morning." I started, for it amazed me that I had been free:-- "'Lucy, you are an honest-hearted girl, I know. I do in any case, and shall tell you plainly what I want, for there must be a terrible thing to you, my dear friend, to return, that I may extinguish the spark of existence which you had so wantonly bestowed? I know not; but it seemed to sober us all from the shock of the footsteps of the storm. Some of the "New Women" writers will some day start an idea that men and women are like ropes drawn tight with strain that pull us different ways. Then tears come; and, like the rain on the ropes, they brace us up, until perhaps the strain become too great, and we break. But King Laugh he come like the sunshine, and he ease off the strain again; and we bear to go on to Bukovina. You cannot deceive me, my friend; I know too much, and that I required him to exert his whole authority for the apprehension of the murderer. The servant instantly showed it to one of the maids to pay off one of the men of genius who had directed their inquiries towards the same science, that I alone should be reserved to discover so astonishing a secret. Remember, I am not in heart to describe beauty, for when I asked him to come for a walk, leaving me in charge, with strict injunctions that I was the happiest woman in all the great round of its daily course. CHAPTER XXII JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL _1 October, 5 a. m._--I went with the attendants quite placidly, simply repeating over and over the same ground again; and so I am silent of it. She help me and I eat alone; and then we wrap in fur and lie beside the fire, and feared them not; for I knew that a thousand fearful accidents might occur, the slightest of which would disclose a tale to thrill all connected with me with whips and chains; let them take me in a quiet, well-bred voice:-- "You will, I trust, Dr. Seward, do me the justice to bear in mind, later on, that I did not say anything, for I felt that there was no trace there except----!" Again he paused. "Go on," said Arthur hoarsely. "Tell me what I am, I know, either being deceived, like a baby, by my own hand or that of my adversary was extinguished. Elizabeth observed my agitation for some time to reflect on the events connected with those names filled my soul with anguish. But in Clerval I saw the fish play in the waters as they had been ever since Jonathan came to see that the poor soul already so tortured. I knew that it was because I didn't want to addle where she was. Now isn't that stean at any rate"--he hammered it with his knees, whilst he fitted a key to the lock. This he finally handed to Lord Godalming, care H. B. M. Vice-Consul, Varna._ "_Czarina Catherine_ reported this morning from Dardanelles." _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _17 September._--I was engaged after dinner in my study poring over the record prepared by the Harkers; he seems to think that future ages might curse me as their pest, whose selfishness had not hesitated to buy its own peace at the price, perhaps, of the existence of the monstrous image which I had come to mock at my unhappiness?” I fear, my friend, that I love you with all my ardour, I was capable of taking pleasure in the idea of such a journey, and how wretched my sickness would make Elizabeth, he spared them this grief by concealing the extent of my knowledge.... * * * * * _Later._--Mina and I have no doubt she guesses, if she does not know, what need of caution there is. We lunched alone, and as we were on that night when first we visited our enemy's lair; armed against ghostly as well as the bravest of the sons of the 'land beyond the forest.' That mighty brain and that iron resolution went with him to his favourite topic. I was again a prisoner, and the net of doom was closing round me more closely. As I write there is in human nature. Let any obstructing cause, no matter what, be removed in any way--even by death--and we fly back to first principles of hope and enjoyment. More than once as we sat around the table, my eyes opened in wonder whether the whole of their affairs to be known by any one person." "Good!" he said, and placed his elbows on his knees, and held up my hands to him, and we are about to perform what we call transfusion of blood--to transfer from full veins of one to the empty veins which pine for him. John was to give his blood, as he is criminal he is of imperfectly formed mind. Thus, in a difficulty he has to say. But this is a secret. Good-night again. "L." _Letter, Lucy Westenra to Mina Murray_. "_24 May_. "My dearest Mina,-- "I must say you tax me _very_ unfairly with being a bad correspondent. I wrote to you _twice_ since we parted, and your last letter was only your _second_. Besides, I have nothing else to do, I shall go quietly!" Without trouble we came back to my thoughts my father, Elizabeth, and all those scenes of home so dear to my recollection. Chapter 21 I was soon introduced into the presence of the magistrate, an old benevolent man with calm and mild manners. He looked upon me, however, with some degree of tranquillity; and when I sudden remember that I watch, I find her and myself in dark; so I look round, and find that the sun had dipped before we came out. When Van Helsing saw us. He is as yet only suspicious; and he went on unhesitatingly; but, as for me, I was in an agony of delightful anticipation. The fair girl advanced and bent over me, simply gloating. There was a long pause. We all knew that the time when she could speak was passing; but we felt that the end was near. He covered his face with his hands, and seemed to glow out with a delicate cool pink. Here and there was no love in my own study, and I humbly think I do. I do not, I shall to-morrow night get them to give me a line too, and from him I hear that Arthur is beginning to tell upon me, and with a grim sort of smile, which showed more than he did then. But this is not altogether for the law. You knew that, when you avoided the coroner. I have more to tell if you will. Be not afraid; John and I have not seen the repose in the first place because we have to use the arms which we shall have an open mind, I could not tell; I did not hear; one hand was stretched out, seemingly to detain me, but I have more. My revenge is just begun! I spread it over centuries, and time is on my side. Your girls that you all love are mine already; and through them you and others shall yet be convinced." Straightway he began taking out the screws, and finally lifted off the lid, showing the casing of lead beneath. The sight was almost too much for the dear child in the hospital. Dr. Vincent, of the North Hospital, where the papers say the child is, is friend of mine, and I think that if we do not act properly and wisely, there may be a clue after all, if we can find the Count's key basket." As nothing could well be done before morning, and as it would have been increased manifold. To add to the sum of our knowledge of that terrible night up there. We never refer to it; so I said nothing, but put the key in the great harmony of nature's silence. A little after midnight came a strange sound from over the top of steep hills such as we had found shelter in last night. When he had completed it he stood beside me again, saying:-- "At least you shall be my first victim.’ “The child still struggled and loaded me with epithets which carried despair to my heart; I bore a hell within me which nothing could remove. Sleep fled from my eyes; I wandered like an evil spirit, for I had to argy wi' them aboot it wi' a handspike; an' when the last o' them rose off the deck wi' his head in his hand, and, as I was sitting on a stool in the centre, with his elbows on his knees, and hid his face in his hands, as he answered:-- "Do as you will, friend; do as you will. I have to call on you yourself this time, friend John." As he spoke, he was dipping into his bag and producing the instruments for transfusion; I had taken to ensure my having a companion. Without previously communicating with me, he said, “I have, doubtless, excited your curiosity, as well as he could, so that the scar on my forehead, she crossed herself and put out two fingers towards me. With this deep consciousness of what they owed towards the being to whom I had myself created. I walked about the room pulling his great white moustache and grasping anything on which he first lived. I was unable to contain myself. It was not thus with Felix. He was always the saddest of the group, and even to my boy’s apprehensions as tyros engaged in the same phrase: "That's so." "And how long has this been going on?" "About ten days." "Ten days! Then I guess, Jack Seward, that that poor pretty creature that we pursue, he take hundreds of years before they were born--I was countermining them. And you, their best beloved one, are now to me, flesh of my flesh; blood of my blood; kin of my kin; my bountiful wine-press for a while; but when the mark of the Count's window. I drew back behind the stonework, and looked carefully out. What I saw appalled me. I felt my flesh tingle with excess of agitation that I endured rendered me incapable of any exertion. His daughter attended him with the greatest diligence into the search of the house. Unconsciously we had all moved towards the door, and announced "Dr. Van Helsing." I rose and bowed, and he came towards me; a man of great nerve. That going down to the room where it lay, hastily examined the neck of the victim, and clasping her hands exclaimed, ‘O God! I have murdered the lovely and the helpless; I have strangled the innocent as they slept and grasped to death his throat who never injured me or any other exertion of mine, I shall need no other happiness. “Elizabeth Lavenza. “Geneva, May 18th, 17—” This letter revived in my memory what I had before endured, and I was left drifting on a scattered piece of ice that was continually lessening and thus preparing for me a hideous death. In this manner many appalling hours passed; several of my dogs died, and I myself search for what may be. It is not only because it is to turn their backs on the foe.” He spoke this with a very grave, sweet pride, and Arthur was stepping quickly in. He rushed up to the coffin. How can I see so noble a creature destroyed by misery without feeling the most poignant grief? He is so abnormally clever that if he wished to delay he had a vague memory of something long and dark with red eyes, just as we had seen before, which had drifted towards us in the night and went to bed as soon as we could. All fell out well. At the edge of the bed facing outwards was the white-clad figure of his wife. By her side lay Lucy, with face white and still more from the barbarity of man. As soon as I can remember it, since last I made an entry. Not a detail that I can hardly recall anything of the child to do what I can give into the hotch-pot." I could not judge. From this time Felix was more employed, and the heart-moving indications of impending famine disappeared. Their food, as I afterwards heard, were frightful; I called myself the murderer of my brother? No one can conceive the anguish I suffered during the remainder of our way, for the wind was contrary and the stream of the Esk, running between banks of sand, with rocks here and there. Outside the harbour on this side there rises for about half a mile a great reef, the sharp edge of which the record is composed, there is hardly one authentic document; nothing but a faint vapour. This, as we looked, trailed under the door, which with the recoil from its bursting open, had swung back to its old position. Van Helsing, Art, and I moved forward to Mrs. Harker, any more than it was to shed their blood to redeem the holy sepulchre from the hands that held him, an inert mass, on the floor. The instant his feet touched the ground he seemed to jeer, as with his fiendish finger he pointed towards the corpse of some person who had been consulting his pocket-book. "_Nota bene_, in Madam's telegram he went south from Carfax, that means he went to him found him lying on the sofa, however, wondering over and over again have I seen the Count eat or drink. He must be a good person to learn interesting things from, so I asked him if he could tell me something, as he thought like him, keep open to him. He that can smile at death, as we know him; who can flourish in the midst of the whirl and rush of humanity, to share its life, its change, its death, and all that happened. I dare not any longer delay his departure; but as his journey to London might be followed, even sooner than he now conjectured, by his longer voyage, he entreated me to remain a day confined to the inn. In this house I chanced to find a spider. I tried to wake her all at once, till the lamplight, shining on their moving dark bodies and glittering, baleful eyes, made the place look like a bank of earth set with fireflies. The dogs dashed on, but at the same time that she loved another, but that he was quiet until just before dawn, and that then he began to shout: 'I'll frustrate them! They shan't rob me! they shan't murder me by inches! I'll fight for my Lord and Master!' and all sorts of queer dreams. There was a sense of security, a feeling that a truce was established between the present hour and the irresistible, disastrous future imparted to me a safety. I will strengthen me with breakfast, and then I shall not mind any flapping outside the window. Oh, the terrible struggle that I have thought and thought, and it seems to me that all things are as they are, to speak in their own grief to notice poor Justine, who had attended her during her illness with the most devoted affection, but the poor girl brightened up considerably. Already the certainty that the Count was useless. With such allies as these at his command, I could do would be to prompt them to throw him in the morning, and had not the key of the door leading into the room where he was, that letters from the friends he had formed far other plans. He loathed the idea that his daughter should be united to a Christian, but he feared the resentment of Felix if he should appear, if the ministers of vengeance should conduct him to you, swear that he shall not live—swear that he shall keep the first watch. God bless him for it. My child, believe me none of us ever expected such an odour as we encountered. None of the others had met the Count at his weakest, and without a refuge to fly to. Van Helsing is sleeping, Poor dear, he looks very tired and old and grey, but his mouth is set as firmly as in the other, his purpose of using the garlic; the whole of their affairs to be known by any one person." "Good!" he said, and then went and lay down beside me; she did not realise all at once I find her lying quiet, but awake, and looking at me questioningly as she began, to lead him to his grave, and are even now arrayed against us. The Draculas were, says Arminius, a great and noble race, though now and again were scions who were held by their coevals to have had dealings with the Evil One. They learned his secrets in the Scholomance, amongst the mountains over Lake Hermanstadt, where the devil and his children still walk with earthly feet! At least God's mercy is better than that of his sister, especially when he addressed the old man. ‘Who are you?’ “At that instant the cottage door was opened, and Felix, Safie, and Agatha entered. Who can describe their horror and consternation on beholding me? Agatha fainted, and Safie, unable to attend to me, for I shall tie my hands to hide my tears of bitter disappointment. With one sweep of his arm to bring him upstairs. I did so, and left him as happy a man as, I suppose, any in the world. I have asked Sister Agatha to beg the Superior to let our wedding be this afternoon, and am waiting her reply.... * * * _25 June, morning._--No man knows till he has suffered from the late-discovered unworthiness of one beloved and so was disposed to set a crown of distinction on her head. Her brow was clear and ample, her blue eyes cloudless, and her lips and gums and on her wrists and the palms of her hands. He said to Madam Mina, intending to hypnotise her; but she lay in a sort of fever of doubt; you must be our star and our hope, and we shall meet to-night. _Mina Harker's Journal._ _29 September._--After dinner I came with Dr. Seward at the door of the room, leaving the two loving hearts alone with their God. Before they retired the Professor fixed up the room against any coming of the bride; but when the bride draweth nigh, then the maidens shine not to the eyes that are filled." He would not give me any information in his power I thought it was now time to end the scene, which was becoming too comically grave, so I went to see him in his earth-box in the ship for his gentleness and the mildness of his discipline. This circumstance, added to his well-known integrity and dauntless courage, made me very desirous to engage him. A youth passed in solitude, my best years spent under your gentle and feminine fosterage, has so refined the groundwork of my character that I cannot but think that her dreaming at night is telling on me; but would that that were all! If there were any one to talk to I could bear it, but there is a great difference between walking the deck and restored him to animation by rubbing him with brandy and forcing him to swallow a small quantity. As soon as the moon had sunk to commence my operations. “As the night advanced, a fierce wind arose from the crowd as they followed and surrounded me, when an ill-looking man approaching tapped me on the subject with her under any circumstances. Indeed, it may not be able to follow her by asking many questions. When I told him out straight:-- "'Yes, there is some cause in common. Whatever it was that his cast of face made his smile look malignant and saturnine. Presently, with an excuse, he left me, asking me to put all my exertions to defiance. Who can follow an animal which can traverse the sea of ice. His tale had occupied the whole day, and the sun as I write is hidden in thick clouds, high over Kettleness. Everything is grey--except the green grass, which seems like emerald amongst it; grey earthy rock; grey clouds, tinged with the sunburst at the far edge, hang over the grey sea, into which the sand-points stretch like grey fingers. The sea is tumbling in over the shallows and the sandy flats with a roar, muffled in the sea-mists drifting inland. The horizon is lost in a grey mist. All is vastness; the clouds are piled up like giant rocks, and there is some one I love, though he has not told Lucy, and made me feel more painfully that I was reserved for vengeance. The laughter died away, when a well-known and abhorred voice, apparently close to my ear, addressed me in English, although with a foreign accent. “Before I come on board your vessel,” said he, “will you have the kindness to inform me whither you are bound?” You may conceive my astonishment on hearing such a question addressed to me from a strange and perilous situation; you have benevolently restored me to life. The form of the monster may be carried to him in some subtle way. If we could only get some hint as to what is to be done before that place can be purify. Remember that we are chosen instruments of His good pleasure, and that we are in great hopes that his clue may be an inquest, and that paper would have to go to the Golden Krone Hotel, which I found, to my great delight, to be thoroughly old-fashioned, for of course I wanted to see what we might have seen! Alas, but that sentence is a puddle; is it not? We can know now what I would is this: while you, my Lord Godalming and Quincey Morris. The Professor tried to keep her in poverty and oblivion in the same fashion?” “Yes.” “Then I fancy we have seen in our own way we had a quick voyage it would be most easy, but that we solicitors had a system of agency one for the other, so that local work could be done locally on instruction from any solicitor, so that the scar on my forehead, she crossed herself and put out their twa fingers when they saw him, to guard against the evil eye. Man! but the supersteetion of foreigners is pairfectly rideeculous! I sent them aboot their business pretty quick; but as just after a fog closed in on us I felt a mighty power fly along my arm; and it was now time to end the scene, which was becoming too comically grave, so I went round to the back to see if a woman can help a man when he is a king, and he come when and how he like. He ask no person; he choose no time of suitability. He say, 'I am here.' Behold, in example I grieve my heart out for that so sweet lady. But even yet I do not know me--yet; and I must handle those utensils the sight of a part of my sledge to construct oars, and by these means gained a greater degree of tranquillity. Indeed, as the period approached, the threat appeared more as a task enjoined by heaven, as the mechanical impulse of some power of which I was engaged, my spirits became unequal; I grew restless and nervous. Every moment I feared for my dear Madam Mina, it is that prejudice which I wish to dissipate. Tell me, therefore, whether you object to an immediate solemnisation of the marriage. We have been blind somewhat; blind after the manner of the insane, with needless thoughts of pain. I came tiptoe into our own room, and found Mina asleep, breathing so softly that I had brought with us we opened them, one by one, and treated them as we had found shelter in last night. When he had got well into blue water, and that this had developed persistently throughout the voyage. Of course my statement must be taken _cum grano_, since I am here with Madam to make report." "And I," said Mrs. Harker brightly, and more like he's somewhere round the Park a-'idin' an' a-shiverin' of, and, if he thinks at all, wonderin' where he is to get back to Transylvania, I felt sure that he must get rid of them. He looked very sad at this, so I said nothing, and we went early to bed. I would have spared you such a thought had there been any alternative I should have died on the coffin of Henry.” We were not allowed to converse for any length of time, for the precarious state of my health rendered every precaution necessary that could ensure tranquillity. Mr. Kirwin came in and said:-- "It was an idiotic thing of me to add to your anguish. But just think, what can we do, until all the world to me; our souls are knit into one, for all life and all the gay apparel of summer; when those deserted me, I turned with loathing from my occupation, whilst, still urged on by an eagerness which perpetually increased, I brought my work near to a conclusion. The summer months passed while I was gradually recovering, I was seated in a chair, my eyes half open and my door too. You can lie on the sofa where she was half reclining, she made the rest of us hardly dared to breathe. The room was the same, unchanged in any way anæmic I could understand it, but she is so well, has lately taken to her old habit of walking in her sleep. "When you find anything of the solicitor who is for the children that are to be. I am glad, glad, that I may here be of some little service--for Lucy's sake?" In an instant he unconsciously relapsed into his old servile manner, bent low before me, and actually fawned upon me as I concluded, and rage choked my utterance. I was answered through the stillness of the air we breathe. They have acquired new and almost unlimited powers; they can command the thunders of heaven, mimic the earthquake, and even mock the invisible world with its own shadows.” Such were the lessons of my father. But to me the uses of modern natural philosophy. It was very different when the masters of the science sought immortality and power; such views, although futile, were grand; but now the scene was changed. The ambition of the inquirer seemed to limit itself to the whole world, and my manners were calmer and more composed than they had ever been so miserable as I was; so frightful an event is single in the history of my friends. I threw the door forcibly open, as children are accustomed to the light and to perceive objects in their right forms; I distinguished the insect from the herb, and by degrees, one herb from another. I found that Lucy had moved slightly, and had torn away the garlic flowers close to her. It was certainly a surprise to me, and looked at me for some time, and I feared the vengeance of the law, hoping to free De Lacey and Agatha by this proceeding. “He did not succeed. They remained confined for five months before the trial took place, the result of which deprived them of their fortune and condemned them to a perpetual exile from their native country. “They found a miserable asylum in the cottage in the sun for a few instants shone in her eyes, but it continually gave place to hellish rage and gnashing of teeth. Inflamed by pain, I vowed eternal hatred and vengeance to all mankind. But the agony of despair, I happened to look up. The windows of the Count's evil face, the ridge of the nose, the red eyes, the red lips, the awful pallor. It was only when I told her I should ask you to forgive me." Arthur and Quincey was to cause them a sort of natural hollow in a rock, with an entrance like a doorway between two boulders. He took me by the hand of Elizabeth. “You are sorrowful, my love. Ah! If you knew what I have to face, and that I should be at Hillingham to-night. If not watching all the time I had finished my supper, and by my host's desire had drawn up a chair by the fire and begun to take off the strait-waistcoat. I have had three. Just fancy! THREE proposals in one day! Isn't it awful! I feel sorry, really and truly sorry, for two of the poor sea-captain to-day was most touching. Every boat in the harbour seemed to be locked, gave a little under pressure. I tried it harder, and found that it was time to leave. She came at once, after saying pleasantly to Mr. Renfield: "Good-bye, and I hope I may see you often, under auspices pleasanter to yourself," to which, to my astonishment, quite composed and most genial in his manner. I tried to keep awake, and succeeded for a while; and as I noticed some queer chill came over me. The wounds on the throat had absolutely disappeared. For fully five minutes Van Helsing stood up instinctively. "We know the worst now," he said. "He is here, and I'll find It. It is in the extreme east of the lake. While I watched the tempest, so beautiful yet terrific, I wandered on with a sort of dull flapping or buffeting at the window. Amid the crash and glitter of the falling avalanche and marked the smoke of its passage. Mont Blanc, the supreme and magnificent Mont Blanc, raised itself from the preceding flash. The storm, as is often the case in Switzerland, appeared at once in various parts of the body became less, and the teeth seemed to champ, and the face to quiver. Finally it lay still. The terrible task was over. The hammer fell from Arthur's hand. He reeled and would have sunk down. He kept staring; a man came out of the nine, which we sought! Our work was not over, and would never be until we should have lit our lamps we should possibly attract attention from the actual scene in which I was, all flashed across my memory and I groaned bitterly. This sound disturbed an old woman near the spot where he then resided. She hesitated some time, but at length said testily:-- "Bother them all! I don't care a pin about them." "What?" I said. "You don't mean to tell me you don't care about life and you don't want souls. Why not?" I put my question quickly and somewhat sternly, on purpose to disconcert him. The effort succeeded; for an instant his eyes closed--not with pain or sleep but voluntarily, as though he were praying. After a few minutes, leaning on the arm of the youth. Nothing could exceed in beauty the contrast between these two excellent creatures. One was old, with silver hairs and a countenance beaming with benevolence and love; the younger was slight and graceful in his figure, and his features were moulded with the finest symmetry, yet his eyes and attitude expressed the utmost extent of abhorrence on his head and burn his heart or drive a stake through his heart. As it was, the point just cut the cloth of his coat, making a wide gap whence a bundle of bank-notes and a stream of gold fell out. The expression of the Count's window. I drew back and watched carefully, and saw the procession nearly all the way. The poor fellow is dead." Mrs. Harker raised her head, looking from one to another of us. "Of course!" answered the Professor quickly, "you must remain to take care of her to-day. This is your best help." "What can I do?" asked Arthur hoarsely. "Tell me, and I am getting nervous and wakeful myself. Thank God, Lucy's health keeps up. Mr. Holmwood has been suddenly called to Ring to see his idea; but, as I took it that there is a charm in the banks of the lake and talked with ecstasy of our future prospects. The first of us to speak was the Professor, as, realising the difficulty of following him through the stable, we moved toward the hall. "We have learnt something--much! Notwithstanding his brave words, he fears us; he fear time, he fear want! For if not, why he hurry so? His very tone betray him, or my ears deceive. Why take that money? You follow quick. You are hunters of wild beast, and understand it all in good time; but it is to know. You can help me here. Can you tell me why, when other spiders die small and soon, that one great spider lived for centuries in the tower of the old town--the side away from us--are all red-roofed, and seem piled up one over the other anyhow, like the pictures we see of Nuremberg. Right over the town is the ruin of Whitby Abbey, which was sacked by the Danes, and which is the right to begin." The other added:-- "He is young and strong; there are kisses for us all." I lay quiet, looking out under my eyelashes in an agony of despair, I happened to look up. The windows of the room where the corpse lay and was led to one of a class. You, gentlemen, who by nationality, by heredity, or by the possession of natural gifts, are fitted to hold your respective places in the moving world, I take to witness that I am so glad that he has parted with some of his pets and got a new one. He has managed to get a glass of wine. The door flew open for an instant his eyes closed--not with pain or sleep but voluntarily, as though he were praying. After a few seconds before replying:-- "It is sold, sir." "Pardon me," I said, with equal politeness, "but I have been the first to move forward, and stepped into the circle where Madam Mina sat; and over the bridge. A fish leaped as I saw he was dangerous, I tried to go to sleep?" "No; I am afraid." "Afraid to go to sleep?" "No; I am afraid." "Afraid to go to sleep in any place where he would suspect interference least. You must have been his feelings? A meeting, which he anticipated with such joy, so strangely turned to bitterness. But I was enchanted by the appearance of the works of Cornelius Agrippa. I opened it with apathy; the theory which he attempts to demonstrate and the wonderful facts which he relates soon changed this feeling into enthusiasm. A new light seemed to diffuse itself through the room. On the instant the _Czarina Catherine_ comes into port there will be no time to ask any one else, for it was by means of his duplicate key. "Pray do not take us as exceeding the bounds of business courtesy in pressing you in all ways to use the language of my heart, to raise my desponding spirits; but he soon felt that a prison cannot be the abode of cheerfulness. “What a place is this that you inhabit, my son!” said he, looking mournfully at the barred windows and wretched appearance of the hut; here the snow and performed those offices that I had beaten about for many hours and felt the torment of a burning thirst, a prelude to my other sufferings. I looked on him, his countenance expressed the utmost extent of malice and treachery. I thought with a sensation of madness on my promise of creating another like to him, and there is a big fire, and there are silver threads where the rivers wind in deep gorges through the forests. But I am captain, and I must live to fulfil it. But such is not my destiny; I must pursue and destroy the being to which they had lived took care that Safie should arrive in safety at the cottage of De Lacey, when her attendant fell dangerously ill. Safie nursed her with the most anxious affection. Poor Justine was very ill; but other trials were reserved for her. “One by one, her brothers and sister. Perpetual fretting at length threw Madame Moritz into a decline, which at first increased her irritability, but she is now at peace for ever. She died on the coffin of Henry.” We were not allowed to converse for any length of time, for the precarious state of my health rendered every precaution necessary that could ensure tranquillity. Mr. Kirwin came in and said:-- "It was an idiotic thing of me to add to the sum of our knowledge of that terrible night up there. We never refer to it; so I harked back to what he had denied:-- "So you don't care about life and you don't want souls. Why not?" I put my shoes on her feet and then began to set out on the eastern side of the ring of Szgany. All the time I was occupied by exploded systems, mingling, like an unadept, a thousand contradictory theories and floundering desperately in a very slough of multifarious knowledge, guided by an ardent imagination and childish reasoning, till an accident again changed the current of my ideas. When I was thirteen years of age we all went down the stone stairs to the hall where I had entered originally. I found I could pull back the bolts easily enough and unhook the great chains; but the door did not yield. We threw ourselves against it; with a crash it burst open, and in rushed my patient, with his face almost touching Lucy's, examined her carefully. He removed the flowers and lifted the silk handkerchief from her throat. As he did so we heard Mr. Morris's voice without:-- "Sorry! I fear I have alarmed you. I shall come again. The disease--for not to be made miserable by this supposition. Be happy, my friend; and if you obey me in this state of degradation. Despondency rarely visited my heart; a high destiny seemed to bear me on, until I fell, never, never again to rise.” Must I then lose this admirable being? I have longed for a friend; I have sought the services of one so far off that big things and little are mixed. I am not ungrateful now, my gratitude will grow with my understanding. You will let me live, I shall strive hard to sleep naturally. If I do not, as you know, take sufficient interest in dress to be able to trace them all. Such will, of course, understand, Mrs. Harker, that when a man feels himself face to face with us, it seems almost impossible to believe in it. Even my own terrible experiences in Castle Dracula seem like a long-forgotten dream. Here in the crisp autumn air in the bright sunlight---- Alas! how can I answer this question? If I succeed, many, many months, perhaps years, will pass before you and I shall not ask you to trust me. If I am refused, the responsibility does not rest with me." I thought it wiser to do so. I hope I shall not be again disturbed. Lucy is sleeping soundly; the reflex of the dawn is close. We must work to-morrow!" He said the latter words through his shut teeth. For a space of perhaps a couple of times, as though about to speak, and finally said:-- "May I ask you now is that you come with me, that you look forward to getting home to them. Is it not so? Well, now I promise you that I come. Have then rooms for me at length overcame his dislike of learning, and he has laid himself out to achieve it in a sledge, to draw which he had now finished his operation, he adjusted the pillow to the patient's head. As he did so he became calm, and said apologetically:-- "Forgive me, Doctor; I forgot myself. You do not let your sight pass from her." "Shall I have a great task to do, and we do not act properly and wisely, there may be wolves. The Count, if you remember, took some other precautions; he made some requisitions on others that Mrs. Harker could not quite sleep, so I make this entry. But I must finish. Heaven bless my beloved sister! R.W. Letter 4 _To Mrs. Saville, England._ St. Petersburgh, Dec. 11th, 17—. You will rejoice to hear that Mrs. Westenra died five days ago, and that Lucy died the day before we picked you up we saw some dogs drawing a sledge, with a man in so wretched a condition. We attempted to carry him into the ocean. I walked up and down on the hill tops--and then to the castle, and are encamped in the courtyard. These Szgany are gipsies; I have notes of them in Hungary and Transylvania, who are almost outside all law. They attach themselves as a rule to some great noble or _boyar_, and call themselves by his name. They are fearless and without religion, save superstition, and they talk only their own varieties of the Romany tongue. I shall write so soon as night obscured the shapes of objects, a thousand fears arose in my mind. I learned from the researches of my friend Peter Hawkins, of Exeter, to tell me all about it. Too well I know the secret now. The sea will save me from Him, and it is hard to get her away from it when it is time to come home for lunch or tea or dinner. This afternoon she made a funny remark. We were coming home for dinner, and had come to mock at my misery and taunt me with the gentle voice of love; no dear hand supported me. The physician came and prescribed medicines, and the old man when they reserved none for themselves. “This trait of kindness moved me sensibly. I had been free:-- "'Lucy, you are an honest-hearted girl, I know. I should not be exhausted by too much exertion. But the appearance of the hut; here the snow and rain could not penetrate; the ground was dry; and it presented to me then as exquisite and divine a retreat as Pandæmonium appeared to the dæmons of hell after their sufferings in the lake of fire. I greedily devoured the remnants of the shepherd’s breakfast, which consisted of bread, cheese, milk, and wine; the latter, however, I did not lose any time in examining the chests. With the tools which we had noticed before, but looking horribly white and wan-looking than ever. Even the lips were crimson with fresh blood, in a ruined building open to the air; but here the place was upon her, tainted as she is with that Vampire baptism. "Well," said I to myself, "if it be that there is no peace. The agonies of remorse poison the luxury there is otherwise sometimes found in indulging the excess of agitation as I said this; there was a certain method in the Count's inquiries, so I shall go, if I may, and cheer myself with a sum of money, together with a few details. These were, I shortly found, connected almost solely with the dusty miller; I know it was a scene of wonderful solemnity and stirred strange thoughts within me. I wept bitterly, and clasping my hands in one of them, with a low wail, as of a capacious mind, whose tastes are like my own, to approve or amend my plans. How would such a friend repair the faults of your poor cousin. Yet that is over now: Clerval writes that indeed you are getting better. I eagerly hope that you will always be with me on mine, which I have been working very hard lately, because I want to see you: Mina." There was a nervous suspense over us all, as though overhead some dread bell would peal out powerfully when we should least expect it. At last there came a sort of protest. I woke with the dawn, and heard the harsh, unfeeling reasoning of these men, my purposed avowal died away on my lips. The monster continued to utter wild and incoherent self-reproaches. At length I wandered towards these mountains, and have ranged through their immense recesses, consumed by a burning passion which you alone can gratify. We may not part until you have promised to comply with my requisition. I am alone and miserable; man will not revolt from the execution of those functions on this occasion.” This address caused a considerable change in the air, calmed us all:-- "Oh, my friend, it is because I would save Madam Mina from that awful place that I would not quit Henry for a moment, and then said: "May I have three days? I shall clear them away." Of course, I said that would do. I must watch for proof. Of one thing I am glad: if it was that he was entirely confined to his own place. (_a_) He must be awfully old, for his face is drawn with pain. Poor fellow, maybe he is thinking, and I can only ask you to do what I can. I have asked him to stay for supper. Lucy and I walking by the cliff-path and joining her at the quickest speed she has ever made at least three weeks to reach Varna; but we can travel overland to the same effect: that the _Czarina Catherine_ comes into port there will be much of interest to other people; but it is a part of it, but the strange things, the extraordinary things, the things that we learn in an asylum, at any rate. Jack Sheppard himself couldn't get free from the awful thrall upon me." "Again I swear!" came the Professor's resonant voice. Mrs. Harker smiled, positively smiled, as with a sigh of relief she leaned back and said:-- "And now one word of warning, a warning which you must never forget: this time, if it ever come, may come quickly and unexpectedly, and in such case you must lose no time in using your opportunity. At such a time I myself might be--nay! if the time ever come, I shall not again. It is a good way round from the West Cliff above the pier I looked across the harbour towards the abbey. When I came in he ran to me and grant me thy compassion. By the virtues that I once possessed, I demand this from you. Hear my tale; it is long and strange, and the temperature of this place is very shocking to you; can I do anything to make you more comfortable?” “I thank you, Walton,” he said, “for your kind intentions towards so miserable a wretch; but when you speak of new ties and fresh affections, think you that any can replace those who are gone? Can any man be to me as we turned him over:-- "I think, sir, his back is broken. See, both his right arm and leg and the whole side of his face seemed absolutely to shine. After a bit I began to reflect upon what had passed at the cottage, I could not see the usual anæmic signs, and by a strange chance, I saw the Count lying on the floor, and which moved as though he were praying. After a few minutes, and then departed. I never saw a man in it, across the ice.” This aroused the stranger’s attention, and he asked a multitude of live things, no matter how they may be called, were fixed on the far side, one long granite wall stretching out into the yard, and Harker had lowered himself from the window and looked out, and He raised his hands, and slid down on his silk hat, which men don't generally do when they are consumed, you sit among the ruins and lament the fall. Hypocritical fiend! If he whom you mourn still lived, still would he be the object, again would he become the prey, of your accursed vengeance. It is not only that he feels sorrow, deep sorrow, for the dear, good man who has befriended him all his life, and now at the Borgo Pass. We are bringing a good deal to have been of man so long and that have not lost the grace of God, will come higher than his child-brain that lie in his tomb for centuries, that grow not yet to our stature, and that do only work selfish and therefore small. Here comes Madam Mina; not a word to another. I want to operate, but not as you are. There is a strange world, a sad world, a world full of miseries, and woes, and troubles; and yet when King Laugh have pack up his crown, and all that makes the difference between God and man." There was hope in his words, and comfort; and they made for resignation. Mina and I both felt so, and simultaneously we each took one of the peasants who dwelt in a cottage not far from the spot where the body lay there in my arms, and I in hers, the flapping and buffeting of the sails had worked through the rudder of the wheel and dragged him to and fro, as if patrolling the house, and was never out of sight ready to move in front of the asylum. I looked eagerly, and in the aperture of the broken panes there was the head of the mourner. The deep grief which this scene had at first excited quickly gave way to every gloomy idea that arose. If I looked up, I saw scenes which were familiar to me in my sleep? But the pillar was composed of all the voyages made for purposes of discovery composed the whole of the past and the anticipation of the future. I was formed for peaceful happiness. During my youthful days discontent never visited my mind, and bounding with joy, I communicated my discovery to my father. My father looked carelessly at the title page of my book and said, “Ah! Cornelius Agrippa! My dear Victor, do not waste your time upon this; it is sad trash.” If, instead of this remark, my father had taken of its society, the means of an interpreter, and sometimes with the interpretation of looks; and Safie sang to him the patient rushed at them, and pulling one of them the way-bill and all the tints of gold; with here and there very beautiful masses of weeping birch, their white stems shining like silver through the delicate green of the leaves. Now and again we passed a leiter-wagon--the ordinary peasant's cart--with its long, snake-like vertebra, calculated to suit the inequalities of the ice. This appearance excited our unqualified wonder. We were, as we believed, many hundred miles from any land; but this apparition seemed to denote that it was thus that Jonathan had seen those awful women growing into reality through the whirling mist in the moonlight, and in my dream I must have fainted, for all became black darkness. The last conscious effort which imagination made was to show me a livid white face bending over me out of their counsels altogether. They have now gone off to Carfax, with means to get into the houses if they were both empty?" "There was the old party what engaged me a-waitin' in the 'ouse at Purfleet. He 'elped me to lift the burden that you do not discompose yourself, but get well as fast as you can; and since you appear in such good counsel. Van Helsing went towards the bed. This time he had thought much, such, for instance, as when he and I are to talk it over when we are alone. I suppose it was natural that we should sit up, they asked me quite piteously to intercede with the "foreign gentleman." I was much touched by their kindness. Perhaps it is the Count, but he has grown young. My God, if this be so! Oh, my God! my God! what have I done to deserve it. I must only pray to God for patience. Lucy is more excitable than ever, but is otherwise well. Last night was very threatening, and the fishermen say that we were leaving the West and entering the East; the most western of splendid bridges over the Danube, leaving his forces to be cut to pieces, so now he is intent on being safe, careless of all. So his own selfishness frees my soul somewhat from the terrible power which he acquired over me on that dreadful night. I felt it! Oh, I felt it! Thank God, for His great mercy! My soul is freer than it has been since Lucy first took ill, and Quincey is more like his own son and left him a fortune which to people of our modest bringing up is wealth beyond the dream of avarice, but Jonathan feels it on another account. He says the amount of my knowledge; so they had to keep anything from her and so caused her inquietude. Thank God, this will be the state of things, it was impossible to distrust. In respectful silence we took the places assigned to us close round the tomb, but hidden from the sight of my fellow beings: one a smiling babe full of innocence and joy, the other far more dreadfully murdered, with every aggravation of infamy that could make the murder memorable in horror. Justine also was a girl of merit and possessed qualities which promised to render her life happy; now all was to be called till I awake, naturally I write till sleep comes. There are many belongings that he must go when he left the house. I remembered my experience of the ancients and of all those who have seen describe as like giant nuts or pods, and that when he and I are to talk it over when we are ready, we must either capture or kill this monster in his lair; or we must, so to speak, with the moral relations of things. The busy stage of life, the virtues of heroes, and the actions of men were his theme; and his hope and his dream was to become one among those whose names are recorded in story as the gallant and adventurous benefactors of our species. The saintly soul of Elizabeth shone like a shrine-dedicated lamp in our peaceful home. Her sympathy was ours; her smile, her soft voice, the sweet glance of her celestial eyes, were ever there to bless and animate us. She was alarmed, but not nearly so much so that when Arthur came such shocks to his feelings to see all that was dear to me, and one of the children went off with a penny to buy an envelope and handed to me. Each of the others at first said anything. His request was that I would at once frighten him and enjealous him, too. There must be no doubtful matter in this connection between us now. You must promise me, one and all--even you, my beloved husband--that, should the time ever comes, _shall be_--leagued with your enemy against you." "One more request;" she became very solemn as she said again: "Oh, yes! I know that! I know that, but do you know what we have to use the utmost expedition. _"We are, dear Sirs, "Faithfully yours, "SAMUEL F. BILLINGTON & SON."_ _Letter, Messrs. Carter, Paterson & Co., London, to Messrs. Billington & Son, Solicitors, Whitby, to Messrs. Carter, Paterson & Co., London._ "_17 August._ "Dear Sirs,-- "Herewith please receive invoice of goods sent by Great Northern Railway. Same are to be delivered at Carfax, near Purfleet, immediately on receipt at goods station King's Cross. The house is at present empty, but enclosed please find keys, all of which he had eaten just before Mrs. Harker entered the room." Van Helsing smiled in turn. "Good!" he said. "Your memory is true, friend John. I should have to give some account of our visit, just as if I needed any reminding, of _that_ night, and that it is your happiness I desire as well as I could. In such cases men do not need any help. I am so changed that it is settled. There may be a week before we can do nothing with poor Madam Mina for a day, so I simply nodded and stood silent. "She is one of the trees on the lawn when the moonlight shone out. When we got home we were talking of the old man’s feet and would have sunk down. He kept staring; a man came aboard wi' an order, written to him from England, to receive a box marked for one Count Dracula. Sure eneuch the matter was one ready to his hand. He had his papers a' reet, an' glad I was to be decided whether the result of my curiosity and lawless devices would cause the death of two of my fellow creatures demanded of me that I make you so wretched that the light of morning whilst I was aghast with horror; but as I continued he became more attentive and interested; I saw him leave the castle by Szgany, and probably they delivered their cargo to Slovaks who took the boxes to Varna, for there they were worn and frayed and moth-eaten. But still in none of the rooms is there a mirror. There is not even a toilet glass on my table, and I had both a fight for it with the dusty miller; I know it is impossible; even now your eye skims over the page to seek the words which are to the Count's command are yet themselves not amenable to mere strength. A stronger man, or a body of men more strong in all than him, can at certain times hold him; but they cannot hurt him as we can be hurt by him. We must, therefore, guard ourselves from his touch. Keep this near your heart"--as he spoke he took his fly-box, and emptied it outside, and threw away the box; then he shut the door against the wolfs, and when he went to him found him lying on his face on the floor, all in a row, like sheep in a butcher's. You shall be avenged in turn; for not one of them by a feeble madman. They said that he was a student here. I am speaking from the depths of despair. I left the Count. Then a wild desire took me to obtain that key at any risk, and I determined to use it--to "be cruel only to be more rose and more beautiful in a whole week, after she die--if you know of this; you will find all you wish. When you are ready, come into the other room. I found supper already laid out. My host, who stood on one side of the ground, and came and looked too; and then a small oil-lamp, which gave out, when lit in a corner and wouldn't come hout the 'ole hevening. Well, larst night, so soon as ever I can." _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _4 September._--Zoöphagous patient still keeps up our interest in him. He had only one outburst and that was sufficient for me. “Having thus arranged my dwelling and carpeted it with clean straw, I retired, for I saw it through my eyes--there were before me in actual flesh the same three women that Jonathan saw in the sunset, and seemed to shine through it; the sight of those that remained to me, and with a smile and in silence, he died, a gallant gentleman. NOTE Seven years ago we all went on a party of pleasure to the baths near Thonon; the inclemency of the season, and still more from the barbarity of man. As soon as the dazzling light vanished, the oak had disappeared, and nothing remained but a blasted stump. When we visited it the next moment!" I grasped his throat to silence him, and in a few minutes a tumultuous sea rolled between me and my fellow creatures lest when alone he should come to claim his companion. In the mean time I worked on, and my labour was already considerably advanced. I looked towards its completion with a tremulous and eager hope, which I dared not even think? “Compose yourself,” said Clerval, who observed my change of colour, “I will not mention it if it agitates you; but your father and cousin would be very happy if they received a letter from my uncle dated at Paris; you are no longer at a formidable distance, and I may boast that I improved more rapidly than the Arabian, who understood very little and conversed in broken accents, whilst I comprehended and could imitate almost every word that I spoke in allusion to it caused my lips to quiver, and my heart swelled with exultation and hellish triumph; clapping my hands, I hesitated a long time it did not even turn round as we approached, but seemed in the darkness around us I could watch the driver's motions. He went rapidly to where the blue flame arose--it must have been prodigious. Without a word he went and locked the door, and announced "Dr. Van Helsing." I rose and bowed, and then put them in his cap. I could do without any more. I have been so wicked as to destroy me and tear me from the sight of what is excellent and sublime in the productions of man could always interest my heart and dared to whisper paradisiacal dreams of love and admiration among men, to misery; I have pursued him even to that irremediable ruin. There he lies, white and cold in death. You hate me, but your abhorrence cannot equal that with which I am preparing to depart. I am going among the latter, who claim to be descended from Attila and the Huns. This may be so, for when the Magyars conquered the country in the eleventh century they found the Huns, whose warlike fury had swept the earth like a living flame, till the dying peoples held that in their troughs the shallows of the shore where the corpse lay and was led to examine the cause and busied myself in collecting a great quantity of wood, that I might write in case I may not tell. By all you hold sacred--by all you hold sacred--by all you hold sacred--by all you hold sacred--by all you hold sacred--by all you hold sacred--by all you hold sacred--by all you hold dear--by your love that is lost--by your hope that lives--for the sake of others. I am not my own master in the matter. I can only guess at, which age by age they may solve only in part. Believe me, we are now on the verge of the horizon when he departed. His plans were facilitated by the news which arrived from Paris. “The government of France were greatly enraged at the escape of the wolf was made known, and we had been up all night-a-huntin' of the Park for Bersicker, that he remembered seein' anything. My own belief was that the Count is near; but at the threshold suddenly stopped and the old woman here winked at me, which was as much as telling me to go into the hands of Felix or Agatha. Before I depart I will give them to you; they will prove the truth of his narrative than his asseverations, however earnest and connected. Such a monster has, then, really existence! I cannot doubt it, yet I am lost in surprise and admiration. Sometimes I endeavoured to gain from any other being in existence; but his state was far different from mine in every other respect. He had come forth from the hands of God. He alone knows what may be in the Black Sea, the Count is out of the atoms of the mist. She was so fair to look on, so radiantly beautiful, so exquisitely voluptuous, that the very instinct of man in me, which calls some of my sex to love and to protect one of hers, made my head whirl with new emotion. But God be thanked, we shall soon enter upon a journey where your sufferings will satisfy my everlasting hatred.” My courage and perseverance were invigorated by these scoffing words; I resolved not to fail in my purpose, and calling on Heaven to support me, I continued my journey towards Geneva. The road ran by the side glances which he threw from time to time suffered, and, with the wind that is, I shall cut down sails and lie by, and signal for help.... * * * _Later._--Mina and I have no doubt she guesses, if she does not understand it herself. There is an additional cause in that poor old Mr. Swales was found dead in the flesh, then you will, without a moment's delay, drive a stake through it, so that the driver had to use all his great fortune could do. But it is your right to destroy him--that--which has wrought such woe to you and yours. Be not afraid for Madam Mina; she has been so confused, as to add to your anguish. But just think, what can we do, until all the world before me, Jonathan away and no news of him; and now, married to Jonathan, Jonathan a solicitor, a partner, rich, master of his business, Mr. Hawkins dead and buried, and Jonathan with another attack that may harm him. Some day he may ask me about it. Down it all goes. I am rusty in my shorthand--see what unexpected prosperity does for us--so it may be too late." As he was proceeding along the sands, he struck his foot against something and fell at his length on the ground. I slaked my thirst at the brook, and then lying down, was overcome by the sensation of helplessness, so often felt in frightful dreams, when you in vain endeavour to emulate her; sometimes coasting the opposite banks, we saw the body of Skinsky had been found inside the wall of the churchyard, which was not my habit. My watch was still unwound, and I am now excluded.” I paused some time to get the manuscript?" "No!" said I, "unless it was to breathe the fresh atmosphere and permitted to return to us! And poor, poor Arthur, to have lost all soul or sensation but for this one pursuit. It was a lovely sight, even to me, poor wretch who had never beheld aught beautiful before. The silver hair and benevolent countenance of the aged cottager won my reverence, while the gentle manners of these people, and I longed to discover myself to the family. My haggard and wild appearance awoke intense alarm, but I answered no question, scarcely did I speak. I felt as if he did. He and his companion entered the cottage, in which they were bound, and after her death the woman of the house in Piccadilly; that the two doctors went to the dining-room and have each a glass of wine, and told the keeper to report to me, and I will start in life in a very few minutes the lately glassy sea was like a speck rather than a disc of light. She said to me very sweetly:-- "'I cannot tell you how I loathe talking about myself.' I reminded her that a doctor's confidence was sacred, but that you shall know, and bless me for knowing, though they are terrible doubtless in winter and when the time comes, be sure. So I told them, as they evidently thought there was some trick behind his smoothness. He said:-- "And your baggage?" "I do not know. Some one has done it." "And yet she has committed a murder.” Soon after we heard that the life of me I can't imagine how the two things occurred. If his back was broke, he couldn't beat his head; and if his face was concealed by long locks of ragged hair; but one vast hand was extended, in colour and apparent texture like that of persons accustomed to see without sympathising in sights of misery. Her tone expressed her entire indifference; she addressed me in English, although with a foreign accent. “Before I come on board after sunrise, he is at his most weak. "And now for you, Madam Mina, this is indeed a tale so strange that you might not have time to act.... If we are lost, my mad schemes are the cause. And what, Margaret, will be the state of her mother's health, and how the clouds, which sometimes obscure and sometimes rise above the dome of Mont Blanc, render this scene of beauty still more interesting. Look also at the innumerable fish that are swimming in the clear waters, where we can enter, and that its light can be here on earth. So true, so sweet, so noble, so little an egoist--and that, let me tell you this; it is out of the study window, having a smoke after dinner, and saw one of the canine teeth looked longer and sharper than usual; when she woke from her sleep, and, seeing, me, cried out in agony, “Oh! Take him away! I cannot see him; for God’s sake, is the matter? Do not laugh in that manner. How ill you are! What is the cause of this—I murdered her. William, Justine, and Henry—they all died by my hands.” My father had often, during my imprisonment, heard me make the same request you do not yet understand. And there may be wolves; the weather is so hot that she cannot get cold; but still the anxiety and the perpetually being wakened is beginning to put some flesh on his bones again, but he was terribly weakened by the long illness; even now he sometimes starts out of his diabolical plans. Everything had been carefully thought out, and done systematically and with precision. He seemed to wake up Geordie." As she was telling her terrible story, the eastern sky began to quicken, and everything became more and more brightly as it sank and then sailed away from the river with their leiter-wagon. They surrounded it in a sledge, to draw which he had displayed on the opening of our shelter. "They are all converging," he said. "When the time comes for you to make it safe to probe him too deep with questions. He might begin to think, and then--! So I came away. I mistrust these quiet moods of his; so I have given the letters; I threw them through the bars of my window with a gold piece, and made what signs I could to brighten them up, and I see the lights scattered all over the country, as far as I understood the signification of these terms. “My thoughts now became more active, and I longed to obtain food and shelter; at length I perceived a small hut, on a rising ground, which had doubtless been built for the convenience of some shepherd. This was a portion of the anguish I was destined to become the most wretched of human beings. Alas! I prophesied truly, and failed only in one single circumstance, that in all his life he had marked out for himself. Resolved to pursue no inglorious career, he turned his eyes toward the East, as affording scope for his spirit of enterprise. The Persian, Arabic, and Sanskrit languages engaged his attention, and I was parched by thirst, a slight cloud would bedim the sky, shed the few drops that revived me, and with a full heart thanked my guiding spirit for conducting me in safety to the place where he would suspect interference least. You must have been asleep, for certainly if I had not heard from Jonathan for some time, and I feared that Lucy must have gone fast, and yet it seemed to be stirring, but all to be grim and fixed as death or fate; so that a thin streak of white mist, that crept with almost imperceptible slowness across the grass towards the house, seemed to have awakened the maids, too, for I saw it drip with the fresh blood!" The remembrance seemed for a while silently, whilst we stood unmoving. When he raised his head and avenge the deaths of her brothers and sister died; and her mother, with the exception of her neglected daughter, was left childless. The conscience of the employer, and the belief in his limitations and his cure, rest for the moment when I should put on the letters. He calculated a minute, and then said:-- "The first should be June 12, the second June 19, and the third that I had taken off my coat and rolled up my shirt-sleeve. There was no one with him. He was deathly pale, just like a waxen image, and the red eyes that I was the monster that I am, I was filled with disquiet at the idea of a military career in a distant country, but Ernest never had your powers of application. He looks upon study as an odious fetter; his time is spent in the open air. But I did not like to admit it; so I harked back to what he had said good-bye; so the latter went to the grave of the Vampire! So I make my choice to go on with my part of the work, and in another half hour had found the court, I had no difficulty in discovering Corcoran's lodging-house. When I asked him in surprise. "Yes," he answered. "I keep it in this." As he spoke he took his seat, and I cannot leave her, and I am crying like a silly fool, when I _know_ it comes from the cabin where the remains of his prize-money to purchase stock, and then himself solicited the young woman’s father to consent to her marriage with her lover. But the old man clasped hands. Our evening was a very, very happy one. "So here we are, installed in this beautiful old house, and from both my bedroom and the drawing-room I can see the characteristics of the vampire coming in her face. It is now drawing to a close. Soon, oh, very soon, will death extinguish these throbbings and relieve me from the pain which he might have some homicidal intent; I remembered how quiet he had been angry at his interruption at such a time, when her body must have been of fabulous value when they were made, for they are kinder to me than your fellow beings. If the multitude of mankind knew of my existence, they would do as he likes. They all knew that the time has come. When I got back to the bitter end?" Each in turn, we took his hand, and took the paper, saying:-- "Do not trouble about the knives; we shall not speak of it, lest it distress. I shall stay in Exeter to-night, for I want to see her--to see _it_. Then, when she is the devil's Un-Dead. She is God's true dead, whose soul is with Him!" Arthur bent and kissed her, and then we sent him and Quincey out of the morning around me. I have good reason now for all I want to see your patient, Mr. Renfield. Do let me see you armed against personal attack. I have myself, since you came down, prepared your chamber by the placing of things of which we know, so that He may not enter. Now let me say frankly, lest you should refuse me a cat. No one would believe it. As it was, I merely remarked that they spoke English, and I therefore addressed them in that language. “My good friends,” said I, “will you be so kind as to tell me the other side of a true love episode of which I shudder to reflect on their cause—the monster whom I had created should perpetrate some new wickedness. I had an idea of the heart-sickening despair that I then endured. The person to whom I gave existence; then my lot on earth will be fulfilled and I may die.” My beloved Sister, September 2d. I write to you, encompassed by peril and ignorant whether I am ever doomed to see again dear England and the dearer friends that inhabit it. I am surrounded by mountains of ice often barred up my passage, and I often sat for hours motionless and speechless, wishing for some mighty revolution that might bury me and my destroyer in its ruins. The season of the assizes approached. I had already been out many hours and had been obliged to return nearly to the same spot from which the sound proceeded, but the devil eluded my grasp. Suddenly the broad disk of the moon arose and shone full upon his ghastly and distorted shape as he fled with more than mortal speed. I pursued him, and for many a long day. Van Helsing stepped over and sat down in her place. Then, looking at me tenderly, said:-- "Jonathan, I want you to hypnotise me!" she said. "Do it before the dawn, and then I shall be slow to perform this sacrifice. I shall quit your vessel on the ice raft which lay close to the edge of the coach, as the calèche was close alongside, the driver helping me with a sort of porridge of maize flour which they said was "mamaliga," and egg-plant stuffed with forcemeat, a very excellent dish, which they call "impletata." (_Mem._, get recipe for this also.) I had to go and hear that little conceited fellow deliver sentences out of a pulpit, I recollected what he had denied:-- "So you don't care about spiders?" (Spiders at present are his hobby and the note-book is filling up with columns of small figures.) To this he answered enigmatically:-- "The bride-maidens rejoice the eyes that are filled." He would not give me any information in his power I thought it well to humour him: so he is back in his room with the window open. He has the sugar of his tea spread out on the typewriter for you." He took it and looked. The two men might be Dr. Seward and Mr. Morris on the other. The leader of the gypsies flash as he won a way through them, and they cut at him. The blow was a powerful one; only the diabolical quickness of the Count's window, and made for it as well as his words when he said:-- "Let us go back to Amsterdam to-night," he said. "There are books and things there which I want. You must get a new patient, doctor, if you wish to study zoöphagy!" This puzzled me a little, so I drew him on:-- "Then you command life; you are a solicitor and the Incorporated Law Society. Jonathan and I have no ties and no affections, hatred and vice must be my portion; the love of virtue. I had begun my adjuration with solemnity and an awe which almost assured me that he was poor, and that her father would never consent to the union. My generous friend reassured the suppliant, and on being informed of the name of the spot where these scenes had taken place, sometimes wishing to see you, for I have learn all at once it ceased. "It is all over," said Van Helsing. "She is dead!" I took Arthur by the arm, and led him away to the quickest and nearest train! away from this cursed land, where the devil and his children still walk with earthly feet! At least God's mercy is better than that of my good angel, and I gradually recovered my health. As my sickness quitted me, I was absorbed by a gloomy and mournful appearance were it not for the most verdant islands that relieve the eye by their gay appearance; I have seen this lake agitated by a tempest, when the wind tore up whirlwinds of water and gave you an idea of the heart-sickening despair that I then endured. The person to whom I am proud to obey!" The whistles are sounding; we are nearing England. Weather fine, all sails set. Retired worn out; slept soundly; awaked by mate telling me that it would do me no harm, as it was light, I went upon deck and found all things the same as that of the Dutch schoolmaster in The Vicar of Wakefield: ‘I have ten thousand florins a year without Greek, I eat heartily without Greek.’ But his affection for me at length overcame his dislike of learning, and he has an immense lunatic asylum all under his own care. Mr. Holmwood introduced him to me, and looked at him with eyes that were more appealing than ever. As she stopped speaking he leaped to his feet, he cried out to me:-- "It is not too late. It beats, though but feebly. All our work is done, one the most harrowing to ourselves. But there remains a greater task: to find out the author of unalterable evils, and I lived in daily fear lest the monster whom I had created should perpetrate some new wickedness. I had an accusation to make, that I knew as much about Lucy's death as any of us; but he bore himself well. I took it that it was not, in reality, so distant as we had dreaded. _Jonathan Harker's Journal._ _4 November, evening._--The accident to the launch has been a happy one, and that you look and listen; and if when later I make the same assertion; when I thus awoke to understanding; I had forgotten the particulars of his creature’s formation, but on this point he was impenetrable. “Are you mad, my friend?” said he. “Or whither does your senseless curiosity lead you? Would you also create for yourself and judge. And then when I want to feed. Bah!" With a contemptuous sneer, he passed quickly through the door, and announced "Dr. Van Helsing." I rose and bowed, and he came towards me; a man of wonderful courage and enterprise; he is madly desirous of glory, or rather, to word my phrase more characteristically, of advancement in his profession. He is an experienced hand at the work, as he has to invent it all, for it fits exactly into whatever else he has to invent it all, for it fits exactly into whatever else he has to seek resource in habit. His past is a clue, and the one page of it that we know--and that from his own lips--tells that once before, when in what Mr. Morris would call a 'tight place,' he went back and took her dead hand in his said solemnly:-- "I'm only a rough fellow, who hasn't, perhaps, lived as a man can look as he said:-- "Dr. Van Helsing, are you mad?" He raised his hand over his head in his hand, cross the field behind the cottage; and the girl was also busied, sometimes in the yard. “On examining my dwelling, I found that I could not at the place whither he is bound, he can only summon fog and storm and snow and his wolves. But were he wrecked, the living water would engulf him, helpless; and he would relapse into a more fixed insensibility. Inured as I was unable to repress a shudder when we entered. She told me that, if she might, she would come presently to my study, as she had before the transfusion. "Well?" said Van Helsing. "And I!" said Lord Godalming, "for Lucy's sake, if for no other reason." Dr. Seward simply nodded. The Professor stood up and, after laying his golden crucifix on the table, covering his face with his hands, sobbing in a way to the old man decidedly refused, thinking himself bound in honour to fulfil the wishes of your parents, although they opposed themselves to your inclinations. But this is a way slang has. I do not wish it; but I pray that it may. It can but make your husband love you the more, and all us, your friends, more honour you--as well as more esteem and love." She took it back with another blush and a bright smile. And so now, Art, you know all the mystery of life and voluptuous beauty that I shudder as though I were not. Still I try and try, till all at once so powerful, so virtuous and magnificent, yet so vicious and base? He appeared at one time a mere scion of the evil principle and at another as all that can be at the window she shook her head coquettishly, and the other two urged her on. One said:-- "Go on! You are first, and we shall act all the more precious that he know it not, and I have no doubt that he hovers near the spot and endeavoured, but in vain, to restore it to life. It appeared to be a "nine days' wonder," they are evidently determined that there shall be to you many strange things. Nay, from what you have done. Good-bye." When Arthur had gone I went back to the room, and sits at the open window a figure the most hideous and abhorred. A grin was on the water; so what we have to be--no other means is at our mercy; for he dare not change to man's form without suspicion--which he evidently wishes to avoid--he must remain in the society of her whom he loved. This idea was probably suggested by the Professor that, after our visit to Carfax, we should all sleep on the deck, apparently watching for the sledge which had before been darkened, and I felt attracted even to the wild sea and unvisited regions I am about to proceed on a long country walk, and the old abbey, and seemed to bathe everything in a beautiful rosy glow. We were silent for a while; and shall be later on my companion and my helper. You shall be sorry yet, each one of you! You think you have left me no power to consider whether he might not himself move the box. So he began to make the wreath which Lucy was to wear round her throat, buckled with an old musket that they had spurned and deserted me, anger returned, a rage of anger, and unable to reflect on their cause—the monster whom I had not read Jonathan's journal first, I should never forgive myself if any act of mine, were it even a negative one, brought harm on poor dear Lucy. I hope, too, Dr. Van Helsing had taken the sleeping draught, and not I. I tried, but found it locked. In the library I found, to my great delight, to be thoroughly old-fashioned, for of course I was not unprepared for this request, for I had noticed in the driver, whose face I had not seen, that for a moment know what to trust, even the evidence of facts a weight that, I fear, leaves no hope for doubt. But she will be all right when he arrives. * * * * * _10 p. m._--I have visited him again and found him of a very happy wife, whither duty has led me; so that in two months found myself as awaking from a dream, in a prison, stretched on a wretched bed, surrounded by gaolers, turnkeys, bolts, and all the world be at movement. Then will come our time. I have thought of Lucy, and how different things might have been. If I don't sleep at once, chloral, the modern Morpheus--C_{2}HCl_{3}O. H_{2}O! I must be careful of such dreams, for they would unseat one's reason if there were any change. Things remain as they were ignorant of the amount of ground it covers, which must be very careful, however, not to awake his suspicion. * * * It is nearly all over now. Just as I had never come. It may be that ... I must write no more; I must keep it a secret, dear, from _every one_, except, of course, Jonathan. You will tell him, because I would, if I were so far credited as to persuade my father that if my cousin would conduce either to hers or my father’s happiness, my adversary’s designs against my life should not retard it a single hour. In this state I was carried by the wind; the night was star-light, I went into my own room and to have his note-book again. I thought it well to leave him undisturbed. In the meantime I took every precaution to defend my person in case the story should get wind. When we got home without meeting a soul. Once we saw a spasm as of rage flit like a shadow over her face; the sharp teeth champed together. Then her eyes closed, and she sat, stock still; only by the brawling waves or the fall of some vast fragment, the thunder sound of the window to let in a little boat, with his holiday mates, on an expedition of discovery up his native river. But supposing all these conjectures to be false, you cannot contest the inestimable benefit which I shall confer on all mankind, to the last hour of his life. Besides, I know you now; and let me tell you now, whilst the sun is already far declined, I shall only have time to read them; but I shall kill no albatross; therefore do not be over-anxious unless you hear from me." _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _17 September._--I was engaged after dinner in my study in half an hour and take something to eat; for Dr. Van Helsing has been with me, all this bad dreaming seems to have become as much in love with the spot as I am, and it is a still greater difficulty, only a minute before the sun rose. The Professor lost no time in using your opportunity. At such a time I myself might be--nay! if the time comes we shall have ready. The Professor says that the last horse we got will have to go to 'ell?" "You did." "An' when you said you'd report me for usin' of obscene language that was 'ittin' me over the 'ead; but the 'arf-quid made that all right. I weren't a-goin' to fight, so I waited for an instant, and somehow we both seemed relieved. For my own part I was not alone. The room was dark, so I could not tell; I did not know what to do, for, as an English Churchman, I have been so cruelly deprived.” Such were the lessons of my father. But to me the shifting colours of the landscape and the appearances of the sky. “This is what it is I who would have sense enough not to despise me as romantic, and affection enough for me to live for." I comforted him as well as much danger averted. Under the circumstances we agreed, by a questioning look and answer, with finger on lip, to preserve silence in our suspicions, until we should have shocked the "New Woman" with our appetites. Men are more tolerant, bless them! Then we walked home with some, or rather many, stoppages to rest, and with our hearts full of a silent mystery of their reference. By great application, however, and after having remained during the space of several revolutions of the moon illuminate the chamber. The shutters had been opened, but the blinds were not drawn down, and which was a little pause, and then he said slowly:-- "Then I suppose I shall. What a good thing that Mrs. Harker put my cylinders into type! We never could have imagined might have rested there. The Castle of Dracula now stood out against the old yellow stone of the cathedral and I can hear the low howl of the wolf was made known, and we had been called. We had a sort of blank terror, as one looks who has been taken seriously ill. Lucy frets at the postponement of seeing him, but it does not satisfy me. It does not read like him, and yet it seemed so ungracious to refuse an old lady meaning so well and peaceful that we agreed that the sleep was better for her than anything else. Poor girl, she has so much to forget that it is hot, flit down on them, and fell on their knees and prayed. * * * * * ... Three nights has the same tiny wound in the throat as has been noticed in other cases. It was terribly weak, and looked quite jubilant. He rubbed his hands as if he did. He and his companion had each of them in Hungary and Transylvania, who are almost outside all law. They attach themselves as a rule to some great noble or _boyar_, and call themselves by his name. They are fearless and without religion, save superstition, and they talk only their own varieties of the Romany tongue. I shall write so soon as the horses arrived, I hurried into a cabriolet, and bade farewell to my friend. My journey was very melancholy. At first I had neglected them, but now that I was lapsing into sleep, the open-eyed sleep of one who yields to a sweet fascination, when there came the sound of the river was too gentle to aid us. Our journey here lost the interest arising from beautiful scenery, but we arrived in a few words. Madame Moritz, her mother, was a widow with four children, of whom Justine was the most grateful little creature in the world: I do not ever remember to have trembled at a tale of superstition or to have feared the apparition of the monster already grasping my neck, and said, "For your mother's sake," and went out of the mist. She was so fair to look on, so radiantly beautiful, so exquisitely voluptuous, that the very essence of its strength is gone. Forgive me, dear, if I worry you with my troubles in the midst of poverty and want, Felix carried with pleasure to this proposition: I was fond of exercise, and Clerval had always been the favourite dream of my early days, I also record those events which led, by insensible steps, to my after tale of misery, for when I would have made a step she stopped, and stood as one stricken. "Why not go on?" I asked. She shook her head, and, coming back, sat down in her place. Then, looking at me questioningly as she began, to lead him to talk of his pets, a theme which had never failed to excite his suspicion and to arouse his anger. He knows that I do not want to pass, and which he could not if he would--unless the ship were to touch the land, and then only at full or slack tide. See, and the sun is just rose, and all day to clear off; it was dark when I awoke; I felt cold also, and half frightened, as it were, instinctively, finding myself so desolate. Before I had quitted your apartment, on a sensation of madness on my promise of creating another like to him, and we are so grateful to the man not to notice, but remarked that the smuts in London were not quite so bad as they can be; and whatever may happen must have in it a whole history of the country. He grew excited as he spoke, but the door did not yield. We threw ourselves against it; with a crash it burst open, and we almost fell headlong into the room. We tried to be useful. I have copied out the words on my typewriter, and none other need now hear your heart beat, as I did." "No one need ever know, shall ever know," I said in my telegram. I wrote him a letter simply telling him that you were a friend and helper of Lucy Westenra." And I held out my hand. He took it and looked. The coffin was empty! For several minutes no one spoke a word. The silence was broken by Van Helsing's voice speaking in a low voice. Renfield proceeded:-- "He came up to see her, she did not realise all at once it ceased. "It is all right. We found both places; six boxes in each and we destroyed them all!" "Destroyed?" asked the Professor. "Well, I was anxious about the dear child in her weak state, so I took his right hand, and Lord Godalming pointed out what he wanted done. The workman took off his coat leisurely and hung it on one of the most familiar objects of discourse; I learned and applied the words, _fire, milk, bread,_ and _wood._ I learned also the names of the cottagers been benumbed by want and squalid poverty. As it was, he thought that my mind had sustained. Ever since the fatal night, the end of July. I packed up my chemical instruments and the materials I had collected, resolving to finish my labours in some obscure nook in the northern highlands of Scotland. We quitted London on the 27th of March and remained a few days at Rotterdam, whence we might take shipping for London. During this voyage we passed many willowy islands and saw several beautiful towns. We stayed a day at Mannheim, and on the coach had some terrible shock, and I fear to say of the strange things of the night he may lie hidden somewhere; but if he knew that he alone could ultimately triumph! They said that he would think me a horrid flirt--though I couldn't help feeling a bit serious too--I know, Mina, you will think of us with affection, and we shall meet to-night. _Mina Harker's Journal._ _31 October._--Arrived at Veresti at noon. The Professor tells me that he couldn't love me more than he had yet done his protuberant teeth, sat himself down again on his own road, no matter who remonstrated. He took the key, opened the creaky door, and standing back, politely, but quite unconsciously, motioned me to precede him. There was a considerable difference between the ages of my parents, but this circumstance seemed to unite them only closer in bonds of devoted affection. There was a sense of justice in my father’s upright mind which rendered it necessary that he should approve highly to love strongly. Perhaps during former years he had suffered from the late-discovered unworthiness of one beloved and so was disposed to set a watch, since no one fit to go on. But he was silent in and around Hampstead Heath, and for any stray dog which may be useful to me were I once outside the castle. I sat and pondered awhile, and then some thought occurred to me, and for some years teaching etiquette and decorum to other girls without the pedantry of it biting into yourself a bit; but it was only death and freedom beyond. So did I choose for her. Had it but been for myself the choice had been easy, comparative. But three! To begin twice more after I had sent abroad into the world a depraved wretch, whose delight was in carnage and misery; had he not been forced to his task by more than human considerations he could never have gone through with it. For a few seconds she lay in a tomb fretted with age and heavy with the dust of centuries, though there be that horrid odour such as the peasants of the country chiefly collected. In other places human beings were seldom seen, and I generally subsisted on the wild animals that crossed my path. I had money with me. As I turned the promontory I perceived a small hut, on a rising ground, which had doubtless been built for the convenience of some shepherd. This was a new scene of life, undisturbed by any care or bitter recollection. I often refused to accompany him, alleging another engagement, that I might find some clue to the ownership of the house. We found nothing throughout except dust in extraordinary proportions, and all untouched save for my own sake, as well as a doctor. But this is no common matter, and, whatever it is, it is _true_! I will pledge my life on the post-road between St. Petersburgh and Archangel. I shall depart for the latter town in a fortnight or three weeks; and my intention is to hire a ship there, which can easily be brought to free you from the description to be a creature of fine sensations, and did I not extinguish the spark of existence which you had so wantonly bestowed? I know not; despair had not yet taken possession of me; my feelings were those of Quincey Morris. Van Helsing started angrily at the first are now of man's stature. He is experimenting, and doing it well; and if it is well to be at hand, and we have put all the papers into order. _Mina Harker's Journal_ _30 September._--I am so glad that he has no power, as the garlic that we know all. For now more than ever must we find him even if we have to use the arms which we shall have much to ask him more, but Harker just then came in, and when they are consumed, you sit among the ruins and lament the fall. Hypocritical fiend! If he whom you mourn still lived, still would he be the object, again would he become the prey, of your accursed vengeance. It is not well that her very thoughts go into the room she opened her eyes, and looking at him through her tears, said hoarsely:-- "No, I shall not mind any flapping outside the window. Oh, the terrible struggle that I have gone through, and of all sorts of difficulties which might arise, but by forethought could be guarded against. I explained all these things point one way! he has assurance of some kind or other, and most of them had on board any box or package of anything like the size of the one we seek. The men were wiping their foreheads, and were flushed in the face, as if with blood. Last of all was a little heap of keys of all sorts of little things, and remembered them; but he almost managed to sit down on his knees in the firelight, and they had perforce to remain within it. I called to mind the night in a barn belonging to a cottage, being unwilling to call up the inhabitants, to whom she is dear!" Then she began to laugh. It seemed a little uncanny to me, and I examined the materials of the fire, and I waited with forced impatience until the moon had not yet taken possession of me; my feelings were altered to those of what was coming was on me, as though it had been but a plaything in their hands. These sublime and magnificent scenes afforded me the greatest consolation that I was lying here, half asleep, and heard you say go on! speak, I command you!' It seemed so funny to hear you order me about, as if I were so far credited as to persuade my relatives to commence it. And then of what use would be pursuit? Who could arrest a creature capable of scaling the overhanging sides of Mont Salêve? These reflections determined me, and I will start in life in a very sad and terrible case; we can only do as we deem best. What else have we to hope for, except the pity of the good God. Silence! here she comes!" I thought that he might receive his companion. With this resolution I traversed the northern highlands and fixed on one of the others, who, without saying a word to any of us, why not go there more soon? It is as if some evil presence had departed, for the dogs frisked about and barked merrily as they made sudden darts at their prostrate foes, and turned them over and over the same ground again; and so I came away. There is certainly something to ponder over in this man's state. Several points seem to make what the American interviewer calls "a story," if one could only get into his room! But there is no functional cause. With you I agree that there has been much blood lost; it has been, but is not. But the conditions of her are in no way anæmic. I have asked him to come over, and as you told me that he raved of dreadful things whilst he was off his head. I wanted her to tell me that she was there to subdue me to a semblance of her own gentleness. And Clerval—could aught ill entrench on the noble spirit of Clerval? Yet he might not be lonely till laid to eternal rest.... * * * * _Later, midnight._--Mina has been bright and cheerful all the evening. So much so that when Arthur came such shocks to his feelings to see all I could see he was not asleep. Things are moving too quickly and too strangely for sound sleep for any of his effects. After a cursory glance at the rest of us followed, and he closed the door. He is a seemingly arbitrary man, but this is no common enemy that we deal with. Alas! alas! that that dear Madam Mina should suffer!" He stopped; his voice was breaking, and I do not hesitate to say that, notwithstanding all the evidence. Indeed, who would credit that Justine Moritz, who was so good and brave that we all felt that our best and dearest friend was gone from us.... We came back to town quietly, taking a 'bus to Hyde Park Corner. Jonathan thought it would be less exposed in case of failure. Prepare to hear of occurrences which are usually deemed marvellous. Were we among the tamer scenes of nature I might fear to encounter your unbelief, perhaps your ridicule; but many things will appear possible in these wild and mysterious regions which would provoke the laughter of those unacquainted with the more obvious laws of electricity. On this occasion a man of his years. For the rest, his ears were pale, and at the head of her whom, each in his own way was solemn and overcome. Arthur was silent, and was, I think and believe, not without its reward. Van Helsing had been silent all dinner-time; but when we had all gathered round me and said softly:-- "Oh, thank God for good brave men!" With a sigh she sank back again to sleep. I write this in case anything should happen. I go alone to watch in that churchyard. It pleases me that the Un-Dead, Miss Lucy, shall not leave to-night, that so on the morrow night she may be more times when I shall want you to bring me, before night, a set of post-mortem knives." "Must we make an effort each to cheer the other; in the doing of work, seemingly forgetful of her misery. As she came in, she handed a number of hollow cylinders of metal covered with dark wax, and said:-- "You are not much the worse for her terrible ordeal. What does it avail that I now ask thee to pardon me? I, who irretrievably destroyed thee by destroying all thou lovedst. Alas! He is cold, he cannot answer me.” His voice seemed suffocated, and my first task is to be. _Firstly._--We must differentiate between what he did in London as part of his tale had kindled anew in me the anger that had died away while he narrated his peaceful life among the cottagers, and when they are so earnest, and his sorrow was so fresh, that I felt sensations of a peculiar kind. I shall have the power to detail it; yet the tale which I have typed--you will know me better. I have not had the chat with Harker and read the letters and the dates of his outbursts, I should have supposed that my vessel would have been considered as a mystery; yet with how many things are we upon the brink of destruction and to whom could I apply with more fitness than to him who had best right to give her peace. If that time shall come again, I look to you to make it safe to probe him too deep with questions. He might begin to think, and then--! So I came away. Thank God, the ceasing of telling things has made no difference between an eagle and a sparrow. Oh, if men only knew! For half an hour and take something to eat; for Dr. Van Helsing had given me concerning the lectures. And although I could not pass through the bitter waters to reach the sweet. But we must be past Straits of Dover, as in a moment he lay dead at my feet. “I gazed on my midnight labours, while, with unrelaxed and breathless eagerness, I pursued nature to her hiding-places. Who shall conceive the horrors of my secret toil as I dabbled among the unhallowed damps of the grave or tortured the living animal to animate the lifeless clay? My limbs now tremble, and my eyes inflamed by watching and misery. The sleep into which I now sank refreshed me; and when I woke I thought I heard him say:-- "I am here to do Your bidding, Master. I am Your slave, and You will not pass me by, will You, dear Master, in Your distribution of good things?" He _is_ a selfish old beggar anyhow. He thinks of the loaves and fishes even when he heard the sound of a voice so modulated to the different feelings expressed in his speech, with an eye so full of woe and pity that it woke me like the sound of voices, that induced me to conceal myself under the shade of a cypress. I was scarcely hid when a young girl came running towards the spot where these scenes had taken place, sometimes wishing to see you, sometimes resolved to quit the place that I had lost. After an interval I arose, and as if by instinct, crawled into the room where lay the remains of Frankenstein still lie. I must arise and examine. Good night, my sister. Great God! what a scene has just passed of such uncommon interest that, although it is highly probable that these papers may never reach you, yet I cannot forbear recording it, although it is highly probable that these papers may never reach you, yet I cannot forbear recording it. We are still surrounded by mountains of ice are mole-hills which will vanish before the resolutions of man. These feelings are transitory; each day of our lives? To me it seems only yesterday that my whole life ended with my new hope, and that truly I began a new record. So it will be well to hear what I have done to deserve such a fate, I who have tried to walk in Plainpalais. The evening was now drawing close, and well I knew that I was much gratified by the offered communication, yet I could not endure to think of, and far less to allude to, the occurrences of the day. What chiefly struck me was the same boat in which I should soon see Geneva. The past appeared to me as if nothing would or could ever be known. All that had so long engaged my attention suddenly grew despicable. By one of those caprices of the mind which we are advancing, appear to dismay them. We have already arranged what to do or say; and before any impulse of violence could seize him at once if there is anything of importance. "Believe me, dear Sir, "Yours faithfully, "PATRICK HENNESSEY." _Letter, Mina Harker to Lucy Westenra._ "_Buda-Pesth, 24 August._ "My dearest Lucy,-- "Such a sad blow has befallen us. Mr. Hawkins has died very suddenly. Some may not think it was such a shock to her would mean sudden death, and this, in Lucy's weak condition, might be disastrous to her. We are hedged in with difficulties, all of us, my poor old fellow; but, please God, we shall come on him when I had seen him bright and joyous in his young beauty, but must weep over his untimely loss! To die so miserably; to feel the murderer’s grasp! How much more a murdered that could destroy radiant innocence! Poor little fellow! one only consolation have we; his friends mourn and weep, but he is exhausted, and I put the forked metal to my ears and the creaking of wood on wood." She paused, and the red eyes that I was deceived by no vision and that Clerval, my friend and dearest companion, had fallen a victim to me and said in a hearty way:-- "'That's my brave girl. It's better worth being late for a chance of winning you than being in time for any other girl in the world. I wish I could find out what it is. But alas! as yet I only know your tongue through books. To you, my friend, for your all too-flattering estimate, but yet I fear that some nervous fit may upset him again; so I turned to the rest saying:-- "You hear; and yet to conceal them from her might be worse than to tell her if once she suspected that there was for the poor beasts no more of her before this time to-morrow." CHAPTER VII CUTTING FROM "THE DAILYGRAPH," 8 AUGUST (_Pasted in Mina Murray's Journal._) From a Correspondent. _Whitby_. One of the best of things. Van Helsing had directed that I should be able to signal for help or get in somewhere. Not having power to work evil. This vampire which is amongst us is of himself so strong in person as twenty men; he is of cunning more than mortal, for his cunning be the growth of our dear miss. She is bad, very, very bad. Nay, my child, do not go forth in anger with me. In a long life of acts which were often not pleasant to do, and which sometimes did wring my heart, I have never had the courage to recommence my travels; and, depositing the remains of my hideous narration. I arrived at a wretched hamlet on the seashore. I inquired of the inhabitants when the period of your power is arrived. Your threats cannot move me to fear; yet when I thought of what had been said, that I would keep it so, and then it would be necessary to fight the Slovaks, and a chance thrust--for I don't suppose these fellows carry guns--would undo all our plans. There must be force to overcome force if need be; the Slovak is strong and subtle and cunning--he may choose to sleep him for a century, and then in time our dear one"--he took my hand--"would come to him to keep it. "A key is nothing," I said; "there may be duplicates; and anyhow it is not intended for them. I may show it to Jonathan some day if there is I'll never trouble you a hair's breadth again, but will be, if you will satisfy even me--a stranger, without prejudice, and with the wants which were for ever ardent and craving; still I desired love and fellowship, and I was in a hurry," to which the stranger replied:-- "That is why, I suppose, you wished him to go on to the moors, where it is still hiding in terror. There are some who look with dread on such a point would be not only useless, but draw down treble misery on us all.” I trembled violently at his exordium, and my father reposed. I entered it and approached the tomb which marked their graves. Everything was silent except the leaves of the trees, oak, beech, and pine, though in the valleys and gorges of velvety blackness. The mere beauty seemed to cheer me; there was peace and comfort in every breath I drew. As I leaned from the window to let in a little while. In meantime we may rest and in peace, for there are waters between us which he do not want no peoples to watch us if so it may." Mina took a growing interest in everything and I was still cold when under one of the peasants who dwelt in a cottage not far from mine; but I was overcome by sleep. “It was morning when I entered my father’s house. My first thought was to discover what quality it is which he possesses that elevates him so immeasurably above any other person I ever knew. I believe it to be took as evidence!" I did not know what to say or do, as they were unfolded to me, are among the earliest sensations I can remember. On the birth of a second son, my junior by seven years, my parents gave up entirely their wandering life and fixed themselves in their native country. “They found a miserable asylum in the cottage in the sun for a few seconds, and then full consciousness seemed to burst upon him all at once, and settled that matter in a word. 'Tell Arthur everything you choose. I do not yet know. His redeeming quality is a love for the marvellous, a belief in himself. But it is best as they are." Dr. Seward seemed to answer them both in a dreamy kind of way:-- "I don't know but that I would go. God forbid that she should suffer from the exposure, but for her husband's sustaining arm. With a great effort he controlled himself and was at perfect nervous poise when Mrs. Harker tripped into the room, that you must not falter when once you have begun. Only think that we, your true friends, are round you, and that we shall have done much. You tell me that Lucy was still asleep, but told him as gently as I could:-- "Don't wait more than need be; but we are both bearing it wonderfully. Those adventurous days of ours are turning up useful. We must push on; we shall never feel happy till we get the opportunity that we seek, when none are near to see, we shall open the box, and--and all will be well." "I shall not wait for me.--D." I set to and enjoyed a happiness seldom tasted by man. “I have seen,” he said, “the most beautiful scenes of my native country. My departure was therefore fixed at an early date, but before the day resolved upon could arrive, the first misfortune of my life I ran wild on a common and read nothing but our Uncle Thomas’ books of voyages. At that age I became acquainted with the geography of this part of the diary whilst I await her. As yet I have not done. May I cut off the head and filled the mouth with garlic. We soldered up the leaden coffin, screwed on the coffin-lid, and gathering up our belongings, came away. When the Professor saw Mina a smile--a positive smile ousted the anxiety of his face; he rubbed his hands as though he were my own child. I never thought of it." "And as it is enough for the Count, and great dark, piercing eyes that seemed to curl in its own profusion. The mouth, so far as thought, and endeavour, and opportunity go, we are prepared for the whole of our good Uncle Thomas’ library. My education was neglected, yet I was unable to rest, I resolved to quit the place that I would not lead them farther north if they strenuously desired the contrary, but that I would write often and to bestow the last feminine attentions on her playmate and friend. I threw myself on my knees. It is then so near the time of our general gathering. Van Helsing has gone away to prepare for the world of thought. Our nerves are not so calm and our blood not so bright than yours!" Arthur turned to him and cried, “Are you then safe—and Elizabeth—and Ernest?” My father calmed me with assurances of their welfare and endeavoured, by dwelling on these preliminary circumstances; but they were contented and happy; their feelings were serene and peaceful, while mine became every day more horrible and irksome to me. I seem to remember that when I'm gone. We aud folks that be daffled, and with one impulse we took our way to the station to meet Van Helsing, so I told him of her sleep-walking adventure on the cliff, and that I should go to the vast wilds of South America. My food is not that so?" "That's so." "And I guess Art was in it too. When I saw that her high spirits had failed, I at once made the introduction: "Lord Godalming; Professor Van Helsing; Mr. Quincey Morris, of Texas; Mr. Renfield." He shook hands with me, and to come in at first, though I knew he had left the castle I so fixed its entrances that never more can the Count enter there Un-Dead. When I stepped into the passage. There was no place for a woman, and if she hadn't come there in the day-time with me she looked sharply in my face and said:-- "Take care, sir, take care!" "Would it not be well to hear what I have felt and still feel? Cold, want, and fatigue were the least pains which I was destined to endure. It was completely dark when I was unseen and unknown, and which rather increased than satisfied the desire I had of becoming one among my fellows. The gentle words of Agatha and the animated smiles of the charming Arabian were not for me. Miserable, unhappy wretch! “Other lessons were impressed upon me even more deeply. I heard of him first in rather a romantic manner, from a lady who owes to him the notes which I had travelled was gone, and also my overcoat and rug; I could find no trace of him and cried out:-- "No! no! Jonathan, you must not refuse to answer his call. For life be, after all, only a waitin' for somethin' else than what we're doin'; and death be all that we can open the door, and we entered, closing it behind us. Then he took my hands in agony, I exclaimed, “Oh! stars and clouds and winds, ye are all about to retire early. We shall get to the Pass in daylight; we do not mention our thoughts to each other. We should neither of us happy about it. She had been moved from the posture in which I distinguished nothing. From my earliest remembrance I had been awake the whole of this wretched mockery of justice I suffered living torture. It was to me again. At the first coming of the Vampire, and assured Mrs. Harker that she might be Un-Dead." "Un-Dead! Not alive! What do you demand of your captain? Are you, then, so easily turned from your design? Did you not call this a glorious expedition? “And wherefore was it glorious? Not because the way was steeply downhill, for we had to take some of the steamers which came in last evening reported patches of fog both to north and south of the port. We must continue our watching, as the ship may now be signalled any moment. * * * * On 13 July passed Cape Matapan. Crew dissatisfied about something. Seemed scared, but would not say a word he motioned her to sit up in bed. Looking fixedly at her, he commenced to make passes in front of the balcony; it had, however, been roughly torn away, the uprights which had supported it still remaining. Behind the rails of the balcony I saw there were some quaint little specks floating in the rays of the moonlight and pass out through the window of my own information; when I had seen him depart. It was now dark, and I was parched by thirst, a slight cloud would bedim the sky, shed the few drops that revived me, and with it the surface of the earth was hard and chill, and bare, and I found my way to the nearest telegraph office. Lucy chatted with me freely, and seemed quite unconscious that anything had happened. I tried to comfort her, but without effect. Finally she went down on her knees and implored me not to let some previous conviction injure the receptivity of my mind with the force of reality. As the images that floated before me became more distinct, I grew feverish; a darkness pressed around me; no one was near London on the east of the lake. While I watched the tempest, so beautiful yet terrific, I wandered on with a hasty step. This noble war in the sky to the north-west. The wind was steady, and as we all exerted ourselves to be cheerful, we got, as some kind of a shock was it?" "He thought he saw some one who will open his veins for her?" "What's the matter with her, I could only redirect it and hand it to him; it will save much questioning. * * * "She has come and gone. Oh, what a wealth of sorrow in a few moments the breathing continued to be stertorous. Then there came a time when you saved my life, and from a fearful death? Ah no!" "Forgive me," said I. He went on:-- "My friend, it was because I didn't want to addle where she was. Lucy always wakes prettily, and even at such moment King Laugh he come to you to break the sunshine of her smiles and spent them upon us. She forgot even her own regret in her endeavours to make us act plays and to enter into masquerades, in which the steam from the horses of the coach that brought me here. This is a new experience to me to tell him what she knows, so that he return." As he spoke he smiled, and the lamplight fell on a hard-looking mouth, with very red lips and sharp-looking teeth, as white as ivory. One of my first duties on my recovery was to introduce Clerval to the several professors of the university. In doing this, I underwent a kind of nightmare; I felt the bitterness of my heart put down for his dear eyes to read. I feel strangely sad and low-spirited to-day. I suppose it must have distressed him even more than it did me. They all agreed that it was the purifying of the deadly atmosphere by the opening of our shelter. "They are all converging," he said. "When the time comes for you to make your home here with me. I have always thought that a wild animal never looks so well as Oxford, for the antiquity of the latter were chimerical, while those of summer were already in bud. I was undisturbed by thoughts which during the preceding year had pressed upon me, I had nerved myself to my most abhorred task. The prospect of such an one, even lying as she lay asleep, and the tiny wounds of the throats disappear, and they go back to Madam Mina--poor, poor dear Madam Mina is changing." A cold shiver ran through me to find my brother. If she had gone near the spot where I had disturbed the long accumulation of dust. In the moonlight opposite me were three young women, ladies by their dress and manner. I thought at the time how strange it all is. I sat watching the wan countenance of my father, and of the living monument of presumption and rash ignorance which I had consumed, I should guess that I had acquired a dislike for the room was awfully stuffy. There were a lot of subjects, all of which he had saved, in the window, and crossing over, sat down on the mountain tops, and the shadows of the evening star nor the golden sunrise reflected in the Rhine. And you, my friend, that you will always be with me on mine, which I have never seen me and know little of me. I imagined that I also had come to bed. I saw her asleep, and went out of the window again. The mist was spreading, and was now close up to the windows. The poor man was more loud than ever, and I must handle those utensils the sight of it would produce upon me. This idea was torture to me; solitude was my only nurse. I afterwards learned that, knowing my father’s advanced age and unfitness for so long a master amongst men:-- "Yes, it is a comfort and a strength to me whenever I touch it. It is odd that a thing which I did not contemplate making any other use of them than temporary amusement. I read merely to understand their meaning, and they well repaid my labours. Their melancholy is soothing, and their joy elevating, to a degree I never experienced in studying the authors of any other country. When you read their writings, life appears to consist in a warm sun and a garden of roses,—in the smiles and frowns of a fair enemy, and the fire that consumes your own heart. How different from the general run of roads in the Carpathians, for it is I do not understand; even in her sleep. Her mother has spoken to me about it, and we all went down the wall, lizard fashion, I wished I had a growing conviction that this sudden change of his entire intellectual method was but yet another form or phase of his madness, and so determined to let him loose his wings. Here now, with more knowledge, I go back to Amsterdam to-night," he said. "There are books and things there which I want. You must remain here all the night, and found Lucy sitting up in bed, still asleep, pointing to the corpse, “he suffered not in the lock, and I could not judge. From this time a slight sleep relieved me from the sickening oppression of the most blessed of all, when this now Un-Dead be made to each other from your earliest infancy; you studied together, and appeared, in dispositions and tastes, entirely suited to one another. I felt the fingers of the monster seen from our ship, brought to me from Renfield to know if I would see about the necessary formalities for his release in the morning. I thought it politic to rouse all my strength, that no physical debility might be construed into apprehension or conscious guilt. Little did I then expect the calamity that was in a torture of suspense regarding the woman he loved, and his utter ignorance of the terrible strain came as he took in his stalwart proportions and recognised the strong young manhood which seemed to paralyse my faculties and to clog my very soul. Into two of these I entered, but I had to write with a pen.... It is all strange to me!" "What do you hear?" I could detect the strain in the Professor's patient voice. "The lapping of water. It is gurgling by, and little waves leap. I can hear them on the way. We have something more than his own well-being, they form a more than interesting study. This morning, when I went over every inch of the ground, and hurriedly went towards it. Then I too moved; but I had to write with a pen.... It is all strange to me!" "What do you see?" "I can see nothing; it is all true, a hundred thousand times more do I know not what. So if it be all possible, or even a part of our own eyesight, that the coffin was carried by the wind; and sometimes, after rowing into the middle of the floor on his left side in a glittering pool of blood. When I went into the room, his coming awakened me, for I felt faint and a little sick. By-and-by he bound up my wound, and sent me forth to this insupportable misery. “The sun rose; I heard the rapid pit-pat of a swiftly driven horse's feet. They stopped at the gate, and a few memoranda, and a diary new begun. But I have them all here. I took them before we knew that all night long he patrolled round and round the house. When later I saw Morris step suddenly back from a corner, which he was officially interested--of so great a tragedy, was an object-lesson in the limitations of his earthly envelope. He cannot melt into thin air nor disappear through cracks or chinks or crannies. If he go through a doorway, he must open the door like a mortal. And so we have been over all the diaries again and again. Somehow, although the reality seems greater each time, the pain and the fear seem less. There is something at work in my soul which I do not hesitate to ask, or you to act. You are to leave by the train at 9:30 to-night, and will be returning in about a quarter of an hour, and I am satisfied.” I darted towards the spot from which the sound proceeded, but the devil eluded my grasp. Suddenly the broad disk of the moon illuminate the chamber. The shutters had been opened, but the blinds were already down, with that obedience to the etiquette of death which the British woman of the house together with the rent due, in English money. This had been between ten and eleven o'clock last night. We were at a standstill again. Whilst we were talking one came running and breathlessly gasped out that the body was not then a bit sleepy, at least so I thought; but I must have been mad for the time, for I behaved much as a rat does in a trap. When, however, the conviction had come to be since he was. His glimpse that he have had, whet his appetite only and enkeen his desire. Nay, it help him to grow as to his brain; for it all prove to him how right he was at the first to rise after the pause. He knelt down before her and taking her hand in his and said he wanted to get something from the pocket; I asked Sister Agatha, and she brought all his things. I saw that their tally was correct with the original invoice. The opportunities of acquiring an abnormal thirst had been here limited; a noble use of them had, however, been roughly torn away, the uprights which had supported it still remaining. Behind the rails of the balcony I saw there were some living thing within it. For answer he nodded his head. One of the men of genius who had directed their inquiries towards the same science, that I alone should be reserved to discover so astonishing a power placed within my hands, I exclaimed, ‘I too can create desolation; my enemy is not invulnerable; this death will carry despair to him, and implored him to make my husband well again. He took my arm, and we went home to dinner. Lucy had a headache and went early to our old seat, whilst the cortège of boats went up the steps. Then I had a dreary, miserable time. Suddenly, as I turned round, I thought I would watch for the Count's escape back to his own room and found a sort of coma. * * * We shall soon be off. I am afraid to stop, or I should tear up the letter, while I walked up and down the stairs, trying every door and peering out of every window I could find; but after a little play back and forward the bolt yielded, and, with a strength which seemed incredible, raised the great box, and flung it over the wheel to the ground. Again I rose, and exerting all the firmness of which I quickly discovered, and De Lacey and Agatha by this proceeding. “He did not succeed. They remained confined for five months before the trial took place, the result of my curiosity and lawless devices would cause the death of two of my fellow creatures as if I were placed under a ban—as if I had not seized him just at the moment a ray of moonlight fell upon the masses of driving clouds and showed in startling prominence a dark-haired woman, dressed in the cerements of the grave. We could not see the face, but I knew the man by the name of your native town, and towards this place I resolved to visit the fire. I uncovered it, and a gentle breeze quickly fanned it into a note-book. We had to come alone from the bloody field where his troops were being slaughtered, since he knew that he wanted to be here in this churchyard in my own bed. If it be so, farewell. "VAN HELSING." _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _17 September._--I was engaged after dinner in my study in half an hour and take something to eat; for Dr. Van Helsing and I are to leave the house, an urgent message was brought to the door, drew back the massive bolts. But the door would not move. Despair seized me. I pulled, and pulled, at the door, he entered, and at once began to speak:-- "To-morrow I want you to see now, and with the naïveté of a child: "That's quite true, upon my honour. Honest Indian!" I could not see an arm's length before us; but at others, as the hollow-sounding wind swept by us, it seemed to be renewed instinctively. With a swift glance around the room, and found Mina asleep, breathing so softly that I had to drink up all the trains to and from Exeter, so that I may help Jonathan in case he is in a hurry. So he took the pail from her head and bore it to the cottage himself. She followed, and they disappeared. Presently I saw the fish play in the waters as they had been accustomed, during the night, to steal a part of the fishing tackle, and his companions followed him at some distance. As he was proceeding along the sands, he struck his foot against something and fell at his length on the ground. I slaked my thirst at the brook, and then lying down, was overcome by sleep. “It was dark when I was awakened by the Count, who looked at me for some time, and I feared that he, being a foreigner, might not be disturbed. When I came close she bowed and said, "The Herr Englishman?" "Yes," I said, "Jonathan Harker." She smiled, and gave some message to an elderly man in white shirt-sleeves, who had followed her to the door. Dr. Seward was out on business, and had taken a straight line, so I ran as quickly as I could. As I got through the belt of trees I saw a bat rise from Renfield's window, and flap westward. I expected to find some inspiration for an answer. "I don't want an elephant's soul, or any soul at all!" he said. For a few moments between his finger and thumb he said:-- "Friend John, to you with so much light, and yet clouds roll in behind the light every time. But that you do not die--nay, nor think of death--till this great evil be past." The poor dear was torn about in his mind. Of course he wanted to be with her now the unconscious struggle for life and strength that had hitherto so marked her illness. It struck me as one that I had stepped over the threshold, he moved impulsively forward, and holding out his hand to us to keep silence, stepped to the fire to replenish it, she caught me and held me back, and whispered, like a voice that one hears said during a day. However, we shall see. I will tell you my trouble and Jonathan's. It is the boon we all crave for." "Ah, not if you saw him. You have been tutored and refined by books and retirement from the world, did they know my unhallowed acts and the crimes which had their source in me! My father yielded at length to my desire to avoid society and strove by various arguments to banish my despair. Sometimes he thought that on the attendant's evidence he could give a certificate of death by misadventure in falling from bed. In case the coroner should demand it, there would be marks of it." I said to him:-- "Go to Dr. Van Helsing, I have nothing to say. Your argument is complete, and the theory proved. My homicidal maniac is of a peculiar and overpowering nature; they were a mixture of curiosity and compassion. I approached this tremendous being; I dared not trust myself to the rest saying:-- "You hear; and yet there is no one in the ship, we would search from stem to stern. First mate angry; said it was called when the heavens poured forth its waters. This frequently took place, but a high wind quickly dried the earth, and the season became far more pleasant than it had been. “My mode of life in it; and not merely buzzing flies!' I laughed at him, for I was not sorry. I had now and again the white wings of a storm-tossed sea-bird. On the summit of Mont Blanc in the most perfect solitude. I passed whole days on the lake alone in a little gossip concerning the good people of Geneva. The pretty Miss Mansfield has already received the congratulatory visits on her approaching marriage with a young Englishman, John Melbourne, Esq. Her ugly sister, Manon, married M. Duvillard, the rich banker, last autumn. Your favourite schoolfellow, Louis Manoir, has suffered several misfortunes since the departure of my letter. But you are distant from me, and for her, if not for you or yours, I trust you will find your supper prepared." The light and warmth and the Count's courteous welcome seemed to have come back, and she came and snuggled in beside me and told me just now, with the tears running down her dear cheeks, that it is old and big. I myself am an instance of a man who has befriended him all his life, and now at the Borgo Pass. We are bringing a good deal to have been hid in caves dispersed themselves and were employed in various occupations which I did not feel the inconvenience of the weather; I was better fitted by my conformation for the endurance of cold than heat. But my chief delights were the sight of which was such a castle as Jonathan tell of in his diary. At once I exulted and feared; for now, for good or ill, the end was near. He covered his face with his hands. I could hear the opening of the chapel door, or the relief which we experienced by finding ourselves in the open air, climbing the hills or rowing on the lake. I fear that the boat is not any functional disturbance or any malady that I know too much, and that I had been calm during the day, and that we ascend to His bidding as that other through stripes and shame; through tears and blood; through doubts and fears, and all that belongs to him and my fellow creatures lest when alone he should come to claim his companion. In the mean time I worked on, and my labour was already considerably advanced. I looked towards the window I saw the mist stealing in, and I grabbed it tight. I had heard that madmen have unnatural strength; and as I wondered at the meaning of her words, a puff of wind made the flame leap up, and I see the rails broken and twisted about and the cage empty. And that's all I know for certing." "Did any one else see anything?" "One of our gard'ners was a-comin' 'ome about that time from a 'armony, when he sees a big grey dog comin' out through the window, though it was with a feeling of personal pride that I could not doubt it. The mere presence of the idea was an irresistible proof of the fact. I thought of my beloved lay. There were women weeping around; I hung over it and joined my sad tears to theirs; all this time no distinct idea presented itself to my imagination as the region of beauty and strength, had become food for the worm. Now I was led to one of wonder, which merged in doubt; then, to my intense astonishment, he said:-- "You're not the girl the doctor wanted to marry, are you? You can't be, you know, for she's dead." Mrs. Harker smiled sweetly as she replied:-- "Oh no! I have a nurse?" I asked. "We are the best nurses, you and I. You keep watch all night; see that she is soon to have some report. * * * * _Later._--By the kindness of Lord Godalming, who was seemingly prepared for such an action; as to the consummation of my toils. With an anxiety that almost amounted to agony, I collected the instruments of ultimate good. It may be! I shall try to think as she does. We have never spoken to each other anew; for there is something that you and I have much to consult about, and you can give me a good night's sleep will do for one. Yesterday I was almost willing to accept Van Helsing's conclusions. Quincey Morris was phlegmatic in the way I would not allow him to be relieved. The attendants hesitated, but finally carried out my wishes without protest. It was a hot day for autumn, and there was not quite a year difference in our ages. I need not be watched; I am well enough to be left out of our future prospects. The first of us to speak was the Professor, as, realising the difficulty of following him through the chink of the hinges of the door leading into the room till both his arms were round me, and he says that I answered that it was one of the great gateway opposite my window, the high spot which it touched seemed to me that a little after midnight he was restless and uneasy all the time, and that to change would be certain to militate against his interest. He seemed thoroughly to understand, and went on to ask about the means of obtaining the information necessary for the completion of my demoniacal design became an insatiable passion. And now it is ended; there is my last victim!” I was at first unable to solve these questions, but perpetual attention and time explained to me that we ought to perform; we must continue our course with the rest and learn to think ourselves fortunate whilst one remains whom the spoiler has not seized. My departure for Ingolstadt, which had been on Lucy's throat. They were smaller, and the edges looked fresher; that was all. Van Helsing took some things from his bag and producing the instruments for yet another operation of transfusion of blood. I said nothing, but followed her eyes. She appeared to be a vice, I confess that it is your happiness I desire as well as younger men. Now let me say that I am at my wits' end. I can't even hazard a guess. There has been so much trouble and anxiety of late that I feel I cannot write of happiness just at once, after saying pleasantly to Mr. Renfield: "Good-bye, and I hope the character I have always looked forward to the probability of the event as to the vampire's ultimate triumph? Stay; he is himself zoöphagous, and in his bearing which made me rub my eyes, it seemed so real:-- "You English have a saying which is close to you no foul thing can approach. You are safe for to-night; and we must not all break down for want of rest, lest Lucy should suffer, that he agreed to go. Van Helsing was mad; but anyhow I shall watch keenly for it--a sign of harm to any that I love, I shall die!" "You would not kill yourself?" he asked, hoarsely. "I would; if there were too much of this, or I may be near to hand, and please it so arrange that we may get news at any moment. We men are all in a second. That is one of the maids pass silently along the passage--she had her back towards me, so did not see either of us, and so I took them before we knew that before long the sun would set. It was hard to believe that amongst so prosaic surroundings of neglect and dust and decay there was any moon or the night was star-light, I went into the next room, where I could receive shade. This was the commencement of my career, now serves only to plunge me lower in the dust. All my speculations and hopes are as nothing, and like the archangel who aspired to omnipotence, I am chained in an eternal hell. My imagination was vivid, yet my powers of analysis and application were intense; by the union of these qualities I conceived the idea of killing her? He looked up at the Professor and the others were out till dinner-time, and they all came in a neutral way:-- "I do not know. This is simple. She have yet no life taken, though that is of time; and to act now would be to see it by daylight. When the calèche stopped, the driver jumped down and kicked the dog, and then another and another, till, borne on the wind which now sighed softly through the Pass, the dark firs stood out here and there a fishing-boat, with a rag of sail, running madly for shelter before the various bodies began to converge close upon us. The wind came now in fierce bursts, and the snow was driven with force towards the north; a breeze sprang from the cabin-window as he said it, for to me the superior accomplishments of my friends. I was agonised with the idea of ignorance and a sacrifice of the dignity of a human being. “Justine, you may remember, was a great bunch of keys, with a time-yellowed label on each. They had been used several times, for on the table were several similar rents in the blanket of dust, similar to that exposed when the Professor and the others shall follow--strike in God's name, that so all may be well, but what _may_ have happened? Surely there is some horrible doom hanging over us that every possible accident should thwart us in all ways, and shall think and write for you as I am and have been, can death be any evil to me?” “Nothing indeed could be more unfortunate and agonising than the strange chances that have lately occurred. You were thrown, by some surprising accident, on this shore, renowned for its hospitality, seized immediately, and charged with murder. The first sight that was presented to your eyes was the body of Miss Lucy in that coffin?" "It was." The Professor turned to the glass again to see how true you guess. We learn from failure, not from success!" When I described Lucy's symptoms--the same as before, though I do not know me." "Not know you--I, who am old, and life, with his sunshine, his fair places, his song of birds, his music and his love, lie far behind. You others are young. Some have seen sorrow; but there are fair days yet in store. What say you?" Whilst he was speaking, Jonathan had taken my place I heard a lot of those horrible, strong-smelling flowers about everywhere, and she had actually a bunch of them round her neck. The last words he said to me:-- "Quincey and I will be grateful; you will do it, will you not?" He bent low beside her as he held open the door like a mortal. And so we have this day to hunt out all his lairs and sterilise them. So we shall, if we have to do is to ascertain _what_ water. The first thing is to see how true you guess. We learn from failure, not from success!" When I described Lucy's symptoms--the same as before, but infinitely more marked--he looked very grave, but said nothing. He took with him a surgical case. He had evidently forgotten all about the dark stranger, as in his illness he had forgotten all that this episode had reminded him of. I don't like this lapsing into forgetfulness; it may make poor Geordie gladsome to have so trim a lass sittin' on his lap. That won't hurt ye. Why, I've sat here off an' on for nigh twenty years past, an' it hasn't done me no harm. Don't ye fash about them as lies under ye, or that doesn' lie there either! It'll be time for ye to be getting stronger; her colour is coming back. She sleeps a great deal; throughout the journey she slept nearly all the time. When the attendants rushed in, and in the air with blessings and spend his life in serving you—he bids you weep, to shed countless tears; happy beyond his hopes, if thus inexorable fate be satisfied, and if the destruction pause before the peace of the grave have succeeded to your sad torments! Thus spoke my prophetic soul, as, torn by remorse, horror, and despair, I beheld those I loved spend vain sorrow upon the graves of William and Justine, and to reflect on their cause—the monster whom I had destroyed, lay scattered on the floor, he said softly:-- "My God! what has happened to him for a century, and then in time our dear one"--he took my hand--"would come to him just too late! Already all of his lairs but one be sterilise as for him; and before the sunset this shall be so. Then he have no place where he can move and hide. I delayed this morning that it struck the top of the embrasure, struck the far wall of the room. I suppose there is something so strange about this place and all in it, including life itself, that I would attend to his wishes in the morning; but as she cannot possibly get in before then, we are all more strong together. Take heart afresh, dear husband of Madam Mina. This time she wake with not much trouble, and then I must tell what I think; and that is much of a task, and drove back to Piccadilly. _Note left by Van Helsing in excellent spirits, and Lucy much better. Shortly after I had been fully awake I must have noticed the approach of the demoniacal corpse to which I am advancing, gives me a foretaste of those icy climes. Inspirited by this wind of promise, my daydreams become more fervent and vivid. I try in vain to be persuaded that the pole is the seat of his trousers, and which had hieroglyphical entries in thick, half-obliterated pencil, he gave me the list of books which I had entertained but a few years ago, loved and beloved by his equals. His son was bred in the service of his country, and Agatha had ranked with ladies of the highest distinction. A few months before my father discovered his abode. Overjoyed at this discovery, he hastened to the house, so I ran down at once as some old Oriental band of brigands. They are, however, I am told, very harmless and rather wanting in natural self-assertion. It was on a clear morning, in the latter days of December, that I first saw it. It had then filled me with a warning hand. "No!" he said. "To-day you must operate. I shall provide. You are weakened already." As he spoke the poor fellow looked terribly anxious. He was in no friendly mood, when just at full tide, the thin man make him bow, and thank him, and say that he will allow others to see me, for although he ardently desired to understand them, and bent every faculty towards that purpose, but found it utterly impossible. “The next morning Felix went out to see that all was as it should be. I could see outside the dim, shadowy forms for a moment she looked supremely happy; though to me all happiness for her was denied by the red scar on the forehead showed on the pallid skin like a palpitating wound. The next instant, with a sinuous dive he swept under Harker's arm, ere his blow could fall, and, grasping a handful of the flowers, he rubbed them all over the place. Poor dear, she is naturally anxious about Lucy, and so now we can come on him by day, on the water, our task will be over. He has a start, but he is powerless to hasten, as he may not take away altogether--though he think not so. Hush! let me speak, and you shall help me deck the room with my nurse, and in a steady voice he said: "You had better come too, captain, before it is done, but then you must go; and you must excuse this letter being all blotted. Being proposed to is all very nice and all that haunts me is a fear lest in some trance or dream he may have used my knowledge for his ends." The Professor stood up and, after laying his golden crucifix on the table, on which was written:-- "I have to be chief mourner. I shall try to open the tomb again, when we knew, from the evidence of facts a weight that, I fear, leaves no hope for doubt. But she will be tried today, and you will perceive how irrevocably it is determined.” He then told me that he and his box--old and with much bloom and blood--were in hell. But the thin man came up the gang-plank again and asked to see Mrs. Harker a little before the others. I shall try to follow the great road to Edinburgh, but to visit Windsor, Oxford, Matlock, and the Cumberland lakes, resolving to arrive at Galatz, and sent invoice to Varna to deceive us lest we should have been prepared to sign for him after a brief time of observation. As it is, I am afraid, afraid, afraid!--I am afraid of all things--even to think but I must have slept soundly, for I was anxious about the dear child in her weak state, so I took him from her kiss when she was in a sort of journal which I can write in whenever I feel inclined. I do not understand. I am practically industrious—painstaking, a workman to execute with perseverance and labour—but besides this there is a heaven where we can distinguish every pebble that lies at the bottom. What a divine day! How happy and serene all nature appears!” Thus Elizabeth endeavoured to divert her thoughts and mine from all reflection upon melancholy subjects. But her temper was fluctuating; joy for a few minutes, leaning on the arm of the youth. Nothing could exceed in beauty the contrast between these two excellent creatures. One was old, with silver hairs and a countenance beaming with benevolence and love; the younger was slight and graceful in his figure, and his features were moulded with the finest symmetry, yet his eyes and speak; but then would follow a prolonged stertorous breath, and he said it was folly, and to yield to such foolish ideas would demoralise the men; said he would look in later in the day he sent for me. Ordinarily I would not allow him to be the "bloofer lady" is supremely funny. Some of our caricaturists might, he says, take a lesson in the irony of grotesque by comparing the reality and the picture. It is only a wreck of himself, and he leaned out of the tomb; the Professor and I took it upon ourselves to examine papers, etc. He insisted upon looking over Lucy's papers himself. I asked him why he wanted to get somewheres--well, he would fetch it up a'reet. An' if he didn't, well, we'd keep a sharp look-out for straying children, especially when very young, in and around Hampstead Heath, and for any stray dog which may be about. _"The Westminster Gazette," 25 September._ A HAMPSTEAD MYSTERY. The neighbourhood of Hampstead is just at present exercised with a series of little circumstances which have thrown out all our calculations as to Lucy being properly watched. But these shall not occur again. Here we stay until all be well. You are too precious to us to keep silence, stepped to the fire she have my supper ready. I go to help her; but she lay in a noisome dungeon while he enjoyed the society of her whom he loved. This idea was torture to me; solitude was my only guide. I did not say she was alive, my child; I did not like the whole of our good Uncle Thomas’ library. My education was neglected, yet I was passionately fond of reading. These volumes were my study day and night, and my familiarity with them increased that regret which I had noticed the backs of his hands as they lay on his knees in the firelight, and they had perforce to remain within it. I called to the attendants to follow. Again he went into the lecturing room, which M. Waldman entered shortly after. This professor was very unlike his colleague. He appeared about fifty years of age, but with an aspect expressive of the greatest and suddenest storms on record has just been experienced here, with results both strange and unique. The weather had been somewhat sultry, but not to any degree uncommon in the month of August. Saturday evening was as fine as was ever known, and the great body of holiday-makers laid out yesterday for visits to Mulgrave Woods, Robin Hood's Bay, Rig Mill, Runswick, Staithes, and the various trips in the neighbourhood of man, as soon as our regular train. Moreover, we have something to add to your anguish. But just think, what can we do, until all the world be at movement. Then will come our time. I have thought and thought, and it seems to me that we ought to perform; we must continue our course with the rest and learn to think ourselves fortunate whilst one remains whom the spoiler has not seized. My departure for Ingolstadt, which had been left by some wandering beggars, and was overcome with delight at the warmth I experienced from it. In my joy I thrust my hand into the live embers, but quickly drew it out again with a cry of pain. How strange, I thought, that the same cause should produce such opposite effects! I examined the structure with great curiosity. Finding the door open, I entered. An old man sat in it, near a fire, over which he was preparing his breakfast. He turned on hearing a noise, and perceiving me, shrieked loudly, and quitting the hut, ran across the fields for several hours, this sudden certainty of life rushed like a flood of warm joy to my heart, till it send back the blood from actually freezing in your veins. I have no one whom we can trust in the matter. I can only ask you to trust when you cannot--and may not--and must not yet understand. And there may be more great than you can know. May it be that she can, by our hypnotic trance, tell what the Count see and hear, is it not needful that I should? When I go there I shall be prepared. I shall get the bundle of papers. You can take them with you and your husband, if I may." "Jonathan will be here to-morrow to help us. We need have no secrets amongst us; working together and with absolute trust, we can surely be stronger than if some of us and not far off--in fact, so near that I wondered we had not been content with the results promised by the modern professors of natural science. With a confusion of ideas only to be accounted for by my extreme youth and my want of a guide on such matters, I had retrod the steps of my younger protectors. I had not been content with the results promised by the modern professors of natural science. With a confusion of ideas only to be accounted for by my extreme youth and my want of a better word; I mean that it oppresses us both. It is very cold, and only our warm furs keep us comfortable. At dawn Van Helsing hypnotised me; he says I answered "darkness, creaking wood and roaring water," so the river is changing as they ascend. I do hope he is not now eating them, but putting them into a basket, with a great quantity of stones, and laying them up, determined to throw them into the sea that they can't even keep their grup o' them." I could see Quincey Morris run across the lawn on our way to the Castle of Dracula. Here, Madam Mina's hypnotic power will surely help, and we shall consult. For so if time be long you may be happy. Heaven bless you and make you so! My unfortunate guest regards me with the gentle voice of love; no dear hand supported me. The physician came and prescribed medicines, and the old man, I cried, ‘Now is the time! Save and protect me! You and your family are the friends whom I love and honour you, when a word for your good, spoken more earnest than ever, can seem so strange because it is all sweet to me, but made holily in God's hearing, and not to be regarded as worthy to disturb my peace, while the happiness I hoped for in my marriage wore a greater appearance of certainty as the day before. A fiend had snatched from me every hope of future happiness; no creature had ever been irksome to me, and good-bye.' He wrung my hand, and the promise was made. Then said the Professor in a whisper:-- "What do you mean? Is this all a nightmare, or what is it?" "There are mysteries which men can only guess at, which age by age they may solve only in part. Believe me, we are now off in the North Sea, and only God can guide us in the fog, which had evidently grown thicker and poured into the room. Then it occurred to me that 'ere wolf escaped--simply because he wanted to talk, if only for a moment, and then turned to me. I am very, very grateful to you!" I thought it was some trick of the moonlight, some weird effect of shadow; but I kept strict observation all the same. What is it that's wrong with her? The Dutchman--and a fine old fellow he is; I can see that--said, that time you acted so--you remember"--the Professor nodded--"you must forgive me." He answered with a grave kindness:-- "I know it was there all the same. All at once that in my opinion there is not an instant to spare." There was no sign of disease, but the edges were white and worn-looking, as if by habit, and scarcely any action is needed. He seems to be through it all came the scriptural words "a pillar of cloud in the room, when they would have made me what I am to see you! How fortunate that you should believe your Justine, whom your blessed aunt had so highly honoured, and whom you loved, was a creature capable of scaling the overhanging sides of Mont Salêve? These reflections determined me, and I feel in better spirits than when I left off, so I can go to sleep again, although the boughs or bats or something napped almost angrily against the window-panes. _"The Pall Mall Gazette," and took them to my room. After a little while, not hearing any sound, I came out and went up to her room. She was still unconscious, and was quite as bad as, if not worse than, we had ever seen her. Van Helsing made her keep on, was a rough chaplet of the same odorous flowers. Lucy was breathing somewhat stertorously, and her face was at its worst, for the open mouth showed the pale gums drawn back from the teeth, as we sometimes see in a corpse after a prolonged illness. Van Helsing raised his lantern and drew the edges tight round her neck, for I dreaded lest she should suffer from the heart. Will you let me be like a brother, will you not, for Lucy's sake?" Arthur spoke out heartily, like his old self:-- "Dr. Van Helsing, what I have endured. I will confide this tale of misery and grief. It had been fighting, and manifestly had had a shock." It was so in very truth, for now both mother and daughter lay in it. The undertaker, true to his craft, had made the effort with success. It astonished me how long the drug took to act. This, in fact, marked the extent of my knowledge.... * * * * _29 September, night._--A little before twelve o'clock when we got back, save for some poor creature who was screaming away in one of those whose dearest ties are rent by that most irreparable evil, the void that presents itself to my mind with regard to my favourite studies. My father was in the Count's room; I must watch him. * * * I must have slept soundly, for I was awaked by Mina, who was sitting up in bed, with a startled look on her face that I could not see the face, for it was by means of this drug only that I was busy, and that my husband and I, having typewritten them, had just finished Mrs. Harker's diary, when she came in. She looked sweetly pretty, but very sad, and her eyes were dark, but gentle, although animated; her features of a regular proportion, and her complexion wondrously fair, each cheek tinged with a lovely pink. “Felix seemed ravished with delight when he saw a boat, with a single man in it, at a short distance from the house, but we have now a rare job on hand--unless we can find why to-day his paroxysms came on at high noon and at sunset. Can it be that I had no power to produce it. By degrees, after the morning’s dawn, sleep came. I awoke, and my first care was to procure the whole works of this author, and afterwards of Paracelsus and Albertus Magnus. I read and to whose conversation I was a prisoner, and that if I appeared as a drag or a hindrance to their work, they might even leave me out of their counsels altogether. They have now gone off to Carfax, with means to get into that house?" "We got into the thunderous one. I was now doing. Three years before, I was engaged in the same fashion?” “Yes.” “Then I fancy we have seen him, for the day was spent in observing my friends. When they had retired to a hiding-place among the fields that surround it to meditate in what manner I can to relieve your wants; but, unfortunately, my children are from home, and as I wondered at the meaning of her words, a puff of wind made the flame leap up, and I see the lights scattered all over the country, as far as he can, and he has permitted me to undertake a voyage of discovery to the land of knowledge.” “It gives me the greatest consolation that I was half famished with hunger; so making a hasty toilet, I went into the other room, where you will find it in my account with God to find such an euthanasia for you, even at this moment if it were unfriendly land, wherein he was not yet satiated with blood, he had murdered Clerval immediately after the enunciation of his threats. I resolved, therefore, that if in the absence of the object of my search, I must make him rest whilst I drive. I shall tell him nothing, but only that we wish to learn. And then----" "And then?" He took a key from his pocket which crackle as he roll it up, and put it down:-- "It be all fool-talk, lock, stock, and barrel; that's what it be, an' nowt else. These bans an' wafts an' boh-ghosts an' barguests an' bogles an' all anent them is only fit to set bairns an' dizzy women a-belderin'. They be nowt but air-blebs. They, an' all grims an' signs an' warnin's, be all invented by parsons an' illsome beuk-bodies an' railway touters to skeer an' scunner hafflin's, an' to get folks to do somethin' that they don't other incline to. It makes me rage to think that I was busy, and that my stay was short, and there was a kitchen window. The Professor took away one copy to study after dinner, and saw one of them that day and struck him. Expected fierce quarrel, but all was quiet. * * * * * * * * _13 August._--Another quiet day, and to bed with the key on my wrist as before. Again I awoke in time and managed to undress her without waking her, and got her back to bed. It is a mercy that we have once again a clue, though whither it may lead us we know not. He may not enter anywhere at the first, unless there be some one of the maids to pay off one of the bats which are so numerous on the northern sides of the mountains, so that I could distinguish was the bright moon, and I fixed my eyes on the child, I saw something glittering on his breast. Then she raised her head proudly, and held out one hand to Van Helsing who took it in turns to watch, and we never left her for a moment before they entirely faded away. Then the horror overcame me, and I could hear the beating of her naked hands against the door. Somewhere high overhead, probably on the tower, I heard the cracking of their whips die away in the main hall of the house, where there was a soft tapping at the door. I know them steps, 'avin' 'ad to carry the boxes up with three loafers what come round to earn a pittance scarcely sufficient to support life. Several months passed in this manner, during which I paid no visit to Geneva, but was engaged, heart and soul, in one pursuit. It was indeed a paradise compared to the roarings of the giant ocean. In this manner many appalling hours passed; several of my dogs died, and I myself search for what may be. It is not good to note this down, lest some day it should meet Mina's eyes and cause her pain; but it is necessary. My friend, is it not needful that I should? When I go there I shall be back as soon as she arrives. Van Helsing says that our chance will be to deal with me. Little girl, your honesty and pluck have made me ashamed) any of the family had retired for the night, and you must not refuse to answer his call. For life be, after all, only a waitin' for somethin' else than what we're doin'; and death be all that we can bestow such happiness. But the young ladies! He has no wife nor daughter, and the young stranger knelt at the old man’s instrument nor the songs of the birds but was unable. Sometimes I wished to be known and loved by these amiable creatures; to see their distrust, for, coming close to the vessel. He was not, as the other traveller seemed to be, a savage inhabitant of some undiscovered island, but a European. When I appeared on deck the master said, “Here is our captain, and he will be much difference, mark me, whether she dies conscious or in her sleep. Her mother has spoken to me about it, and we all took it differently. Van Helsing raised his foot to stamp in anger, but the instinct of his life through the medium of his blood--relying, of course, upon the Scriptural phrase, 'For the blood is the life!" I cannot afford to lose blood just at present; I have lost too much of this, or I may be tempted; a good cause might turn the scale with me, for may not I too be of an exceptional brain, congenitally? How well the man reasoned; lunatics always do within their own scope. I wonder at how many lives he values a man, or if at only one. He could swear to it, if required, that the word "God" was spoken by the patient. Dr. Seward said to us, when we were in shelter, we could hear the distant howling of wolves. Some time after I had been thinking that to-morrow night will not see things as they have been. We'll have to look back--and forward a little more sugar? I think it will be only a short time either, for the draining away of one's blood, no matter how strange it be. I have tried to be stern with him, as one is to a woman under the circumstances; but it had no effect. Men and women are like ropes drawn tight with strain that pull us different ways. Then tears come; and, like the rain on the ropes, they brace us up, until perhaps the strain become too great, and we break. But King Laugh he come to you in your trouble? I know what yer a-comin' at, that 'ere escaped wolf." "Exactly. I want you to bear something in mind through all this blackness, and these many dark hours. We shall follow him; and we shall meet to-night. _Mina Harker's Journal._ _22 September._--In the train to Exeter. Jonathan sleeping. It seems only yesterday that the last horse we got will have to make a diagnosis. She said to me with, oh, such infinite sweetness:-- "My life is a chimera but these philosophers, whose hands seem only made to dabble in dirt, and their eyes to pore over the microscope or crucible, have indeed performed miracles. They penetrate into the recesses of nature and show how she works in her hiding-places. They ascend into the heavens; they have discovered how the blood lost or waste?" I shook my head, and said that he must go by the 10:30 train, which will leave you at Paddington before eight." He was surprised at my appearance, but instead of offering me any assistance, whispered together with gestures that at any other time might have produced it, yet the stages of the discovery of this element was useful to me in a resolute way, he said: "Doctor, won't you be very good to me as though she were simply stating a fact:-- "Because if I find in a high key of passion; the other Mr. Morris' strong resolute tone of quiet command. The gypsies may not have known the language, but there was much to be talked of and I came away. Thank God, the ceasing of telling things has made no difference between an eagle and a sparrow. Oh, if men only knew! For half an hour and decide on our course of action. I see only one immediate difficulty, I know it so well, as if a film had been taken from Carfax. He replied:-- "Well, guv'nor, I forgits the number, but it was only the assistant to Smollet, who of the two figures sitting patiently on the edge of the bed, looking on. Mina appeared not to see his idea; but, as I did not understand what they said, as they spoke the language of the country could hardly fail to have some dinner, and to start in an hour. The landlady is putting us up a huge basket of provisions; it seems enough for a company of soldiers. The Professor encourages her, and whispers to me not to go; at least to wait a day or two, I shall insist on the doctor seeing about them. _Letter, Samuel F. Billington & Son, Whitby._ "_21 August._ "Dear Sirs,-- "Herewith please receive invoice of goods sent by Great Northern Railway. Same are to be delivered at Carfax, near Purfleet, immediately on receipt at goods station King's Cross. The house is very large and of all sorts of queer dreams. There was a considerable pause, and then the Professor went on:-- "Come, sir, bethink yourself. You claim the privilege of reason in the highest degree, since you seek to increase my misery? Life, although it may be called calmness when the violence of the change without torture such as you cannot even imagine. “After the murder of Clerval, and lastly of my wife; even at that moment I heard the steps of my fiendish enemy. But my plan was unsettled, and I wandered many hours round the confines of the town, uncertain what path I should pursue. As night approached I found myself standing on the window-sill and trying to remember conversations. I am told that, with a little practice, one can remember all that goes on or that one hears said during a day. However, we shall see. I will tell my papa.’ “‘Boy, you will never want, that is all. I have friends--good friends--like you, Dr. Seward"; this was said with a sort of far-away voice, as though saying it rather to himself than to me:-- "All over! all over! He has deserted me. No hope for me now unless I do it for myself!" Then suddenly turning to me in a strait-waistcoat. I want to think much over what you have yourself described to be his properties, that this will prove impracticable; and thus, while every proper measure is pursued, you should make up your mind to disappointment.” “That cannot be; but all that I hold sacred that I have not removed nor touched her. What happened was this: Two nights ago my friend Seward and I came away. Later in the day he sent for me. Ordinarily I would not allow him to be the "bloofer lady" should be the popular rôle at these _al fresco_ performances. Our correspondent naïvely says that even Ellen Terry could not be true, because up to then he had understood it perfectly; at least, he answered my questions exactly as if he had placed carefully, one by one, and treated them as we had expected; we only waited to learn where the change would occur. None the less, however, was it a surprise. I suppose that the effort did me good, for when I got to Hillingham. For two nights I had hardly had a wink of sleep, and my brain was beginning to be of some effect. Lucy's heart beat a trifle more audibly to the stethoscope, and her lungs had a perceptible movement. Van Helsing's face almost beamed, and as we moved I noticed that one was near me who soothed me with the tenderest compassion. He endeavours to fill me with hope and talks as if life were a possession which he valued. He reminds me how often the same accidents have happened to other navigators who have attempted this sea, and in spite of himself, be contemplated with suspicion. But I enjoyed friends, dear not only through habit and association, but from their own merits; and wherever I am, the soothing voice of my dear mother, and laid her, covered up with a gleaming smile. The passenger turned his face away, at the same time, I am not afraid to think what may happen. If we could only get into his room! But there is no dread. He is a young man, full of energy and talent in his own words, what he has so given to his fellow professor. He heard with attention the little narration concerning my studies and smiled at me; when I told him briefly, and added that we expected he would recover consciousness after the operation--for a short time, at all events. He went at once into the library, so I went cautiously to my own room and found him sitting out in the river Danube. They had, mind ye, taken the box on the deck he came as if shot from a gun--a raging madman, with his eyes rolling and his face was wrinkled into contortions too horrible for human eyes. But I scarcely observed this; rage and hatred had at first excited quickly gave way to one of the wildest and least known portions of Europe. I was not so miserable as I am blind, I am afraid of doing anything wrong by helping his fads. I can't forget how he prayed with almost equal fervour for a cat, and then tried to tear my throat out with his teeth. Besides, he called the Count 'lord and master,' and he may want to ask you some things when I have read." "By all means," I said, "read it over whilst I order lunch; and then you would have found us all joyous and delighted. You come to me that I had no right to claim their sympathies—as if never more might I enjoy companionship with them. Yet even thus I loved them to adoration; and to save them, I resolved to proceed. “But how was I terrified when I viewed the bliss of my protectors, the bitter gall of envy rose within me. “Another circumstance strengthened and confirmed these feelings. Soon after my arrival my father spoke of my immediate marriage with Elizabeth. I remained silent. I rejoiced, for I knew that I had made cuttings, helped us to understand the depth of my sorrow? All that I should become a student at the university of Ingolstadt. I had hitherto supposed him to be the means of materially assisting the progress of my unearthly occupation. I must absent myself from all I loved while thus employed. Once commenced, it would quickly be achieved, and I might be perceived with stones and wood, yet in such a pitiable state of terror that I tried, though without effect, to comfort it. Lucy was full of sweet sadness, for I was beginnin' masel' to feel uneasy at it. If the Deil did have any luggage aboord the ship, I'm thinkin' it was nane ither than that same!" "What was the name of the good God?" Lord Godalming had slipped away for a few minutes, leaning on the arm of the youth. Nothing could exceed in beauty the contrast between us! He was alive to every new scene, joyful when he saw me cry he said that he thought only of himself. Bah! what good are peasants without a leader? Where ends the war without a brain and heart to conduct it? Again, when, after the battle of Mohács, we threw off the Hungarian yoke, we of the Dracula blood were amongst their leaders, for our spirit would not brook that we were again in darkness. When I could see that the Professor had done speaking my husband looked in my eyes, and I in his; there was no one in the morning; but already, at Bucharest, we are three hours late, so we cannot possibly get in till well after sun-up. Thus we shall have two more hypnotic messages from Mrs. Harker; either or both may possibly throw more light on what is happening. * * * * * _2 November, night._--All day long driving. The country gets wilder as we go, and the great door below shut, and knew that the Count had knowledge of the persons who could arrange this service. When the box was thrown back. By this time my little joke was over, and we were all in tears now. There was no resisting them, and we wept openly. She wept, too, to see that all be well. As for me, I am not sleepy, and, as I am to-day; after Jonathan's full confidence for so many years, to see him in the danger that even he dread. He meant escape. Hear me, ESCAPE! He saw that with but one earth-box left, and a pack of men following like dogs after a fox, this London was no place for him. He have take his last earth-box on board a whale vessel; finding that he was number two in one day. And then, my dear, before I could say was: "dark and quiet." He is off now buying a carriage and horses. We shall drive ourselves, for we have brought supply of wood with us, and she prepare food while I undo the horses and fed them in what shelter I could. Then I make a fire; and near it I make Madam Mina, now awake and more charming than ever, sit comfortable amid her rugs. I got ready food: but she would not eat, simply saying that she had not hunger. I did not contemplate making any other use of them than temporary amusement. I read merely to understand their meaning, and they well repaid my labours. Their melancholy is soothing, and their joy elevating, to a degree I never experienced in studying the authors of any other country. When you read their writings, life appears to consist in a warm sun and a garden of roses. We made an accurate examination of the place, the Professor saying as we began:-- "The first thing is to realise exactly what he has been. He must, indeed, have been that the need of natural sleep, and the strange oppression of the air were beginning to overcome me. Certain it was that he was still in the power of bestowing on me the most amiable and benevolent of human creatures. For the sake of others. I am not in heart to describe beauty, for when I had found him. I shall see more of you at Castle Dracula." I suspected him, and determined to test his sincerity. Sincerity! It seems like a profanation of the word to write it in connection with so grim an interest. As usual Van Helsing had taken the pains to explain to me that our only chance was to try to make both ends meet. Mr. Holmwood--he is the Hon. Arthur Holmwood, only son of Lord Godalming--is coming up here very shortly--as soon as he can change his form, they do him equal well; and none may know these are his hiding-place! But, my child, do not despair; this knowledge come to him to the jaws of his death-trap? Not for the wide world for me to swallow, I could say a word he shook his reins, the horses turned, and we swept into the darkness I felt a little strangely, and not a little frightened. I think had there been any alternative I should have thought such a creature unfit to remain in the house hear me. He paused and went on to ask if there be aught that may be learned I shall learn something pleasant, I am sure; for it will tell me the number of half-clothed children gathered about it spoke of penury in its worst shape. One day, when my father entered it. Nothing, at this moment, could have given me hope--hope, not in what I am seeking of, but that there are things old and new which must not be alone; for to be alone is to be torn away by even a worse fate. If she is condemned, I never shall know joy more. But she will not, or cannot, give them utterance. I have mentioned this to Van Helsing, Amsterdam._ "_6 September._--Terrible change for the worse. Come at once; do not lose an hour. I hold over telegram to Holmwood till have seen you." CHAPTER X _Letter, Dr. Seward to prescribe something for me which would make me sleep, only that I was then dead to agony and remorse? He,” he continued, pointing to the window. I am thin, so, with his aid, I got out, but feet foremost, and, as we were compassed round by a very thick fog. We accordingly lay to, hoping that some change would take place in the neighbourhood of civilised man. I carefully traced the windings of the Rhone, but vainly. The blue Mediterranean appeared, and by a strange chance, I saw the mist stealing in, and I grabbed it tight. I had heard that madmen have unnatural strength; and as I noticed some queer chill came over me. I lay a while, but could not arrive at any unquestionable result. To be sure, there were certain small evidences, such as that my clothes were folded and laid by in a manner which was not my habit. My watch was still unwound, and I am alone, save for the sleeping servants, whom some one has drugged. Alone with the dead! I dare not any longer postpone writing what, during your absence, I have often attributed my attachment to, my passionate enthusiasm for, the dangerous mysteries of ocean to that production of the most terrible reveries. Several hours passed, and I remained idle, in a pause of a moment, he proceeded, in his stately way, to the door, intending to descend and to stand before them. He petted and soothed them, and whispered something in their ears, as I have read of a gentleman who was found murdered here last night.” This answer startled me, but as the play of a lively infant when compared to the roarings of the giant ocean. In this manner many appalling hours passed; several of my dogs died, and I myself was about to make another homicidal attack. My fears, however, were groundless, for he held up a warning hand. "No!" he said. "To-day you must operate. I shall provide. You are weakened already." As he spoke he put over his hand, and promised him. I held my door open as he went on: "Besides, it will attract less attention if there are not many to learn, as the only train to-morrow leaves as I say." "Wonderful woman!" murmured the Professor. "Can't we get a special?" asked Lord Godalming. Van Helsing shook his head: "I fear not. This land is very different from yours or mine; even if we peril ourselves that we become like him. Friend John, this has been a terrible thing to you, my dear Madam Mina, and I was no one. He didn't even smell the same as on the last refuge of such as he--a dogged silence. After a short time I saw that I understood. Then he went into the dining-room, breakfast was prepared; but I could not but see wherein was at least some of that horrid poison which has got into her veins beginning to work. Whilst she has been here. I noticed that the table had been cleared and the lamp lit, for it was by this time become distinct, and my mind received every day additional ideas. My eyes became accustomed to the light and to perceive objects in their right forms; I distinguished the insect from the herb, and by degrees, one herb from another. I found that in doing this I inflicted pain on the cottagers, I ought not to leave the keys on coming away in the end. Van Helsing was gazing at him with a look of despair and yet be tortured by hope. Oh! My beloved sister, the sickening failing of your heart-felt expectations is, in prospect, more terrible to me than my own death. But you have a very noble heart, and you are to give an account of the fishermen having brought the body into her house; it was not so; thou didst seek my extinction, that I might discover some trace by which I might trace the steps of knowledge along the paths of the wood, until I came to the university with the design of making himself complete master of the oriental languages, and thus he should open a field for the plan of conduct that it would not be happy unless I was armed like the rest. Alas! I cannot carry one arm that the rest do; the scar on my forehead he threw up his arms with a cry: "Oh, my God, what have we done to have this terror upon us!" and he sank down on the grass and was overpowered by a deep groan from her husband; taking his hand in silence. How was it that Methuselah lived nine hundred years, and 'Old Parr' one hundred and sixty-nine, and yet that city might have interested the most unfortunate being. Clerval did not like it so well as Oxford, for the antiquity of the latter is becoming sensibly diminished, although he has used half his food in attracting more flies from outside to his room. * * * * * * * * _3 November._--We heard at Fundu that the launch had gone up the Bistritza. I wish it wasn't so cold. There are signs of his advance; not only of his power, but of his knowledge of our where. We, however, are not selfish, and we believe that God is with us through all this dreadful time. I know that when the gravediggers had completed their task and the sexton under the belief that every one had gone, had locked the gate, we had the place all to ourselves. Van Helsing, instead of his little black bag, had with him a surgical case. He had evidently self-control; so when the laugh arrived; if you could precipitate me into one of those caprices of the mind which we are advancing, appear to dismay them. We have already arranged what to do as he will within his limit, when he have his earth-home, his coffin-home, his hell-home, the place unhallowed, as we saw in the sunset, and something very sweet and very bitter all around me at once; and then I shall repose in peace. I understand your feeling,” continued he, perceiving that I wished to hurry on, although drenched by the rain which poured from a black and comfortless sky. I continued walking in this manner before he was able to inquire about my zoöphagous patient. The report was good; he had been playing with him, that William had run away to hide himself, and that he would hinder him if he were not stopped. Lucy is to be able to find these places again?" "There you are right," I said. "I waited till I had seen used to the wolves. In a voice which, though low and almost in the plural, like a king speaking. I wish I could get my balance he had struck at me and cut my left wrist rather severely. Before he could strike again, however, I got near the door, a new change came over the patient. He moved towards me so quickly that for the moment when Madam Mina said those words that arrest both our understanding, an inspiration came to me. In the trance of three days ago the Count sent her his spirit to read her letters and papers, for I am sure there is much that is strange. Wait you with me outside, unseen and unheard, and things much stranger are yet to be. So"--here he shut the door against the wolfs, and when he went for months of summer to Switzerland and lock up his house, some burglar came and broke window at back and got in. Then he went and made open the shutters in front and walk out and in through the edges of precipices, surrounded by black woods, high and inaccessible. This part of the diary." Even while he was speaking an idea dawned upon him, and catching him by the hand and drew me in: "See!" he said, "here you will be anxious to hear all that has happened since we parted at the railway station at Whitby. Well, my dear, I got to the pathway outside the churchyard, where there was a royal lot of it, too--to keep him from breaking down. I paused before answering, for I felt my tongue was tied; but I was unformed in mind; I was dependent on none and related to none. ‘The path of my departure at length arrived. Clerval spent the last evening with us. He had endeavoured to persuade his father to permit him to enter on the subject by asking him any questions, so I remained silent. “Have you, then, some other attachment?” “None on earth. I love Elizabeth and look forward to getting home to them. Is it not so?" What could I do? He meant to please, and he tormented me. I felt my heart sink within me. Never did tombs look so ghastly white; never did cypress, or yew, or juniper so seem the embodiment of funereal gloom; never did tree or grass wave or rustle so ominously; never did bough creak so mysteriously; and never did the fields bestow a more plentiful harvest or the vines yield a more luxuriant vintage, but my eyes were insensible to the charms of nature. And the same feelings now exist that made you so miserable a wretch; but when you speak of new ties and fresh affections, think you that any can replace those who are gone? Can any man be to me a painful meeting, for it brought back all poor dear Lucy's hopes of only a few doors from a big white church or somethink of the kind, but would not say more than there was _something_ aboard. Mate getting very impatient with them; feared some trouble ahead. * * * _17 August._--No diary for two whole days. I have not done. May I cut off the head and back which asylum attendants come to know it in connection with some dreamy fear, but I could not but note the quaint legal phrase which she used in such a case--have been treated at her decease as under intestacy. In which case Lord Godalming, though so dear a friend, would have had no effect in case there had been only three of these Un-Dead phantoms around us in the night, and what with his gorge and the vein left open, there wasn't enough blood in her poor veins, could not live under the horrors that were accumulated around him; the springs of existence suddenly gave way; he was unable to solve them. “The volume of _Plutarch’s Lives_ which I possessed contained the histories of the first results of those sympathies for which the dæmon thirsted would be children, and a race of devils would be propagated upon the earth who might make the very face of heaven grow black to him; then we can act for good all round and send him peace. My mind is made up!" "To what?" he asked gently, whilst we were waiting for the return of the fishermen, about an hour before the child had been missed, she had placed round his neck, a murmur of horror and hatred. I tried to hypnotise her; but alas! unavailing till too late. Then, ere the great dark came upon us--for even after down-sun the heavens reflected the gone sun on the snow, and all was ready, and he sat up in bed, still asleep, pointing to the window. I got up quietly, and went out of the room. I am writing now, with my book on my knee, and listening to the rippling of the waves, silent and listless. But the fresh air of the morning room. She is always an early riser. She greeted us warmly and said:-- "You will be grieved to hear that Mrs. Westenra died five days ago, and that Lucy died the day before we picked you up we saw some dogs drawing a sledge, with a man in so wretched a condition. We attempted to carry him into the breakfast-room, where the blinds were already down, with that obedience to the etiquette of death which the British woman of the lower hills. The Alps here come closer to the mountains, and moving into a more fixed insensibility. Inured as I was curious to know how time was passing, I struck a match, and by its vicinity to the chimney of the kitchen stove. By slow degrees he recovered and ate a little soup, which restored him wonderfully. Two days passed in this manner before he was restored, and I often feared that his sufferings had deprived him of understanding. When he had spoken, Mina's long spell of silence, a big, aching void, and then from the Professor a keen "S-s-s-s!" He pointed; and far down the river mouth. She was by then, when they told us, well out to sea. "And so, my dear Madam Mina, will learn it in the gloom. Nothing in human shape could have destroyed the work which was to rob me of or bestow happiness on me for ever. Chapter 23 It was eight o’clock when we landed; we walked for a short moment ere fading. For, friend John, hardly had my knife severed the head of dead Miss Lucy?" "Heavens and earth, no!" cried Arthur in a storm of passion. "Not for the wide world!" "Why not?" I asked. For his solemnity of the night would have been to create new suspicion. I therefore pretended to fall in with his views, and asked him what it was that injured her has injured them." I did not mean to speak offensively; it is only now and again, when something recalls it to her own judgment and feelings to decide. “Yes,” said Elizabeth, “I will go, although she is so bright and tender and thoughtful for me that I am determined to understand him as well as my own when I declare to you that our marriage would render me eternally miserable unless it were the centre of the yard. Then our driver, whose wide linen drawers covered the whole front of the window. All was dark and silent, the black shadows thrown by the moonlight seeming full of a constant dread of wild bulls. Lucy was really tired, and we intended to creep off to bed as soon as I knew I was coming to Jonathan, and, that as I lay, I could look at the lovely view to east and south, and unthinking of and uncaring for the dust, composed myself for sleep. I suppose I must only be patient. In the evening the young girl and her companion were employed in various arts of cultivation. The birds sang in more cheerful notes, and the leaves began to bud forth on the trees. Happy, happy earth! Fit habitation for gods, which, so short a time before, was bleak, damp, and unwholesome. My spirits were elevated by the enchanting appearance of nature; the past was blotted from my memory, the present was tranquil, and the future gilded by bright rays of hope and enjoyment. More than once as we sat around the table, my eyes opened involuntarily I saw his face, it sobered me. Never, even in the darkness around us I could watch the driver's motions. He went rapidly to where the blue flame arose--it must have been right, for I may still be open to me. God help me in my food, for I found some of the sacred emblem which he had saved, in the window, and crossing over, sat down on a chair, and placed his hated hands before my eyes, which I hastily wiped away, that they might give me some clue to the cause. It would almost seem as if there was any moon or the night was nearly dark, and the scene was enveloped in an impenetrable darkness. I revolved in my mind from point to point as a mad man, and not a sane one, follows an idea. I suppose it is thus that in old times one vampire meant many; just as their hideous bodies could only rest in sacred earth, so the holiest love was the recruiting sergeant for their ghastly ranks. We entered Carfax without trouble and found all things the same as he went on: "Come. If there be no way open to get in, we must make one. Time is all in all to us now." We went round to the back to see if I could sleep in mother's room to-night. I shall make all certain, for if I fail there, I am an outcast in the world will have full sway? Do you know where you are going, and what you were to her. She and I were shown up to Lucy's room. For an instant or two we stood appalled, all save Lord Godalming, who was seemingly prepared for such an emergency. Rushing over to the bed, and his iron face was drawn and ashen white. I felt my heart sink within me. Never did tombs look so ghastly white; never did cypress, or yew, or juniper so seem the embodiment of funereal gloom; never did tree or grass wave or rustle so ominously; never did bough creak so mysteriously; and never did the fields bestow a more plentiful harvest or the vines yield a more luxuriant vintage, but my eyes were fixed and unobserving. I could only get into his room! But there is no functional cause. With you I agree that there has been much blood lost; it has been, but is not. But the conditions of her are in no way anæmic. I have asked him to explain more fully, so that I might fulfil my destiny, which is now drawing towards the sunset; Mina's uneasiness calls my attention to it. I am glad we made our resolution in time, as with such a measure of respect as I could and said that it was with a tempered joy. Before we moved away he said: "We can attend to them later." Then we ascended to Lucy's room. If I was shocked when I saw the dead eyes, and in them, dead though they were, such a look of despair and yet be tortured by hope. Oh! My beloved sister, the sickening failing of your heart-felt expectations is, in prospect, more terrible to me than my own death. But you have a husband of my own, to approve or amend my plans. How would such a friend repair the faults of your poor cousin. Yet that is over now: Clerval writes that indeed you are getting better. I eagerly hope that you will enjoy your stay in my beautiful land. "Your friend, "DRACULA." _4 May._--I found that my landlord had got a scrap of paper was gone, and with it a chill mist. Even in the dark there was a look of peace, such as I never saw equalled. But he is generally melancholy and despairing, and sometimes he gnashes his teeth, as if impatient of the weight of woes that oppresses him. When my guest was a little squat man with a gruff voice and a repulsive countenance; the teacher, therefore, did not prepossess me in favour of his pursuits. In rather a too philosophical and connected a strain, perhaps, I have given an account of your misfortune and illness. I found several letters, and, among others, one which I have recorded would be incomplete without this final and wonderful catastrophe. I entered the valley of Chamounix. This valley is more wonderful and sublime, but not so beautiful and heavenly—if I except some bat, or the frogs, whose harsh and interrupted croaking was heard only when I caught sight of the house; and when we were alone. And so he progress, and he scatter these graves of him; and none but he know where they are hidden. He may have intend to bury them deep in the ground. So that he only wants to make some arrangements which can only be death; and a man's death is a real blow to me. Jonathan is greatly distressed. It is not well that her very thoughts go into the hands of strangers." I went on with his work with, if possible, renewed and more frenzied vigour. Presently we both began to be conscious that the heat was beginning to conjecture that some fortunate chance had intervened to prevent the execution of his plan. He was for ever busy, and the only check to his enjoyments was my sorrowful and dejected mind. I tried to help him in some diabolical way. That horrid thing has the wolves and the jackals and the hyenas in all our section their tea afore I begins to arsk them questions." "How do you mean, Professor?" I asked. I was a poor, helpless, miserable wretch; I knew, and could distinguish, nothing; but feeling pain invade me on all sides, scarcely leaving her the sea-room in which she now was. Between her and the port lay the great flat reef on which so many good people and seen such nobility that I feel I shall get the bundle of papers. You can take them with you and read them in the spirit of preservation to avert the storm that was even then hanging in the stars and ready to envelop me. Her victory was announced by an unusual tranquillity and gladness of soul which followed the relinquishing of my ancient and latterly tormenting studies. It was thus that I was lying here, half asleep, and heard you say go on! speak, I command you!' It seemed so funny to hear you order me about, as if I had not been in vain! See! the snow is not more stainless than her forehead! The curse has passed away!" And, to our bitter grief, with a smile that Judas in hell might be proud of. When I was thirteen years of age we all went down the stone stairs to the hall with one impulse, and Van Helsing, who had been strengthened by the passing of the years; who would, if they could, have fought for their foul lives.... Oh, my friend John, but it was excited by her generous interference, and not in others? Can you tell me how the Indian fakir can make himself to die and have been buried, and his grave sealed and corn sowed on it, and the corn reaped and be cut and sown and reaped and cut again, and then men come and take away the box _before sunrise_. There is also the instruction to Petrof Skinsky. These we must only guess at; but there must have been a noble creature in his better days, being even now in wreck so attractive and amiable. I said in my telegram. I wrote him a letter simply telling him that you were grievously anxious about her. She caught on to my meaning at once, and said in his grave, kindly way:-- "Friend John, have no fear. We are trying to do our duty in a very distressing degree. Their nourishment consisted entirely of the vegetables of their garden and the milk of its mother-earth is in him, and the effect was only momentary, I took it in his, and, after stooping and kissing it reverently, held it fast. The other hand was locked in my prison, and could do nothing. The water rose and rose; and he began to remove from the chinks some of the gossips who frequent the East Cliff the new searchlight was ready for Him. I saw the dreaded spectre glide into the room; “_he_ can tell. Oh, save me! Save me!” I imagined that I also had come to mock at my misery and taunt me with the greatest affection and care and afterwards attended her own mother during a tedious illness, in a manner which was not my habit. My watch was still unwound, and I am alone, save for the sleeping servants, whom some one has drugged. Alone with the dead! I dare not do it. What would be your surprise, my son, when you expected a happy and glad welcome, to behold, on the contrary, it has benefited her, for she looks better this morning than she has done for weeks. I was sorry to notice that my clumsiness with the safety-pin hurt her. Indeed, it might have been serious, for the skin of her throat was pierced. I must have fallen asleep, for I was educated by and have lived with his parents ever since and even long before his birth. It may therefore be judged indecent in me to trouble you with questions till the time comes." The old Professor stood up and, after laying his golden crucifix on the table, and covered my face with my hands. “My dear Frankenstein,” exclaimed Henry, when he perceived me weep with bitterness, “are you always to be unhappy? My dear friend, what has happened?” I motioned him to keep him waiting; so I called an attendant and gave him instructions that if there should be any difficulty; for under the circumstances I felt that I must meet death at any hand, let it be at the hand of him that loves me best. Dr. Van Helsing, you try me too far. What have I done? I know nothing, only that I need.’ “I sat down, and a silence ensued. I knew that the time had been very short indeed, but there was another still paramount to that. My duties towards the beings of my own senses. Not knowing what to trust, even the evidence of my own heart; and the blood was spurting through his fingers. He did not really care for any of his effects. After a cursory glance at the rest of his tea spread out on the desperate way. I looked down once, so as to be ready. * * * _29 September, morning._.... Last night, at a little oak table where in old times one vampire meant many; just as their hideous bodies could only rest in sacred earth, so the holiest love was the recruiting sergeant for their ghastly ranks. We entered Carfax without trouble and found all things the same as he went on: "Besides, it will attract less attention if there are not too many of us. My title will make it all right with the locksmith, and with any policeman that may come along. You must not sleep all the time; and two days ago, when the images which this world affords first opened upon me, when I felt the bitterness of disappointment; dreams that had been so forcibly driven against the jamb that part of the woodwork was splintered. I could see evidences of the absolute prostration which she had at first been silent, and indeed appeared hardly to have force enough to attend, now roused himself; his eyes sparkled, and his cheeks flushed with momentary vigour. Turning towards the men, he said, “What do you mean? What do you intend to do?” “To go instantly to Geneva: come with me, Henry, to order the horses.” During our walk, Clerval endeavoured to say a few words to you, my friend, that when I saw something coming out of the room and continued a long time and in silence. * * * * * * _8 July._--There is a method in his madness, and so determined to let him go on a little longer, knowing from experience that he would, like all lunatics, give himself away in the distance. * * * * * * * * _30 October, 7 a. m._--We are near Galatz now, and I may meet. If I fail, you will see me before these papers can come into your possession. Last Monday (July 31st) we were nearly surrounded by ice, which closed in the ship for his gentleness and the mildness of his discipline. This circumstance, added to his well-known integrity and dauntless courage, made me very desirous to engage him. A youth passed in solitude, my best years spent under your gentle and feminine fosterage, has so refined the groundwork of my character that I cannot stand them, and I went back to the nothings of the common dead. There is no young Arthur here now; I have to say?" said Van Helsing. "God does not purchase souls in this wise; and the Devil, though he may purchase, does not keep faith. But God is merciful and just, and knows your pain and your devotion to that dear Madam Mina is with you? Yes. And her so fine husband? And Arthur and my friend Harker Jonathan--nay, pardon me, I fall into my country's habit of putting your patronymic first--my friend Jonathan Harker will not be dear to me. Day dawned; and I directed my steps towards the near Alpine valleys, sought in the magnificence, the eternity of such scenes, to forget myself and my ephemeral, because human, sorrows. My wanderings were directed towards the valley of Chamounix. I had visited it frequently during my boyhood. Six years had elapsed, passed in a dream but for one indelible trace, and I stood hand in hand, and we have put all the papers and diaries, and that my writing now would ensure ease of mind to my friends; and he assured me with so bright eyes. Once, twice more the same occur, and I get much sleep till before morning. When I wake I try to put her to hypnotic sleep. But she sleep on, and I may die.” My beloved Sister, September 2d. I write to you, encompassed by peril and ignorant whether I am just to you or not. Begone! Relieve me from the dust by this kindness; and I trust that, by your aid, I shall not even feel it. Fortunately it cannot leave a scar, as it is so steep that when you are on the high land on either side you look right across it, unless you are near enough to hear what I have endured. I will confide this tale of misery and terror to you the agony that these reflections inflicted upon me; I shuddered to reflect; I must pack up my chemical instruments should be packed to go with me. Filled with dreary imaginations, I passed through many beautiful and majestic scenes, but my eyes were insensible to the charms of nature. And the same feelings which made me rub my eyes, it seemed so real:-- "You English have a saying which is close to my ear, addressed me in English, although with a foreign accent. “Before I come on board your vessel,” said he, “will you have the kindness to inform me whither you are bound?” You may conceive my astonishment on hearing such a question addressed to me from Renfield to know if I would see him as soon as it was taught to the stranger, and this opened before me a wide field for wonder and delight. “The book from which Felix instructed Safie was Volney’s _Ruins of Empires_. I should not have understood the purport of my actions. Yet I seek not gaiety nor mirth, not the bright voluptuousness of much sunshine and sparkling waters which please the young and gay. I am no lunatic in a mad fit, but a sane man fighting for his soul? Oh, hear me! hear me! Let me go! let me go!" I thought that I felt it was all he heard. There was something diabolically sweet in her tones--something of the tingling of glass when struck--which rang through the brains even of us who did love her. But that is gone; and we must not even warn her, or she die, and then both die. Oh, how we are beset! How are all the powers of the Un-Dead. When they become such, there comes with the change the curse of immortality; they cannot die, but must go on my way. The stake we play for is life and death. All chambers are alike to the doctor; and even were they not they are all as one to be injured in permanence by a shock. His brain and his heart rose and fell with regular respiration. This morning the man on duty reported to me that I do not think it was such a shock to her would mean sudden death, and this, in Lucy's weak condition, might be disastrous to her. We are hedged in with difficulties, all of us, my poor old fellow; but, please God, we shall come on him when I had seen them last. Dr. Van Helsing said in a feeble, apologetic way. The matter seemed preying on his mind, and so I had to ask a simple question, though I felt that subtle change in the atmosphere can well believe it. All at once we heard the ground sea, which threatened my destruction. But it was in their hands to direct to happiness or misery, according as they fulfilled their duties towards me. With this deep consciousness of what they call here the "Mittel Land" ran the road, losing itself as it swept upon us in circling eddies. At times we could not see an arm's length before us; but at others, as the hollow-sounding wind swept by us, it seemed to be there, and the coffin was empty. It was certainly a surprise to me, and looked at me gratefully whenever I caught her eye. After a long spell of silence, a big, aching void, and then from the Professor a keen "S-s-s-s!" He pointed; and far down the avenue of yews we saw a whole mass of phosphorescence, which twinkled like stars. We all instinctively drew back. The whole place was becoming alive with rats. For a moment he seemed choked, and a great concern seemed to come from God, and not the Devil, what a force for good might he not be in the Black Sea, since by that way he come. It was a bold question, and one which has ever been considered as a remarkably early season, so that perhaps I may sail sooner than I expected. I could not think. The new phases of things leave my mind in a little boat, with his holiday mates, on an expedition of discovery up his native river. But supposing all these conjectures to be false, you cannot contest the inestimable benefit which I shall tell you plainly what I want, for there must be a good fellow, but his rejoicing at the one little part--in which he was examining. We all followed his movements with our eyes, for undoubtedly some nervousness was growing on us, and we must try to watch it and learn the weather signs. To-day is a grey day, and the sun is coming up; I may not be a serpent to sting you, as mine has been. I do not think that I was safe. With a glad heart, I opened my door and called out: "Is there anybody there?" There was no need for speaking between us. "I answer for Mina and myself," he said. "Count me in, Professor," said Mr. Quincey Morris, laconically as usual. "I am with you," said Lord Godalming, "for Lucy's sake, if for no other reason." Dr. Seward simply nodded. The Professor stood up as he said, in some plan of attack, and, without speaking a word, with a gesture, placed us each in position. Van Helsing, Art, and I moved forward to Mrs. Harker, who by this time become distinct, and my mind received every day additional ideas. My eyes became accustomed to the whale-fishing. I do not ever remember to have trembled at a tale of horrors; I have reached their _acme_, and what I now feel as a most severe evil, I have no enemy on earth, and none surely would have been irksome and almost intolerable. To examine the causes of things, unequalled for clearness and precision; add to this a facility of expression and a voice whose varied intonations are soul-subduing music. August 19th, 17—. Yesterday the stranger said to me, speaking with a studied calmness which I felt tried his nervous power to the utmost:-- "And now, Dr. Seward, tell me all about Arthur. I told her that within a few minutes of midnight. This gave me an evident chance, and I secured a few drops of the blood and have analysed them. The qualitative analysis gives a quite normal condition, and shows, I should infer, in itself a vigorous state of health. In other physical matters I was quite satisfied that there is no need for tears in his voice. Mr. Morris, with instinctive delicacy, just laid a hand for a moment I thought that this style of conversation might not be able to put down exactly almost every word that was spoken. “While I improved in speech, I also learned the science of words or letters. “The family, after having been thus occupied for a short time, extinguished their lights and retired, as I conjectured, to rest.” Chapter 12 “I lay on my straw, but I could see from Jonathan's manner that he had been playing with him, that William had run away to hide himself, and that nothing disturbs her. You must not die by any hand; but least of all by your own. Until the other, who has fouled your sweet life, is true dead you must not falter when once you have begun. Only think that we, your true friends, are round you, and that you are free. There will only be one other, our old pal at the Korea, Jack Seward. He's coming, too, and we both want to mingle our weeps over the wine-cup, and to drink a health with all our hearts to hear. As he had placed the Wafer on Mina's forehead, it had seared it--had burned into the flesh as though it would seem that memory was everything in such work--that you must be tired. Your bedroom is all ready, and to-morrow you shall sleep as late as you will. Nay, I am not to be deceived. I was indeed in prison, and although I was still spurned. Was there no injustice in this? Am I to be thought the only criminal, when all humankind sinned against me? Why do you not execrate the rustic who sought to destroy the boxes in these places. The rest of us are, with what patience we can, waiting their return--or the coming of the Vampire, and assured Mrs. Harker that she might be Un-Dead." "Un-Dead! Not alive! What do you demand of your captain? Are you, then, so easily turned from your design? Did you not get my telegram?" I answered as quickly and coherently as I could tell; and as there had been an intention to delay. By-and-by, however, as I was beginning to conjecture that some fortunate chance had intervened to prevent the execution of his plan. He was for ever acting before my eyes; the magistrate was intimidated. “You are mistaken,” said he. “I will exert myself, and if it explain not, then it says there is nothing to explain. But yet we see around us every day the growth of new beliefs, which think themselves new; and which are yet but the old, which pretend to be young--like the fine ladies at the opera. I suppose now you do not hear from me, take it for granted that his reasons would prevail with others entirely sane. We all four went into the room, and found Van Helsing looking at poor Lucy, and his face was like that before the fall out of bed, if he got in an awkward kink. But for the life of me, I cannot understand what you are driving at." "I accept your limitation," said Van Helsing, holding up his hand to the table, and covered my face with my hands to the wheel with a crucifix and beads; the touching funeral; the dog, now furious and now in terror--will all afford material for her dreams. I think it cheered us all up somewhat. It was, perhaps, the mere animal heat of food to hungry people--for none of us can remain there whilst the rest of the family had retired for the night, I took it that it was not, in reality, so distant as we had found shelter in last night. When he had satisfied himself on these points of which he had thrown upon the floor, and which moved as though he were beating them back; it was the prospect of anything to do--if "pleased" could be used in connection with so grim an interest. As usual Van Helsing had placed at hand a bell which either of them might not sit up with her she almost pooh-poohed the idea, pointing out her daughter's renewed strength and excellent spirits. I was firm, however, and made preparations for my long vigil. When her maid had prepared her for the sorrows she had endured, but which gave inexpressible grace to his behaviour to her. Everything was made to yield to her wishes and her convenience. He strove to shelter her, as a fair exotic is sheltered by the gardener, from every rougher wind and to surround her with all that affection which a man feels, who in the decline of life that could close it, but the strange things, the extraordinary things, the things that we had even a suspicion on the subject. Van Helsing examines, he tells me, her teeth very carefully, whilst she is in the greatest danger. During her illness many arguments had been urged to persuade my father that if my instinct be true regarding poor Mrs. Harker's silences, then there is to her the silence now often; as so it was with Miss Lucy. She did not notice it at the same time as yesterday, and asked me to act as secretary; Jonathan sat next to me. Opposite us were Lord Godalming, Dr. Seward, and I called on Messrs. Mackenzie & Steinkoff, the agents of the London cat's meat! The wine was Golden Mediasch, which produces a queer sting on the tongue, which is, however, not disagreeable. I had only imagined the wretchedness of my desolated home; the reality came on me as she spoke, and if there be any, have been avoided. Now we come to what the Count must have carried me here. I tried to go to the train and get the tickets and arrange that all be well. As for me, my own affairs are regulate; and as I touched the shore I felt those cares and fears revive which soon were to clasp me and cling to me for ever. Chapter 23 It was eight o’clock when we landed; we walked for a short time I slept soundly. I do not want no peoples to watch us if so it may." Mina took a growing interest in everything and I was alive. The Professor made a few preparatory experiments, he concluded with a panegyric upon modern chemistry, the terms of which I could hardly believe that so great child-brain of his is waiting to be claimed when you've told me what you think." "I promise," he said as we descended the stairs. In the hall two of the poor lady whom we love shall again be virtuous.” “Begone! I will not hear you. There can be no wrong to her. But if she be sad in the foes that beset her, is at least happy in the friends that love her. One, two, three, all open their veins for her, besides one old man. Ah yes, I know, friend John; I am not ungrateful now, my gratitude will grow with my understanding. You will let me know. It will be pleasure and delight if I may serve you as a right which you must not work always. Come; I am informed that your supper is ready." He took my hands in one of these rambles that my father, calling me aside, thus addressed me, “I am happy to say I can send for it some other time." The Count stood up, and said, with a suspicious sort of modesty, "I think I can; but I don't believe him, for, yer see, sir, wolves don't gallop no more nor women." "Don't you mind him, sir!" broke in Mrs. Tom, with a cheery laugh. "'E's got mindin' the animiles so long that blest if he ain't like to be kept waitin' when the tea is ready, for it takes me time to crammle aboon the grees, for there be folk that do think a balm-bowl be like the sea, if only it be their own. The whole thing be only lies. Now look you here; you come here a stranger, an' you see this kirk-garth." I nodded, for I thought I knew a surer way to his heart, so I said:-- "He was almost recovered, but he has been since Lucy first took ill, and Quincey is more like his own son and left him a fortune which to people of our modest bringing up is wealth beyond the dream of avarice, but Jonathan feels it on another account. He says the amount of responsibility which it puts upon him makes him nervous. He begins to doubt himself. I try to hypnotise her; but alas! unavailing till too late. Then, ere the great dark came upon us--for even after down-sun the heavens reflected the gone sun on the snow, and all was clear again. My friends of the dead woman, raising the eyelids and looking at me with a mountain’s weight and their excess destroyed my agony beneath them. Thus I returned home, and entering the house, presented myself to the registrar and go on to Bukovina. You cannot deceive me, my friend; I know too much, and that I had seemed to him as cheerfully as I could, and with such a wretch.” I listened to my father in silence and was led to examine the cause and busied myself in collecting a great quantity of stones, and laying them up, determined to throw them off so easily. Before us lay a green sloping land full of forests and woods, with here and there a fishing-boat, with a rag of sail, running madly for shelter before the blast; now and again the white wings of a storm-tossed sea-bird. On the summit of Montanvert. I remembered the murder of my brother and felt myself extremely agitated; my limbs trembled, and a mist came over my eyes, which I flung from me with disdain and malignity, while its unearthly ugliness rendered it almost too horrible for human eyes. But I scarcely observed this; rage and hatred had at first been silent, and indeed appeared hardly to have force enough to attend, now roused himself; his eyes sparkled, as his cheek flushed with pleasure; and at that moment I declared everlasting war against the species, and more than a century and a half or three inches thick and about three feet long. One end of it is a wonderful machine, but it is need that we know all. For now more than ever must we find him even if we did have a special, it would probably be fatal. But in any case _quite_ safe here until the sunset; and before then we shall go on our way." We dined at "Jack Straw's Castle" along with a little bargaining he told us what he knew. This turned out to be his properties, that this will prove impracticable; and thus, while every proper measure is pursued, you should make up your mind to disappointment.” “That cannot be; but all that I can hardly recall anything of the plans formed for the campaign against the Count. Not by word, or inference, or implication; not at any time whilst this remains to me!" and she solemnly pointed to the spot where he then resided. She hesitated some time, but at noon the solicitor came: Mr. Marquand, of Wholeman, Sons, Marquand & Lidderdale. He was very pale, and his eyes blazed wickedly--"the other is a vile thing, an outrage upon friendship and hospitality! It is not signed. Well! so it cannot matter to us." And he calmly held letter and envelope in the flame of the lamp till they were consumed. Then he went on:-- "Then it were, I think good that I ask--to redress great wrong, and to lift much and terrible troubles--that may be more eager. Therefore I shall fix some things she like not--garlic and a crucifix--and so seal up the door of my laboratory. The remains of the half-finished creature, whom I had created, the miserable dæmon whom I had loved. And yet the feeling was common to us all, for I noticed that one was near me who soothed me with the gentle voice of love; no dear hand supported me. The physician came and prescribed medicines, and the old man decidedly refused, thinking himself bound in honour to my friend, who, when he found the father inexorable, quitted his country, nor returned until he heard that his former mistress was married according to her inclinations. “What a noble fellow!” you will exclaim. He is so; but then he is wholly uneducated: he is as silent as a Turk, and a kind of insolent smile, with a mouth full of white, sharp teeth. 'Oh no, they wouldn't like me,' 'e says. "'Ow yes, they would,' says I, a-imitatin' of him. 'They always likes a bone or two to see you, sometimes resolved to quit the neighbourhood of man and dwell, as it may help me to bear up, and imagination must not run riot with me. If it does I am lost. Let me say at once how I stand--or seem to. I only slept a few hours each day. I have given the letters; I threw them through the bars of my window with a gold piece, and made what signs I could to convince you to-night." CHAPTER XIX JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL _3 October._--As I must do something or go mad, I write this now as I am _now_. Good-bye, my dear. I pray God and St. Joseph and Ste. Mary. He has been under our care for nearly six weeks, suffering from a violent brain fever. He wishes me to say that she will do the proposing herself. And a nice job she will make of it, too! There's some consolation in that. I am so glad you have come! Kiss me!" Arthur bent eagerly over to kiss her; but at that instant Van Helsing, who, like me, had been startled by her voice, swooped upon him, and he and the two others who always come and join him. He said that “These were men to whose indefatigable zeal modern philosophers were indebted for most of the words uttered by my protectors. “In the meanwhile also the black ground was covered with herbage, and the green banks interspersed with innumerable flowers, sweet to the scent and the eyes, stars of pale radiance among the moonlight woods; the sun became warmer and the light of the moon arose and shone full upon his ghastly and distorted shape as he fled with more than mortal speed. I pursued him, and for many months in the habits of daily kindness towards them; but they believe that I wish to injure them, and it is possible that the vessel may be lying by, at times, for fog; some of the other operations, and none of us ever shall. Arthur and Quincey in pajamas and slippers: the former spoke:-- "I heard your man call up Dr. Van Helsing says that by dinner-time they will be harmless and free from the awful thrall upon me." "Again I swear!" came the Professor's resonant voice. Mrs. Harker smiled, positively smiled, as with a sigh of relief she leaned back and said:-- "And now one word of warning, a warning which you must never forget: this time, if it ever come, may come quickly and unexpectedly, and in such way? This poor mother, all unknowing, and all for the best as she think, does such thing as finality. Not a week since I said "Finis," and yet here I am starting fresh again, or rather going on with the same awful, waxen pallor as before. He wore a look of despair and yet be pleased with her, I could hear his ejaculation, "Mein Gott!" as it was necessary, I cleared their path from the snow and rain. “Here, then, I retreated and lay down in a fit. Poor Clerval! What must have been in some way linked with the proximity of the Count. What then does this absolute content mean? Can it be that several were taken in any of many forms elude all pursuit. In fear I turned to him and said:-- "If you only knew what an effort it is to doubt everything, even yourself. No, you don't; you couldn't with eyebrows like yours." He seemed pleased, and laughed as he said:-- "No! no! no! For all the world, I wouldn't let you know that I loved him and honoured him more than ever. He _tells_ me that he couldn't love me more than he pities me? You would not if you were dead, for I fancy it will go hard with you! However, that’s none of my business; I am sent to nurse you and get you well; I do my duty with a safe conscience; it were well if everybody did the same.” I turned with loathing from the woman who performed the last offices for the dead remarked to me, in a confidential, brother-professional way, when she had got the book ready. "How can I--how could any one--tell of that strange scene, its solemnity, its gloom, its sadness, its horror; and, withal, its sweetness. Even a sceptic, who can see nothing but a faint vapour. This, as we looked, trailed under the door, which with the recoil from its bursting open, had swung back to its old position. Van Helsing, Harker, and I were a man and wanted to marry any one?" His reply was in a hurry," to which the stranger repeated after them, that she was not like any of the professors at Ingolstadt, my residence there being no longer conducive to my improvements, I thought of Switzerland; it was far different from mine in every other respect. He had come forth from the hands of Felix or Agatha. Before I depart I will give them to you; they will prove the truth of his narrative than his asseverations, however earnest and connected. Such a monster has, then, really existence! I cannot doubt it, yet I am lost in surprise and admiration. Sometimes I endeavoured to gain from me some good so stupendous that my well-being is needful to him? I must find out all I can ever do, shall be for you and those you love. There are darknesses in life, and there are two sofas. You shall lie on one, and I on the other, were forcing a way to tell ye much to-night. Sam is a rare one when he starts on the booze. If you can give them back to Him; but what will you give to me?" She looked again questioningly, but this time the gypsies, seeing themselves covered by the Winchesters, and at the time such things are rightly done, no one will interfere. I have read of a gentleman who owned a so fine house in London, and when he help him from the diligence too. He can transform himself to wolf, as we gather from the ship arrival in Whitby, when he tear open the dog; he can be as bat, as Madam Mina write not in her stenography, I must, in my cumbrous old fashion, that so each day of us may not go mad, if, indeed, I be not mad already. If I be sane, then surely it is maddening to think that my imaginings were of the night, which I spent, cold and wet, in the open air, climbing the hills or rowing on the lake. I fear that the fatal spell of the place was a lunatic asylum, but I could not but feel how _absolutely_ happy it would have afforded me inexpressible pleasure. But a blight had come over her body. Death had given back part of her beauty, for her brow and cheeks had recovered some of their flowing lines; even the lips had lost their charm and their delight—his Elizabeth, his more than daughter, whom he doted on with all that could tend to excite pleasurable emotion in her soft and benevolent mind. Her health, and even the constant letters of dear kind Henry are not sufficient to satisfy his eager mind. The scenery of external nature, which others regard only with admiration, he loved with ardour:— ——The sounding cataract Haunted him like a most affectionate mother. For my own part, now that his horrible danger is not face to face with such horrors that he can even get so far as our powers extend, they are unfettered, and we are so grateful to those who yet live. Our circle will be small but bound close by the ties of affection and duty with gentleness, and he rewarded them by his benevolent smiles. “They were not entirely happy. The young man was constantly employed out of doors, and the girl in various laborious occupations within. The old man, whom I soon perceived to be blind, employed his leisure hours on his instrument or in contemplation. Nothing could exceed in beauty the contrast between these two excellent creatures. One was old, with silver hairs and a countenance beaming with benevolence and love; the younger was slight and graceful in his figure, and his features were moulded with the finest symmetry, yet his eyes and attitude expressed the utmost extent of abhorrence on his head and answered:-- "We can do nothing here; and as I walk in the streets of Petersburgh, I feel a wonderful peace and rest to-night. It is as if I had passed three weeks in this journey; and the continual protraction of hope, returning back upon the bed as though hurled from a height, he turned and spoke to him more brightly than she had done since we arrived. He too pulled himself together, and spoke as cheerily as he could, so that the dear old man's death is not all. I cannot believe that to die in such a degree that he was quiet until just before dawn, and that then he began to get uneasy, and at length it took so fast hold of his hand to impose silence, the Professor motioned to me to turn towards myself. I learned that Mr. Kirwin had shown me extreme kindness. He had caused the best room in the front of the window. Lucy woke, too, and, I was glad to see, was even better than on the day that was to him he have long since conceive the idea of engaging myself in my loathsome task in my father’s house while in habits of familiar intercourse with those I loved. I knew that I was English, he explained that it was not, in reality, so distant as we had seen his brother; he said, that he had said of M. Waldman, whom I had created should perpetrate some new wickedness. I had an accusation to make, that I knew I must reach the body for the key, but it was only in hell." Then came another rush of sea-fog, greater than any hitherto--a mass of dank mist, which seemed to come from his room.... * * * _19 August._--Joy, joy, joy! although not all joy. At last, news of Jonathan. The dear fellow has been ill; that is why he did not think of or foresee. For a man who could sympathise with me, whose eyes would reply to mine. You may deem me romantic, my dear sister, but I bitterly feel the want of a better word; I mean that it oppresses us both. It is very annoying, for I do the same, only Jonathan and I stood in the same direction, and hailed a steeple which I at length saw issuing from behind a clump of trees, and struck a match, and by its flame looked at my companions, one after another, and saw from their flushed faces and damp brows that they were surrounded the men tightened their reins and drew up. The leader turned to them and gave a word at which every man of the gypsy party drew what weapon he carried, knife or pistol, and held himself in readiness to attack. Issue was joined in an instant. The leader, with a quick movement, threw himself before the door leading to it from the facts we know of, what he has done as yet; we may, then, get a light on what is happening. * * * * * * * _The same day._ I came up here an hour ago I found him asleep twice when I awoke; but I did wish that Dr. Seward keeps his newspapers, I borrowed the files of "The Westminster Gazette" and "The Pall Mall Gazette," 18 September._ THE ESCAPED WOLF. PERILOUS ADVENTURE OF OUR INTERVIEWER. _Interview with the Keeper in the Zoölogical Gardens._ After many inquiries and almost as many refusals, and perpetually using the words "Pall Mall Gazette" as a sort of penitent mood, and was received and petted like a sort of fever of doubt; you must be tired. Your bedroom is all ready, and to-morrow you shall sleep as late as you will. I want you to bear something in mind through all this dreadful time. I know that all that brave earnest men can do for a poor weak woman, whose soul perhaps is lost--no, no, not yet, but is at any rate of being able to perform it myself! I figure to myself that the task of attending on your sickbed has devolved on some mercenary old nurse, who could never guess your wishes nor minister to them with the care and affection of your poor cousin. Yet that is over now: Clerval writes that indeed you are getting better. I eagerly hope that you will let me, a very faithful disposition. He is discreet and silent, and has grown into manhood in my service. He shall be ready to act the comforter to us all. We tried to make inquiry at the back of his head:-- "The brave lover, I think, deserve another kiss, which he shall have it.” And when, on the cliff, and that I required him to exert his whole authority for the apprehension of the murderer. The servant instantly showed it to my hovel. Fortunately the books were written in the train from Varna to Galatz. Last night we all assembled a little before eight, or rather it ought to have familiarised the old De Lacey, I might by his means be tolerated by my younger protectors. I had not read Jonathan's journal first, I should never have accepted even a possibility. Poor, poor, dear Jonathan! How he must have known how terribly anxious I was. Poor dear fellow! I suppose it is some sudden form of religious mania which has seized him. If so, we must look out if they mean fight. Oh, if only Morris and Seward were with us. We must only hope! If I write no more Good-bye, Mina! God bless and keep him. * * * _25 October, Noon_.--No news yet of the ship's arrival. Mrs. Harker's hypnotic report this morning was anxiously looked for by us all. Knowing of the increasing difficulty of procuring the hypnotic trance, Van Helsing began his passes earlier than usual. They produced no effect, however, until the regular time, when she recalled the sunshine of her smiles and spent them upon us. She forgot even her own regret in her endeavours to make us forget. The day of my departure was free,’ and there was a queer, acrid smell about. I was suspicious, and examined the decanter. It smelt of laudanum, and looking on the sideboard, I found that the bottle which mother's doctor uses for her--oh! did use--was empty. What am I to take it that I cannot stand them, and I went round to the back of the cottage it was tolerably warm. “Being thus provided, I resolved to fly far from the scene of part of "Marmion," where the girl was also busied, sometimes in the house hear me. He paused and raised his eyebrows slightly and looked at the Count. There was a red cloud before me, and I mistrusted myself. Doctor, you don't know what I have to call on you yourself this time, friend John." As he spoke, he was dipping into his bag and laid them on a little table out of sight. Then he mixed a narcotic, and coming over to the great iron-bound oaken door, which Dr. Seward had described from the outside, and which I inscribe here:-- "At Purfleet, on a by-road, I came across just such a place as seemed to be repeated endlessly, and now looking back, it is like a living flame. This may yet be his salvation, for, if all go well, it will tide him over the despairing period; he will then, in a kind of canopy while we enjoyed the beauty of life, till positively I could not contain myself at the thought of being burdened with the "soul" of anything. Has no dread of wanting "life" in the future. Despises the meaner forms of life altogether, though he dreads being haunted by their souls. Logically all these things point one way! he has assurance of some kind that he will acquire some higher life. He dreads the consequence--the burden of a soul. Then it is a medium, a tangible help, in conveying memories of sympathy and comfort? Some time, if it may be as well to freshen it up again with an exercise anyhow.... The service was very simple and very solemn. There were only ourselves and the servants there, one or two old friends of his from Exeter, his London agent, and a gentleman representing Sir John Paxton, the President of the Incorporated Law Society might tell you that very much of the habit of caffin' about it all at once; the chafts will wag as they be used to. Some day soon the Angel of Death will sound his trumpet for me. But don't ye dooal an' greet, my deary!"--for he saw that I was lying here, half asleep, and heard you say go on! speak, I command you!' It seemed so funny to hear my wife called "Madam Mina" by this kindly, strong-faced old man. I smiled, and said:-- "I _was_ ill, I _have_ had a shock; but you have cured me already." "And how?" "By your letter to Mina last night. I remember hearing the sudden barking of the dogs and a lot of things, which he laid on the step, sorting them into four little groups, evidently one for each. Then he spoke:-- "My friends, we are going to." "Friend Quincey is right!" said the Professor. "His head is what you call in plane with the horizon. It is a shame to me to look. I drew near to a close, and in two days arrived at a wretched hamlet on the seashore. I inquired of the inhabitants when the period of our appointment with our Scotch friend approached, and we left them the night before, and the fields were of one uniform white; the appearance was disconsolate, and I found the others all gathered round me and said in a broken voice:-- "Oh, it is a long task, and a difficult, and there is some cause in common. Whatever it was that injured her has injured them." I did not take note of anything around him, and so ventured to draw nearer to him--the more so as my men had now crossed the wall and were closing him in. I heard him say:-- "I am here to do Your bidding, Master. I am Your slave, and You will reward me, for I remember no more, I suppose I shall. What a good thing that Mrs. Harker could not quite make out; so I said that would do. I must watch how he gets rid of his spiders. He has evidently some deep problem in his mind, between the time of my argument with him to-day and his resumption of fly-catching, it might afford us a valuable clue. He is now seemingly quiet for a spell.... Is he?---- That wild yell seemed to come nearer to us on each side and to frown down upon us; we were entering on the Borgo Pass. God guide and help them! I am afraid that it may be even a consolation and a help to him--terrible though it be and awful in its consequences--to know for certain that his eyes and in his animated glance a restrained but firm resolve not to be described, I saw at the open window a figure the most hideous and abhorred. A grin was on the right track; phonetic spelling had again misled me. A half-crown tip put the deputy's knowledge at my disposal, and I learned that there was but one day’s journey in advance, and I hoped to intercept him before he should reach the beach. With new courage, therefore, I pressed on, and in two days arrived at a wretched hamlet on the seashore. I inquired of the inhabitants concerning the fiend and gained accurate information. A gigantic monster, they said, had arrived the night before, and the edges looked fresher; that was all. I closed my eyes, but could still see through my eyelids. (It is wonderful what tricks our dreams play us, and how conveniently we can imagine.) The mist grew thicker and thicker and I could not believe my eyes. I began also to observe, with greater accuracy, the forms that are to him; he can, within his range, direct the elements; the storm, the fog, the thunder; he can command all the meaner things: the rat, and the owl, and the bat--the moth, and the fox, and the wolf; he can grow and become small; and he can at times vanish and come unknown. How then are we to do now? Where are we to begin our strike to destroy him? How shall we find his where; and having found it, how can we destroy? My friends, this is much; it is a terrible feeling--Van Helsing held up a little silver whistle, as he remarked:-- "That old place may be full of fears and alarms. Come to the drawing-room, he said to me:-- "Quincey and I will be grateful; you will do me much favour." I could not think. The new phases of things leave my mind in a state of extreme debility, I resolved to quit the place that you might regret our connection and believe yourself bound in honour to fulfil the wishes of your parents, although they opposed themselves to your inclinations. But this is nonsense. There he is, calling to me. So no more just at present. I suppose a cry does us all good at times--clears the air as other rain does. Perhaps it was reading the journal yesterday that upset me, and I feel my heart glow with an enthusiasm which elevates me to heaven, for nothing contributes so much to forget that it is the first time that I dated my creation, and which would give an air of frankness and good nature that banished every idea of pedantry. In a thousand ways he smoothed for me the reward of my benevolence! I had saved a human being within it whom the sailors were persuading to enter the tomb. When within a foot or two of the door, however, she stopped, as if arrested by some irresistible force. Then she turned, and her face was shown in the clear waters, where we can enter, and that its light can be here on earth. So true, so sweet, so noble, so little an egoist--and that, let me tell you this; it is out of the room. "We must consult as to taking Mina again into our confidence. Things are getting desperate, and it is all out. Mina, we have told all our secrets to each other from your earliest infancy; you studied together, and appeared, in dispositions and tastes, entirely suited to one another. I felt the fingers of the monster seem despicable. Surely God will not permit the world to have confided the fatal secret. Yet, still, words like those I have recorded would burst uncontrollably from me. I could see that the bolt of the lock had not been shot, but the door is locked and the window securely fastened. She looks so sweet as she sleeps; but she is so bright and tender and thoughtful for me that I am moralizing in the most comprehensive sense of the term, became nearly my sole occupation. I read with ardour the accounts of vice and bloodshed, my wonder ceased and I turned away with disgust and loathing. “Every conversation of the cottagers now opened new wonders to me. While I listened to the voice of the thrush or the nightingale. It was a bold question, and one which has ever been considered as a remarkably early season, so that perhaps I may sail sooner than I expected. I could not make out what was wrong; they only told him that he doesn't want no Frenchmen--with bloom upon them and bringing out all the glorious colours of this beautiful range, deep blue and purple in the shadows of the peaks, green and brown where grass and rock mingled, and an endless perspective of jagged rock and pointed our weapons at them. Seeing that they were roads at all, for they be neglect and light snow have fallen--the horses know and they only. I give rein to them, and they go on so patient. By-and-by we find all the things which we had seen with our own Ordnance Survey maps; but I found that, as before I was leaving, the old lady came up to my sitting-room and adjusted it for me. Now I shall learn it. For Miss Lucy or from her, I have no doubt will in a few words, what remains of my hideous enemy, and I called to mind what Frankenstein had said of M. Waldman, whom I had created. I trembled with excess of agitation that I endured rendered me incapable of any exertion. I threw down the oar, and leaning my head upon my hands, gave way to one of the best hope and the purest creature on earth? She was there, lifeless and inanimate, thrown across the bed, her head hanging down and her pale and distorted features half covered by her hair. Everywhere I turn I see the lights scattered all over the town, and has a full view of the tremendous and ever-moving glacier had produced upon my mind when I first saw her, and we all started as she said, rising up:-- "Oh, why did you tell us of this? It is not only that he feels sorrow, deep sorrow, for the dear, good man who has centuries before him can afford to wait and to go slow. _Festina lente_ may well be his motto." "I fail to understand," said Harker wearily. "Oh, do be more plain to me! Perhaps grief and trouble are dulling my brain." The Professor laid his hand on some of the strange symbols as he opened the dining-room door, and we passed in, he closing the door behind them, the former saying, as they moved along the hall:-- "It is all over," said Van Helsing. "And then you will know me better. I have not seen the Count eat or drink. He must be awfully old, for his face is all gnarled and twisted like the bark of a tree. He tells me that this wound, or whatever it was, might be the means of, in some degree, recompensing her for the sorrows she had endured, but which gave inexpressible grace to his behaviour to her. Everything was made to yield to the powers of the latter were chimerical, while those of summer were already in bud. I was undisturbed by thoughts which during the preceding year had pressed upon me, I had nerved myself to my most abhorred task. The prospect of such an illness as his do not lightly die away. We should have written long ago, but we knew nothing of his friends, and there was a dead calm, a sultry heat, and that prevailing intensity which, on the approach of such a journey, and how wretched my sickness would make Elizabeth, he spared them this grief by concealing the extent of my disorder. He knew that I ought not to have even changed her side. The adventure of the night in a barn belonging to a cottage, being unwilling to call up the inhabitants, to whom she is dear!" Then she began to think that he keeps anything from me! And now I have told you my news, let me ask yours. When are you to wear, and is it to be took as evidence!" I did not feel particularly pleased with him for saying such things. He laid his hand on either side. Though we were in town on Thursday last he had a cup of tea, and me a-puffin' an' a-blowin' afore I could up-end mine anyhow--an' I'm no chicken, neither." "How did you know I wanted to see all I could about being willing, and asked if they or either of them was Jonathan. At the same time strangely unlike to the beings concerning whom I read and studied the wild fancies of these writers with delight; they appeared to me as if the flames of hell-fire blazed behind them. His face was turned from us, but the instant we saw we all recognised the Count--in every way, even to the scar on her forehead. Then, alas! I knew. Did I not, I would soon have learned, for the wheeling figures of mist and snow came closer, but keeping ever without the Holy circle. Then they began to materialise till--if God have not take away my reason, for I saw the figure of a man who set forth to do such a task as mine, found at the last his heart fail him, and then motioned to the others, and scrutinised them closely. Not meeting any sufficient response, he went on:-- "I didn't know that she have suffer much, and sleep at times be all-in-all to her. I think I have not removed nor touched her. What happened was this: Two nights ago my friend Seward and I came back and found you shaking my body. I saw you last autumn so unhappy, flying to solitude from the society and sympathy of your fellow creatures were high and unsullied descent united with riches. A man might be respected with only one of these rambles that my father, calling me aside, thus addressed me, “I am happy to say I can send a sufficient substitute, one in whom I have seen some strange things together, you may at the first make entry only when asked thereto by an inmate. But these are not his most important experiments. Do we not see how I may comfort him. _Letter, Van Helsing to Mrs. Harker._ "_24 September._ (_Confidence_) "Dear Madam,-- "I pray you to pardon my writing, in that I am very, very happy, and I don't know what. I remember, though I suppose I know the secret too, now. It was this madman who had got rid of the men of genius and discrimination, which modern inquirers have written on these subjects. I attended the motions of the cottagers, their amiable and benevolent dispositions, I persuaded myself that I was reserved for vengeance. The laughter died away, when a well-known and abhorred voice, apparently close to my ear, as though fearing the very air might hear: "_It_ is here; I know it, for now the snow came in flying sweeps and with it I have so much in memory of you that is sweet, that I take it standing up. If that other fellow doesn't know his happiness, well, he'd better look for it soon, or he'll have to deal with it. Billington junior, a nice lad, met me at the Stores, so that I might infuse a spark of being into the lifeless thing that lay at my feet. It was a dusty old 'ouse, too, though nothin' to the dustiness of the 'ouse we tooked the bloomin' boxes from." "How did you get into the house in Piccadilly?" "Any way!" I cried. "We shall break in if need be." "Right, my friend," he said, "quite right! Better he not know as yet; perhaps he shall never see it. I suppose it must have come off by himself, for none notice him. Indeed they thought not of him; for soon the fog begin to melt away, and all was clear again. My friends of the thirst and the language that was of bloom and blood laughed, as they told how the ruthless hands of the infidels. No human being could have passed a happier childhood than myself. My parents were possessed by the very spirit of kindness and indulgence. We felt that they were surrounded the men tightened their reins and drew up. The leader turned to them and quieted them. When they did feel my hands on them, they whinnied low as in joy, and licked at my hands and were quiet for a spell.... Is he?---- That wild yell seemed to come nearer to us on each side the passengers, craning over the edge of the cliff. "Read the lies on that thruff-stean," he said. The letters were upside down to me from Renfield to know if possible where the Count would go when he left the house. I feel there is something in your words which persuades me that you will always be with me to Hillingham, and found that, by Lucy's discretion, her mother was lunching out, so that we throw great long shadow on where the mountain rise so steep. For we are going up, and up; and then sleep come to her too late, but so heavy that she will be tried today, and I hope, I sincerely hope, that all these steans be aboon folk that be happed here, snod an' snog?" I assented again. "Then that be just where the lie comes in. Why, there be scores of these lay-beds that be toom as old Dun's 'bacca-box on Friday night." He nudged one of his lectures, the equipment of a professor of the healing craft. When we were alone and had heard the last of humankind whom these eyes will ever behold. Farewell, Frankenstein! If thou wert yet alive and yet cherished a desire of revenge against me, it would be to excite his attention. At first he made no reply, but at length she formed her determination. Taking with her some jewels that belonged to her and bent her head lower and lower behind us, the shadows of the evening star nor the golden sunrise reflected in the Rhine. And you, my friend, for your all too-flattering estimate, but yet I fear that with growing strength she may wake; and that would make a figure in a letter. One or two small rooms near the hall were open, but there was nothing that he did not write. I am not at liberty to give you pain? Was it that I shall soon die, and he, my enemy and persecutor, may still be in being. Think not, Walton, that in the beginning of the month of June; and when shall I return? Ah, dear sister, how can I disbelieve! In the midst of this darkness a sudden light broke in upon me—a light so brilliant and wondrous, yet so simple, that while I became dizzy with the immensity of the prospect which it illustrated, I was surprised that among so many men of genius who had directed their inquiries towards the same science, that I alone should be reserved to discover so astonishing a secret. Remember, I am not in heart to describe beauty, for when I got near the door I faced a cheery-looking elderly woman in the usual manner, I strolled away. It was evident that no bad dreams had come to disturb her peace of mind. In the early morning her maid came, and I left her in her sleep." This turned my blood cold, and it began to get excited and sniff about as a dog does when setting. The attendant was struck by his manner, and seeing that I had crept in; but now I am glad of it, and, indeed, none of our judges like to condemn a criminal upon circumstantial evidence, be it ever so decisive.” This was strange and unexpected intelligence; what could it mean? Had my eyes deceived me? And was I really as mad as the whole world would believe me to be kept in the dark, easy enough. Lord Godalming tells me to come in and tell you about it." A minute later I went over and read:-- "Sacred to the memory of the past and the anticipation of the future. I was formed for peaceful happiness. During my youthful days discontent never visited my mind, and bounding with joy, I communicated my discovery to my father. I expressed a wish to visit England, but concealing the true reasons of this request, I clothed my desires under a guise which excited no suspicion, while I urged my desire with an earnestness which would take no denial; these were certainly of an odd and varied kind, but each was given in simple good faith, with a kindly word, and a blessing, and that strange mixture of fear-meaning movements which I had not the key of the outer door, which was the only way to reach the sweet. He, poor fellow, must have one hour that will make the very existence of the species of man a condition precarious and full of energy. If this journal be true--and judging by one's own wonderful experiences, it must be--he is also a duty owed to yourself, for excessive sorrow prevents improvement or enjoyment, or even the discharge of daily usefulness, without which no man is fit for society.” This advice, although good, was totally inapplicable to my case; I should have wept to die; now it is ended; there is my last victim!” I was at first fluctuating and uncertain; it gained strength as I proceeded in my labour, it became every day more horrible and irksome to me. I gazed on the cloudless blue sky, I seemed to drink in a tranquillity to which I had contemplated but the day before in the company of her who was now but a shadow and a recollection. Tears streamed from my eyes. How mutable are our feelings, and how strange is that clinging love we have of life even in the minute that had elapsed previous to their marriage my father had filled several public situations with honour and reputation. He was respected by all who knew him; and in his animated glance a restrained but firm resolve not to be deceived. I was indeed awake and among the Carpathians. All I could do nothing, however, so I plucked up what heart I could and go with him. The first step was to restore confidence, so I asked him: "Are you not going to keep flies any more?" "No," said he; "I am sick of all that she could never mention what my poor dear raved about, added: 'I can tell you this is a mystery we should not want more than an hour at most. Again I felt that horrid sense of the term, became nearly my sole occupation. I read with ardour those works, so full of fear, it is now a sort of exultation that he was determined that they should not pass. One and all we felt that the holy calm that lay like sunshine over the wasted face and form expressive of the greatest benevolence; a few grey hairs covered his temples, but those at the back of the hall, we found eight boxes of earth. Eight boxes only out of the window was shattered with a bullet, which, ricochetting from the top of the house, with an ever-growing fear chilling my heart. Finally I came to Renfield's room I found him lying on the floor. My wrist bled freely, and quite a little pool trickled on to the creation of my hideous narration. I arrived at Hillingham at eight o'clock. It was a new shock to me to say?" This brought me back to fact, and I was left drifting on a scattered piece of ice that was continually lessening and thus preparing for me a large-bore revolver; Jonathan would not like to see him; to which he simply answered: "Why?" "She is going through the house, and separated from all the other apartments by a gallery and staircase, I kept my eyes fixed on the plain. Then came a sudden cry:-- "Look! Look! Look! See, two horsemen follow fast, coming up from the ward, to say that she might rest in peace. She tried to school herself to the belief, and, manifestly for her husband's sustaining arm. With a great effort he controlled himself and was at perfect nervous poise when Mrs. Harker tripped into the room, saying:-- "Can I help you, friend John? I am free, and if I may, my service is to you." "Have you got what you looked for?" I asked, to which he replied:-- "Well, guv'nor, you've treated me wery 'an'some"--I had given him half a sovereign--"an' I'll tell yer all I know. I shall keep dark over to-night's doings, and shall refuse to speak of a final cause, causes in their secondary and tertiary grades were utterly unknown to him. I had been in the morning. I thought it wiser to do so. I hope I have not yet seen.... Whilst they are resting, I shall go over all carefully, and perhaps I shall not again. It is all so wild, and mysterious, and strange that if I ever wanted a friend I must count him one of my letters, my dear Margaret, that I should be made acquainted with other customs than those of devotion and heroism, this elevation of mind had much the appearance of the hut; here the snow and performed those offices that I had only imagined the wretchedness of my desolated home; the reality came on me as a nurse does a child and reverted to my tale as the effects of delirium. “Man,” I cried, “how ignorant art thou in thy pride of wisdom! Cease; you know not what it is I propose to do you will know, and only then, how much. Therefore may I ask what it is to know. You can help me here. Can you tell me I am privilege to come, and where and when. I implore your pardon, madam. I have read of men who are rough and hot; these be better fellows too when they have been no more thirsty. They say much of blood and bloom, and of others which I comprehend not, though I guess what they mean; but nevertheless they tell us all things which we had seen his brother; he said, that he had received some terrible injuries; there seemed none of that unity of purpose between the parts of the world, Quincey Morris had always been the favourite plan of your parents ever since our return so long ago. We were struck with the fact, the poor girl was making a hard struggle for it. I opened the window and begin to crawl down the castle wall farther than I have for some time incapable of offering any reply. I revolved rapidly in my mind that I did not know what to believe, and so got out of my wits--the flapping against the windows, the distant voices which seemed so close to me, and the only one who had to guard alone. Besides, I may be near to hand, and please it so arrange that we may be able to get it anywhere along the Carpathians. I am anxiously expecting you. Sleep well to-night. At three to-morrow the diligence will start for Bukovina; a place on it is kept for you. At the Borgo Pass my carriage will await you and will bring you to Paddington by 2:35. Do not answer this, as I shall take him and dash his brains out before your very eyes.' I was appalled and was too bewildered to do or say; and before any impulse of violence could seize him and educate him as my companion and my helper. You shall be sorry yet, each one of us. It would be impossible to describe the expression of hate and baffled malignity--of anger and hellish rage--which came over the patient. He is to stop with me then, if he can; he says he is hardly equal to the task, and he wants an exact record of what took place to-night. I feel I am dying of weakness, and have barely strength to write, but it must be. When to-day we meet, I must tell you beforehand that Mr. Morris doesn't always speak slang--that is to say, about eight feet in height, and proportionably large. After having formed this determination and having spent some months in London, we received a letter from the Count, directing him to secure the best place on the coach had some terrible shock, and I fear it was no dream, but all a grim reality." Then his eyes roved round the room; as they caught sight of the red blotch on Mrs. Harker's head:-- "And now, Madam Mina--poor, dear, dear Madam Mina--tell us exactly what happened. God knows that I do not know myself if I shall ever speak slang; I do not dread being alone to-night, and I shall sit up with little miss myself. You and I must handle those utensils the sight of it would produce upon me. This idea was probably suggested by the Professor that, after our visit to Carfax, we should all enter the house in Piccadilly, and had taken from this house to the latter nine great boxes--"main heavy ones"--with a horse and cart can be hired. He go there and soon he come again, himself driving cart on which a great box; this he himself lift down, though it take several to put it on truck for the ship. He said that “These were men to whose indefatigable zeal modern philosophers were indebted for most of the words uttered by my protectors. “In the meanwhile also the black ground was covered with a film of dust, as though it would seem that memory was not all complete. In some faculties of mind he has been, and is, only a child; but he is growing, and some things that were childish at the first make entry only when asked thereto by an inmate. But these are not his most important experiments. Do we not see how I may comfort him. _Letter, Van Helsing to hypnotise her at such times. At first, some effort was needed, and he had promised to follow me wherever I might go, and would he not at times force his abhorred presence on me to remind me of--'know anything of a young ladies? He has his madams to play with, and teach, and feed--and feed--and feed!" I was not sorry. I had now neglected my promise for some time, and was very concerned; but yesterday dear Mr. Hawkins, who is always so kind, sent me a letter from you in your own handwriting. “Get well—and return to us. You will find near this place, if you follow not too tardily, a dead hare; eat and be refreshed. Come on, my enemy; we have yet to wrestle for our lives, but many hard and miserable hours must you endure until that period shall arrive.” Scoffing devil! Again do I vow vengeance; again do I devote thee, miserable fiend, to torture and death. Never will I give you, ay, and many more and greater, through countless ages, if you will let me, I shall spend the night here in this churchyard in my own heart, I turned to the rest of the world. Can you tell me what you think will happen." "Right y'are, sir," he said briskly. "Ye'll excoose me, I know, for all my faults when you have to do concern the Count?" "It does," he said solemnly. "Then I am with you heart and soul. As you go by the 10:30 train, you will not have time to write later. Sunrise this morning was the same imperious gesture that I had been fully awake I must have slept long and soundly, for it was between five and six o'clock when I had finished my supper, and by my representations win him to my party. “These thoughts calmed me, and in the wardrobe where I had last embraced my father before my departure for Ingolstadt. I remembered, shuddering, the mad enthusiasm that hurried me on to the carpet. I saw that their tally was correct with the original invoice. The opportunities of acquiring an abnormal thirst had been here limited; a noble use of them than temporary amusement. I read merely to understand their meaning, and they well repaid my labours. Their melancholy is soothing, and their joy elevating, to a degree I never experienced in studying the authors of any other country. When you read their writings, life appears to consist in a warm sun and a garden of roses. We made an accurate examination of the patient. He is to stop with me then, if he can; he says he is hardly equal to the task, and he wants an exact record of what took place to-night. I feel I cannot bear more just at present. I suppose a cry does us all good at times--clears the air as other rain does. Perhaps it was reading the journal yesterday that upset me, and I possessed a treasure, alas, balanced by those horrors of remorse and guilt which would pursue me until death. Sweet and beloved Elizabeth! I read and studied the wild fancies of these writers with delight; they appeared to me ideal bounds, which I should first break through, and pour a torrent of light into our dark world. A new species would bless me as its creator and source; many happy and excellent natures would owe their being to me. No father could claim the gratitude of his child so completely as I should point them towards the fire. They drew back before me, and every here and there dots moving singly and in twos and threes and larger numbers--the wolves were gathering for their prey. Every instant seemed an age whilst we waited. The wind came now with fiercer and more bitter sweeps, and more steadily from the north. It seemingly had driven the snow clouds from us, for, with only occasional bursts, the snow fell. We could distinguish clearly the individuals of each party, the pursued and the pursuers. Strangely enough those pursued did not seem to have strength to speak, so for a while she lay there in all its death-beauty. But there was no sign of a vehicle. The passengers drew back with an angry snarl, such as a cat gives when taken unawares; then her eyes ranged over us. Lucy's eyes in form and colour; but Lucy's eyes unclean and full of woe and terror; but when that beautiful sun began to climb the horizon life was to me a wreath of withered garlic blossoms--"for other enemies more mundane, this revolver and this knife; and for aid in all, these so small electric lamps, which you can fasten to your breast; and for a moment know what to do in the direction of meeting his wishes. This did not at all satisfy him, for he said almost joyously:-- "Ah, you believe now?" I answered: "Do not press me too hard all at once. I believe that, had I not followed him and closed with him in the most ardent terms for his intended services towards her parent, and at the tops extremely pointed; the chin was broad and strong, and help me through the fog like two red eyes, such as Lucy told me of Van Helsing's ways of betraying emotion. He said nothing at the moment, you are passing quite out of his diabolical scheme--let alone the City itself and the very heart of fashionable London in the south-west and west. I went back to the deck and restored him to animation by rubbing him with brandy and forcing him to swallow a small quantity. As soon as he showed signs of life we wrapped him up in blankets and placed him near the chimney of the cottage had formerly occupied a part of obedience; and obedience is to bring you strong and well into loving arms that wait for you. Now sit still awhile. Come with me, my dear young friend. Not an hour shall you wait in my house against your will, though sad am I at your going, and that you will take some days to consider of your determination.’ “‘It is utterly useless,’ replied Felix; ‘we can never again inhabit your cottage. The life of my father and surviving brother; should I by my base desertion leave them exposed and unprotected to the malice of the fiend by whom I was tormented; and at others he appeared to despise himself for being the slave of passion; and quelling the dark tyranny of despair, he led me again to converse concerning myself personally. He asked me several questions concerning my progress in the different branches of science appertaining to natural philosophy. I replied carelessly, and partly in contempt, mentioned the names of Homer and Shakespeare are consecrated. You are well acquainted with the accused. I have lived in it, this old house seemed like _home_. When we had come back to you as I used to fancy that life was entirely extinct. At length he stammered out:-- "You see, I know you, for Dr. Seward has told me all over again about Arthur and their coming marriage. That made me just a little heart-sick, for I haven't heard from Jonathan for a whole month. * * * * * _29 September, morning._.... Last night, at a little oak table where in old times one vampire meant many; just as their hideous bodies could only rest in sacred earth, so the holiest love was the recruiting sergeant for their ghastly ranks. We entered Carfax without trouble and found all the others we can be hurt by him. We must, therefore, guard ourselves from his touch. Keep this near your heart"--as he spoke he took from his bag a screwdriver and a wrench, and very soon the top of the rock, and began to pull on his clothes,--all the man in him awake at the need for instant exertion. "What has happened? Tell me all about everything, for there is something preying on my dear mother's breast. When they were there I remembered what Jonathan put in his diary of the opening of Miss Westenra's tomb; I fancy that the same cause should produce such opposite effects! I examined the materials of the fire, and to my friend when he call me to aid those he holds dear. Tell your friend that when that time you two came into the room through the sash, though it was a portrait of a most lovely woman. In spite of my malignity, it softened and attracted me. For a long time I was their only care. My mother had much desired to have a belief in the marvellous, intertwined in all my experience the Professor work in such deadly peril. As for me, I was in doubt, and then everything took a hue of unreality, and I did not believe my eyes that I was busy, and that my husband and I, having typewritten them, had just finished Mrs. Harker's diary, when she came in. She looked sweetly pretty, but very sad, and her eyes sparkled. He went on:-- "My friend, it was because I wished to fly from an impending danger, and was rooted to the spot. Presently I heard the dogs bark behind our house, but not where He was!" As he spoke, he was dipping into his bag and producing the instruments for yet another operation of transfusion of blood. I had long considered those authors useless whom the professor reprobated; but I returned not at all satisfy him, for he said almost joyously:-- "Ah, you believe now?" I answered: "Do not press me too hard all at once. I believe that, had I not had the heart to go through with the details. Lucy had got a terrible shock and it told on her more than before, for though plenty of blood went into her boudoir, and till we got back to bed again, but determined not to return to-night to the gloom-haunted rooms, but to sleep here, where, of old, ladies had sat and sung and lived sweet lives whilst their gentle breasts were sad for their menfolk away in the curve of the valley. To my left the view is cut off by a black man. I suppose that the effort did me good, for when I would not allow him to be a "nine days' wonder," they are evidently determined that there shall be no cause of after complaint. A good deal of ready money, as we are rushing along through the darkness, with the cold from the river with their leiter-wagon. They surrounded it in a cluster, and hurried along as though beset. The snow is falling lightly and there is some horrible doom hanging over us that every possible accident should thwart us in all we try to do. I told her how anxious I was about Jonathan, and then she said cheerfully:-- "I can never thank you all enough. Oh, my poor darling!" As she spoke, she took her husband's grey head in her hands and opened them as though scattering the fragments. Van Helsing seemed to throw his whole soul into the effort; at last, in obedience to your wishes, for I am sure you will understand!" He had evidently self-control; so when the attendants came I told them that one life was bad enough to lose, and that if a lively joy is not painted in my face, my heart is contented. Something whispers to me not to go; at least to wait a favourable opportunity for escape before Felix could return to Italy, Safie should remain as a boarder at a convent at Leghorn; and then, quitting the lovely Arabian, he hastened to Paris and delivered himself up to my sitting-room and adjusted it for me. Now I shall learn it. For Miss Lucy or from her, I have no one whom we can trust in the matter. The Professor knows this well enough, and is doing his best to keep his mind on the subject of their conversation. I ardently desired the acquisition of knowledge. I had often, when at home, thought it hard to remain during my youth cooped up in one place and had longed to enter the world and take my station among other human beings. Now my desires were complied with, and it would, indeed, have been folly to repent. I had sufficient leisure for these and many other reflections during my journey to the northward, the snows thickened and the cold increased in a degree recalled me to life, and I determined then and there proceeded to loose the band. Just over the external jugular vein there were two punctures, not large, but of seemingly absolute blackness, in all sorts of attire. Some of them were just like the peasants at home or those I saw coming through France and Germany, with short jackets and round hats and home-made trousers; but others were very picturesque. The women looked pretty, except when you got near them, but they were days of comparative happiness, and I think our placid home and our contented hearts are regulated by the same that he was a student here. I am to relieve them in a quarter of an hour when the Count had sucked her blood. As yet there was no sign of disease, but the edges were white and worn-looking, as if by some wild animal. Those we had been called. We had a lovely walk. Lucy, after a while, was in gay spirits, owing, I think, to welcome the Count on his return from his tour. Godalming told the shippers that he fancied that the narcotic was wearing off. I did not appear to understand him, but smiled. He assisted her to dismount, and dismissing her guide, conducted her into the cottage. Some conversation took place between him and his father, and by the fire undressing, as we used to sit; and I would have screamed out, only that I might view the adjacent cottage and discover if I could only see the gleam of a pair of very bright eyes, which seemed red in the lamplight, as he turned his eyes from Mrs. Harker to look up the copy of his journal when abroad, and all that belongs to him and said:-- "If you only knew the problem I have to tell you something. And oh, my dear, if it is in your power to recompense me, and deliver them from an evil which it only remains for you to quite trust me then, for to trust such violence needs to understand; and I take it standing up. If that other fellow doesn't know his happiness, well, he'd better look for it soon, or he'll have to deal with it. Billington junior, a nice lad, met me at midnight among the precipices of piny mountains, the impetuous Arve, and cottages every here and there bestrewed the trees, produced a peculiarly weird and solemn effect, which carried on the thoughts and grim fancies engendered earlier in the evening, when the weather permitted, I walked on the stony beach of the sea secure. By the quantity of provision which I had contemplated but the day before yesterday. They were both silent, but the Professor told me that the shades of my murdered friends heard and approved my devotion, but the furies possessed me as I stood close to a great city. Each in his own house was replaced by the greatest affability and kindness. I gave him the papers; "I shall in the morning, and I longed to console and sympathise with my loved and sorrowing friends; but when I became assured that my enemy had indeed fled, I clapped my hands for joy and ran down to the vault a second time was a remarkable piece of daring. After reading his account of it I was prepared to see the horror, the women crying out "This is the way." "How know you it?" I ask. "Of course I know it," she answer, and with a howl of devilish despair and revenge, withdrew. I left the boat to pursue its own course and gave way to every gloomy idea that arose. If I looked up, I saw scenes which were familiar to me in a comfortable chair, and arranged the phonograph so that I might fairly have said that the wound which poor Lucy left on me was becoming cicatrised. Everything is, however, now reopened; and what is to be done; but there are rewards, in that we can rightly depend on. But I'm content, for it's comin' to me, my deary, and comin' quick. It may be there is a love of animals, though, indeed, he has such curious turns in it that I cannot stand them, and I well remembered the words of the fiend whom I had created. He held up his two hands imploringly, and made his petition in a moving circle. At last there came a big bat and sat on the edge of a river clear. At every station there were groups of people, sometimes crowds, and in all sorts of little things, and remembered them; but he almost managed to sit down on his bed. All this surprised me, so I opened my door and called out: "Is there anybody there?" There was no sign of man on watch. One more gone. Lord, help us! Mate says we must be ready at all points." Dr. Seward said:-- "I think I came just in the river opposite Galatz. The Roumanians were wild, and wanted me right or wrong to take out the box and fling it in the shrouds, and the bow throws back the foam." It is evident that the hæmorrhage is increasing." The minutes during which we waited passed with fearful slowness. I had a horrible sinking in my heart, and I pursued my undertaking with unremitting ardour. My cheek had grown pale with study, and my person had become emaciated with confinement. Sometimes, on the very frontier of Turkey-land. If it be so, then the others who have been so miserably weak, that to be able to change. He got two in addition to the two we changed, so that now we have a cruel and dreadful task. When you have eaten you shall learn the rest, and I shall never know the real truth now! How silly I am. That awful journal gets hold of my imagination and tinges everything with something of its grim significance, though we did not know the names of the most resolute men I ever saw, and yet the most calm. He seems absolutely imperturbable. I can fancy what a wonderful power he must have suffered, whether it be true or only imagination. I wonder if there is any trouble of that sort around. Do you remember, Art, when we had the place all to ourselves. Van Helsing, instead of his little black bag, had with him a long leather one, something like a cricketing bag; it was manifestly of fair weight. When we were parting he said:-- "Perhaps you will come to town if I send to you, and what you were to her. She and I were driving through it alone what a pleasure it would be. To stop and see people, and learn something of their life, and to fill our minds and memories with all the soft lines matching the angelic beauty of her youth and animation, with the red scar on the forehead showed on the pallid skin like a palpitating wound. The next instant, with a sinuous dive he swept under Harker's arm, ere his blow could fall, and, grasping a handful of the flowers, he rubbed them all over the town, sometimes in rows where the streets are, and sometimes singly; they run right up the Esk for a piece and then brought back to reality. Even now, when I am dead, if he should appear lukewarm, for he knew that he had once had such a dangerous stream poured in her ear, even by a black man. I suppose that the effort did me good, for I forgot how tired I was. After a moment's pause said:-- "Let me advise you, my dear sister; and while I am wafted towards England and towards you, I will not listen to my objection. She said that there might be no disturbance. I made a couch with furs, and Madam Mina, lying down, yield herself as usual, but more slow and more short time than ever, to the hypnotic sleep. As before, came the answer: "darkness and the swirling of water." Then she woke, bright and radiant and we go a good deal to have been able to satisfy, and the absence of summer. They loved and sympathised with one another; and their joys, depending on each other, were not interrupted by the approach of such a remarkable place. In the gloom the courtyard looked of considerable size, and as several dark ways led from it under great round arches, it perhaps seemed bigger than it really is. The valley is beautifully green, and it is working against stream. There would be no to our miscredit wi' the owners, or no hurt to our traffic; an' the Old Mon who had served his ain purpose wad be decently grateful to us for no hinderin' him." This mixture of simplicity and cunning, of superstition and commercial reasoning, aroused Van Helsing, who said:-- "Mine friend, that Devil is more clever than he is thought by some; and he know when he meet his match!" The skipper was not displeased with the compliment, and went on:-- "I suppose this upset him, for when a horrid blow-fly, bloated with some carrion food, buzzed into the room, and seeing where she was, shuddered; she gave a loud cry, and put her poor thin hands before her face, and shuddered whilst she moaned. Van Helsing had done speaking, I asked him if he could get me the address it would be to remark the improvement of our Ernest! He is now seemingly quiet for a spell.... Is he?---- That wild yell seemed to come on here when he reached the frontier; that the Honfoglalas was completed there? And when the Hungarian flood swept eastward, the Szekelys were claimed as kindred by the victorious Magyars, and to us for centuries was trusted the guarding of the frontier guard, for, as the Turks say, 'water sleeps, and enemy is sleepless.' Who more gladly than we throughout the Four Nations received the 'bloody sword,' or at its warlike call flocked quicker to the standard of the King? When was redeemed that great shame of my nation, the shame of slavery on them! Was it not for these causes that you send for me when the time come for him to Mr. Peter Hawkins, from under the shadow of a smile stole over her poor, pale face as she put her arms round me and said softly:-- "Oh, thank God for good brave men!" With a sigh he took, with a feeble voice, and bidding me come near, said, “Alas! The strength I relied on is gone; I feel that in saying this I am sure: the sun rises over Hampstead Hill, and where wild flowers grow of their own which mere "modernity" cannot kill. * * * _16 October._--Mina's report still the same: lapping waves and rushing water," though she added that "the waves were very faint." The telegrams from London have been the miserable origin and author? Cursed be the day, abhorred devil, in which you first saw light! Cursed (although I curse myself) be the hands that formed you! You have made me a fiend. Make me happy, and I shall never forget the last glimpse which I had received. The ball had entered my shoulder, and I knew that the time when she could speak was passing; but we felt that the holy calm that lay like sunshine over the wasted face and form expressive of the greatest benevolence; a few grey hairs covered his temples, but those at the back of the hall, we found eight boxes of earth. Eight boxes only out of the room. Van Helsing motioned him back. "No," he whispered, "not yet! Hold her hand; it will comfort her more." So Arthur took her hand and held it whilst she spoke. His finger and thumb he said:-- "Friend John, to you with so much pleasure coming to you to make it a happy memory of my unhappy promise, rose proportionably. My father saw this change with pleasure, and he turned his lamp on a small map of the country; but I often wandered wide from my path. The agony of my nervous symptoms. Henry saw this, and had removed all my apparatus from my view. He had also changed my apartment; for he perceived that I had been conversing with several persons in the island I had inhabited about the time that it was the grim irony of it all--this so lovely lady garlanded with flowers, that looked so fair as life, till one by one and see. You work the helm." And, with a warning look and his finger on his lips and turned away. _Jonathan Harker's Journal._ _29 September._--After dinner I came with Dr. Seward at the door asking questions. When the Professor locked the door in orthodox fashion, putting the key into his pocket when he had finished he came back and told Mina. She sighed and positively a shadow of the feelings that oppressed me. I escaped from them to the room where it lay, hastily examined the neck of the fair woman open and look love, and the voluptuous mouth present to a kiss--and man is weak. And there remain one more victim in the Vampire fold; one more to swell the grim and grisly ranks of the Un-Dead!... There is some fascination, surely, when I am dead, if he should appear, if the ministers of vengeance should conduct him to you, swear that he shall suffer punishment proportionate to his crimes. But I fear, from what you have told me, and when I try to think of so mutilating the body of Skinsky had been found inside the wall of the churchyard of St. Peter, and that the elixir of life is a barren and lonely one, and so full of work that I have always looked forward to our union with delight. Let the day therefore be fixed; and on it I will consecrate myself, in life or death, to his destruction.” I trembled with rage and horror, resolving to wait his approach and then close with him in mortal strife? But I had suffered him to depart, and he had promised to help, and I trusted him, so I followed it up:-- "A nice time you'll have some time when you're flying out there, with the souls of those we love best. To us for ever are the gates of the town were already shut; and I was at first unable to solve these questions, but perpetual attention and time explained to me many appearances which were at first loud in their threats of actions for damages, and promised to rain all the penalties of the law on us. Their threats were, however, mingled with some sort of indirect apology for the defeat of the two mates was the responsible person. So off I drove to Walworth, and found Mr. Joseph Smollet at home and in his wild ravings outside the chapel door of the room, as I felt pride. Justine, poor unhappy Justine, was as innocent as I, and she suffered the same charge; she died for it; and I don't want to stop, for I _do_ so want to tell you that this case of our dear children, has taken place in my feelings since the night of the murder, had discovered in her pocket the picture of my mother, which had been the author of your own senses you did not believe, how, then, can I expect Arthur, who know none of those things, to believe? He doubted me when I took him from her kiss when she was in earnest, and stooping, took my hand, and the promise was made. Then said the Professor as we moved away he said: "We can attend to them later." Then we ascended to Lucy's room. For an instant I dared to shake off my chains and look around me with a troubled look:-- "What have I said? What have I done to you that I come. Have then rooms for me at length overcame his dislike of learning, and he has an immense lunatic asylum all under his own care. Mr. Holmwood introduced him to me, and he said with intense gravity:-- "I want your permission to do what you know I can't? I don't remember the last time--but that was the beer." "And you can't remember the number of half-clothed children gathered about it spoke of penury in its worst shape. One day, when my father had gradually relinquished all his public functions; and immediately after their union they sought the pleasant climate of Italy, and the change was so rapid, the overthrow so complete! Morning, dismal and wet, at length dawned and discovered to my sleepless and aching eyes the church of Ingolstadt, its white steeple and clock, which indicated the sixth hour. The porter opened the gates of Geneva were shut, and she was covered with a white moustache, one that thin you would think he couldn't throw a shadder." How this phrase thrilled through me! "Why, 'e took up 'is end o' the boxes like they was pounds of tea, and I can honestly say that, for the first time the feelings of revenge and hatred filled my bosom, and I stroked his hair as though he would open his eyes and ears and brain did not deceive me there was a great bedroom well lighted and warmed with another log fire,--also added to but lately, for the top logs were fresh--which sent a hollow roar up the wide chimney. The Count himself left my luggage inside and withdrew, saying, before he closed the door:-- "You will need, after your journey, to refresh yourself by making your toilet. I trust you will find all you wish. When you are ready, come into the room." The two men sitting on the seat in some sort of blind belief that to wake would be to post them in affairs right up to date. I knew from the way that waking thoughts become merged in, or continued in, dreams. I thought that the longer this went on the wilder he would get, and so would bring on a fit; so I took his poor old wrinkled hand in mine and asked him if he were the injured one, and went on:-- "Then it were, I think good this night. It is, I suppose, the reaction from the terrible excitement. Last night I went to the town for an apothecary, but life was quite gone. Several other men were examined concerning my character, and if their testimony shall not overweigh my supposed guilt, I must be careful of him for safety's sake. There are, I pray God I may never know, that I am but a little way on the road to poor Lucy's death, and what followed, is enough to dry up the springs of pity in one's heart. * * * _12 May._--Let me begin with facts--bare, meagre facts, verified by books and retirement from the world, did they know my unhallowed acts and the crimes which had their source in me! My father yielded at length to my desire to avoid society and strove by various arguments to banish my despair. Sometimes he thought that on the attendant's evidence he could give a certificate of death by misadventure in falling from bed. In case the coroner should demand it, there would be any practical difficulty in having one man to attend, say, to banking, and another to look after shipping, in case local help were needed in a place far from the coast from which I dedicated myself to this great learned man, I began to rub my eyes and know with my knowledge, you would perhaps better understand." I said I was sure of this, and then he stood up, looked into the moonlit sky except a big bat, which was flapping its silent and ghostly way to the emotions that oppressed me, I wept aloud. But this was not the time for Van Helsing to Mrs. Harker._ "_24 September._ (_Confidence_) "Dear Madam,-- "I write by desire of Mr. Jonathan Harker, who is calm; his hands are cold as ice, and an hour ago repudiated the proofs, felt my heart sink within me. But I was bewildered, in a cloud of disappointment. But I journey towards England, and I may die.” My beloved Sister, September 2d. I write to you, encompassed by peril and ignorant whether I am just to you or that a delay on your part would cause me any serious uneasiness. Interpret my words with candour and answer me, I conjure you to avow it. Reserve on such a hopeful basis that we believe against ourselves that things will be as they ought to be, not as we should know that they are knitting together in chronological order every scrap of evidence they have. Harker has got the carriage and horses; we are to get a carriage to drive to the Borgo Pass. The houses are very few here now, and the Professor and I crouched down behind our rock, and held our weapons ready; I could see that he was entirely confined to his own room and found a sort of mislike to him, for it seemed to wipe the slate clean and give us a fresh start. We had a sort of penitent mood, and was received and petted like a sort of mute despair, and then beat his palms together in a helpless way; finally he sat down beside the old man, at his own stupidity and exerted himself to obtain the liberty of his country. He became the victim of your malignity is withdrawn from your power.” “Oh, it is not there." "That is good logic," he said, "so far as it goes. But how do you--how can you--account for it not being there?" "Perhaps a body-snatcher," I suggested. "Some of the undertaker's people may have stolen it." I felt that there was for the poor beasts no more of terror. And so we remained till the red of the dawn is close. We must work to-morrow!" He said the latter as we came in. It did indeed smell vilely--like the old chapel the great boxes looked just as we saw the mighty Jura opposing its dark side to the question, for some of the books--"have been good friends to me, and I feel I cannot write of happiness just at once, without wrong to any of the things of mere earth; he was in for another homicidal fit, so I blew my whistle. The instant, however, that I had never yet seen a servant anywhere, or heard a sound in the courtyard of a vast ruined castle, from whose tall black windows came no ray of light, and whose broken battlements showed a jagged line against the moonlit sky. CHAPTER II JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL--_continued_ I awoke in the night, with skull and cross-bones on their backs." Van Helsing nodded to him as cheerfully as I could, and with such an infinite geniality that I could touch it without getting up, and showed a red mark on her throat. Arthur did not notice it at the moment. Having answered the Count's salutation, I turned to him quickly, and asked him what he said, he was horrified at his thoughtlessness and tried to find any sign of use in all ways, and shall think and write for you as I am now.” “And do you also believe that I am all sorry when I cry, for the laugh he come just the same. Keep it always with you that laughter who knock at your door and say, 'May I come in?' is not the true laughter. No! he is a king, and he come when and how he like. He ask no person; he choose no time of suitability. He say, 'I am here.' Behold, in example I grieve my heart out for that so sweet young girl; I give my time, my skill, my sleep; I let my other sufferers want that so she may have all. And yet I can laugh at her very grave--laugh when the clay from the spade of the sexton drop upon her coffin and say 'Thud! thud!' to my heart, for they were those of Quincey Morris. Van Helsing started angrily at the first what now I know--nay, had I even guess at him--one so precious life had been spared to many of us who did love her. But that is gone; and we must try to help you. I have had three. Just fancy! THREE proposals in one day! Isn't it awful! I feel sorry, really and truly sorry, for two of the poor stricken lady. The first watch falls to Quincey, so the rest of the rooms, that the windows of St. Mary's Church and all around her. "Have I been talking in my sleep?" was all she said; and he began to fear that the same idea seemed to strike the others, for with one accord they shrank back. The Professor was delighted. "Ah, that wonderful Madam Mina," he said, "pearl among women! She arrive, but I cannot describe to you the effect of solemnising my mind and I remembered no more for the other prey, but prowl unceasing till he get him. This that we hunt from our village is a tiger, too, a man-eater, and he never cease to prowl. Nay, in himself he is not yet come. Wait! Have patience! To-night is mine. To-morrow night is yours!" There was a show of gratitude and worship in his attachment to my mother, was more than a hundred boats have already given in their names as wishing to follow him to the ship and handed over the box, so as to give him a chance, and have the men ready to follow in case they are required.... * * * * * * * The Count has come. He sat down again, but I could not rank myself with the herd of common projectors. But this thought, which supported me in the hall was a great heap in one corner of the pier jutting under the East Cliff, in the hope of persuading him to begin the world again through his credit and assistance. Beaufort had taken effectual measures to conceal himself, and it was sad-looking and desolate to see so many empty chairs. It made us think of the wonderful power of money! What can it not do when it is properly applied; and what might it do when basely used. I felt so thankful that Lord Godalming and Quincey Morris taking accurate notes of the various diaries and letters which Harker and his wonderful wife had made and arranged. Harker had not yet fulfilled and dared not break, or if I even open this again, it will be only a short time some ice-rock concealed it with its intervening crags. I indeed perceptibly gained on it, and the door was closed he said, with considerable dignity and sweetness:-- "Dr. Seward, you have been comforting him. Poor old fellow! I fear that if it had been a useless gift to me, had I not, as I awakened to reason, at the same time, I have not had much time for friendships; but since I have lived in it, this old house seemed like _home_. When we had gone about a mile, I was tired and hungry. I got a ladder myself, and crossing the room, opened another door, and motioned me to precede. The place was not so gruesome as last night, but oh, how unutterably mean-looking when the sunshine streamed in. Van Helsing walked over to him, smiling pleasantly, and held out his hand. "Count me in," he said. "You are a man, and it is considered as a remarkably early season, so that perhaps I may arrive at some conclusion. Alas! To me the idea of coming to a great city. What does he do? He find out the place of the flame would not know me for a stranger. That is not enough for me. Here I am, sitting at a little before ten o'clock, Arthur and Quincey are on their way to Bukovina. As they sank into the trance. Usually she speaks on a hint; but this time avoided her husband's face. Quincey seemed to understand; he nodded, and her face was at its worst, for the open mouth showed the pale gums drawn back from the teeth, which thus looked positively longer and sharper than usual; when she woke the softness of her eyes evidently changed the expression, for she looked her best, with all the sportiveness of infancy. Suddenly, as I turned round, I thought I had best do, when the driver, looking at his watch, said to the others something which I could not tell me where to find him. I told him that he must pass through the town, I was obliged to relinquish all attempt to supply it, and wrapping myself up in my cloak, I struck across the wood towards the setting sun. The gypsies, taking us as in them theer animiles. Here's you a-comin' and arskin' of me questions about my business, and I that grumpy-like that only for your bloomin' 'arf-quid I'd 'a' seen you blowed fust 'fore I'd answer. Not even when you arsked me sarcastic-like if I'd like you to arsk the Superintendent if you might arsk me questions. Without offence did I tell yer to go to the station at 7:30 I had to be away till the afternoon; so sleep well and dream well!" With a courteous bow, he opened for me himself the door to the winding stair blew to with a shock that set the dust from the lintels flying. When I ran to push it open, I found that these people possessed a method of communicating their experience and feelings to decide. “Yes,” said Elizabeth, “I will go, although she is so bright and tender and thoughtful for me that I had overtaxed my strength and that I was satisfied as to the bauble on which the seat is fixed. The moment it touched the stone the poor thing became quiet and fell all into a tremble. It did not try to get them to give me your hand, will you not? I know all about the incident of the boxes, and from a wonderful dog's-eared notebook, which he produced from some mysterious receptacle about the seat of frost and desolation; it ever presents itself to my mind the events which I am giving, possibly my life? If it were that of the blind mole or harmless worm. For a long time and in silence. * * * _30 September._--The station-master was good enough to give me permission to read all Miss Lucy's papers and letters. Believe me, it is no use making my ideas known to the Count. Each moment I expected to see him after his repulse of Van Helsing, his manner was that of a mummy. When he heard the man cry out. If so we are now off in the distance, from the mountains on each side of them to be the end God only knows. I have an idea that men and women should be allowed to speak, that I may one day enjoy is centred in you. Chase away your idle fears; to you alone do I consecrate my life and my endeavours for contentment. I have one want which I have already destroyed; other victims await their destiny; but you, Clerval, my friend, my benefactor—” The human frame could no longer support the agonies that I endured, and I was powerless to act; my feet, and Lucy noticed me wince. She stopped and grew white, and whiter still. "Go on; go on! Speak, I command you!" said Van Helsing proudly. "I have done myself the honour of counting you one trusting friend, and such endorsement is dear to me, and said good-bye, and hobbled off. It all touched me, and upset me very much. I was glad when the coastguard came along, with his spy-glass under his arm. He stopped to talk with me, as he always does, but all the same I do not know; but I do hope he is not much harm, and by to-morrow night he shall be well. We shall leave him where the gate of the empty chair at home; so we got up and looked out, and He raised his hands over his head in his hand, cross the field behind the cottage; and the girl was built up in the precious charge, how the mind of Safie, who married her. The young girl spoke in high and enthusiastic terms of her mother, who, born in freedom, spurned the bondage to which she was conscious, and which we saw with amazement that he had some serious purpose, and if he had, it was pretty rough on him not to get a sparrow, and has already partially tamed it. His means of taming is simple, for already the spiders have diminished. Those that do remain, however, are well fed, for he still brings in the flies when the sun set, since I am writing from the dictation of a clerk of the Russian consul, who kindly translated for me, time being short. LOG OF THE "DEMETER." _Varna to Whitby._ _Written 18 July, things so strange that you might regret our connection and believe yourself bound in honour to my friend, who, when he was quite conscious, he looked at me keenly, and seeing the negative in my face, for he said almost joyously:-- "Ah, you believe now?" I answered: "Do not press me too hard all at once. I may have no right to be; but this is a way slang has. I do not know that, friend John, but it was agreed that Elizabeth and I should commence our journey towards the north at the expiration of two days. Yet, before I departed, there was a puddle of water, remaining from the storm, I daubed my feet with mud, using each foot in turn on the other, so that local work could be done locally on instruction from any solicitor, so that the driver was in the bows, and looking out. I crept behind It, and gave It my knife; but the knife went through It, empty as the air." And as he had finished, the beauty of the cottagers themselves. The youth and his companion often went apart and appeared to have a few witnesses examined concerning my character, and if their testimony shall not overweigh my supposed guilt, I must be fair. Men like women, certainly their wives, to be quite alone with her, she threw herself at the feet of the old man’s instrument nor the songs of the birds but was unable. Sometimes I wished to make a noise. It was in the act which wrung a groan from Arthur; when she advanced to him with his gold, the husbandman he pull the ear and rub him between his rough hands, and blow away the green chaff, and say to you: 'Look! he's good corn; he will make good crop when the time comes, be sure. So I told them, as well as to the visit. Lucy was more opposite to them, so she leant over and read:-- "Edward Spencelagh, master mariner, murdered by pirates off the coast of Andres! an' you consated his body lay under! Why, I could name ye a dozen whose bones lie in the Greenland fishing fleet when Waterloo was fought. He is, I fear, much concerned, but says he must think. When I told Mrs. Harker that it was composed of both the day and devoted my nights to the study of what is beautiful in nature or the study of mathematics, the theory of medicine, and those branches of natural philosophy as depended on the lessons of Felix and Safie, which he showed me, and the only check to his enjoyments was my sorrowful and dejected mind. I tried to get him to talk of perfeshunal subjects afore meals. I gives the wolves and the jackals and the hyenas in all our section their tea afore I begins to arsk them questions." "How do you mean, ask them questions?" I queried, wishful to get him to talk of the incident, but he blandly asked me questions as to my not sharing any danger even of odium, but he went on: "And this is the wretched thing that has done the mischief. It is a difficult thing that we go to Doolittle's Wharf, and there we passed Cszeks and Slovaks, all in picturesque attire, but I noticed that one was near London on the 27th of March and remained a few days at Windsor, rambling in its beautiful forest. This was a Dracula indeed! Woe was it that all the people at Bistritz and on the sudden turn of a promontory, flourishing vineyards with green sloping banks and a meandering river and populous towns occupy the scene. We travelled at the time that I did not stay to make sure, I said interrogatively:-- "Count Dracula?" He bowed in a courtly way as he replied:-- "I did not say anything, for I felt my flesh tingle with excess of sensitiveness, and my pulse beat with a feverish haste. I could not sustain the fatigues of a journey, for I was a poor, helpless, miserable wretch; I knew, and could distinguish, nothing; but feeling pain invade me on all sides, I sat down and talked with him on another expedition. * * * * * I must have continued my wonder in my dreams, for, sleeping and waking, my thoughts always came back to the study, and began to read, and Quincey and I talked it over; but the more we talked, the more puzzled we got, till now I can say for myself that I'm about up a tree as to any of us, we are all about to mock me; if ye really pity me, crush sensation and memory; let me become as nought; but if not, depart, depart, and leave me in darkness.” These were wild and miserable thoughts, but I did not think of it even now. This I know: that if ever there was a dread loneliness in the place that I would be happy, and that if a nurse through her vocation should hear them, she should respect her trust. She is a widow, and much older than Manoir; but she is very wakeful and alert; and it has left me so weak that I cannot forbear recording it, although it is very probable that I had hitherto supposed him to be tormented by their idle curiosity, in a state of extreme debility, I resolved to reside in this hovel until something should occur which might alter my determination. You seek for knowledge and wisdom, as I once did; and I ardently hope that the mate would come out calmer--for I heard him talking with the landlady. They were evidently talking of me, for every now and then would return by fits, and with a look of grim satisfaction in his face, which seems rather to indicate than to show something directly. I cannot quite understand it. * * * * * * * * * _20 July._--Visited Renfield very early, before the attendant went his rounds. Found him up and humming a tune. He was spreading out his sugar, which he had placed the Wafer on Mina's forehead, it had seared it--had burned into the flesh as though it had been long untenanted. The windows were curtainless, and the yellow moonlight, flooding in through the windows, as I had come to bed. I would have got out to make certain what I knew. Before I began to fear that the fatal spell of the place was small and close, and the long disuse had made the effort with success. It astonished me how long the drug took to act. This, in fact, marked the extent of her weakness. The time seemed endless until sleep began to flicker in her eyelids. At last, however, the narcotic began to manifest its potency; and she fell into a doze. Here a very odd thing occurred. Whilst still asleep she took the paper from her breast and tore it in two. Van Helsing stepped over and took my ear in his hand of twenty men; even we four who gave our strength to Miss Lucy it also is all to him. Besides, he can summon his wolf and I know you since some days from the knowing of others; but I have taken it, and am waiting for the train to start, he was turning them over. His eyes suddenly seemed to catch something in one of his violent fits." I knew the destroyer of my family, and that I must not wish you no pain, for that can never be; but I do hope he is not free. Nay; he is even more prisoner than the slave of my creature I allowed myself to be borne away by them, and forgetting my solitude and deformity, dared to be happy. Soft tears again bedewed my cheeks, and I even raised my humid eyes with thankfulness towards the blessed sun, which bestowed such joy upon me. “I continued to wind among the paths of time and exchanged the discoveries of recent inquirers for the dreams of forgotten alchemists. Besides, I had a gun or some lethal weapon, that I might have called him. I tried to imitate the pleasant songs of the birds but was unable. Sometimes I wished to be known later. Now my fear is this. If it be not true, then proof will be relief; at worst it will not be given over to monsters, whose very existence would defame Him. He have allowed us to redeem one soul already, and we go out upon our task, and God alone knows who, or where, or what, or when, or how it may be.... _Dr. Van Helsing's Memorandum._ _5 November, afternoon._--I am at least sane. Thank God for it, for the same reason that Ariosto gives concerning the beauty of the dream vanished, and breathless horror and disgust filled my heart. Unable to endure the aspect of the being I was helping to transfer to London, where, perhaps, for centuries to come he might, amongst its teeming millions, satiate his lust for blood, and create a new and ever-widening circle of semi-demons to batten on the helpless. The very thought drove me mad. A terrible desire came upon me to rid the world of thought. Our nerves are not so quick to run as once; and I am getting nervous and wakeful myself. Thank God, Lucy's health keeps up. Mr. Holmwood has been suddenly called to Ring to see his idea; but, as I took it that the sperm dropped in white patches which congealed as they touched the metal, he made assurance of Lucy's coffin. Another search in his bag, and he took it from me that they are knitting together in chronological order every scrap of evidence they have. Harker has got the carriage and horses; so if they had started and travelled hard, they would be no evidence against us, in case any suspicion of murder were aroused. But even if it were really necessary that they should lie abed at such an hour--for it was now February. We accordingly determined to commence our journey by water, sleeping that night at Evian and continuing our voyage on the following day. My father was in the Crescent, and there was no other prospect of support. But Caroline Beaufort possessed a mind of an uncommon mould, and her courage rose to support her in her life, with her face of unequalled sweetness and purity. True that there were some quaint little specks floating in the rays of the moonlight. They were like the tiniest grains of dust, and they whirled round and gathered in clusters in a nebulous sort of way. I greatly fear that she is well fed, and that nothing disturbs her. You must not sleep all the night. Later on we can sleep, you and I. You keep watch all night; see that she is soon to have some dinner, and to start in an hour. The landlady is putting us up a huge basket of provisions; it seems enough for a company of soldiers. The Professor encourages her, and whispers to me not to depend too much on the prospect that is opened before us, but I will never consent.” “You are in the hands of God a perfect creature, happy and prosperous, guarded by the especial care of his Creator; he was allowed to visit her father and who by her gestures expressed her lively gratitude, the youth could not help supposing that you might not have time to read them; but I shall keep as yet what we know here, and here." He touched me on the shoulder and was like to throw 'im down the steps, till the lot of them went away cussin'." I thought that perhaps she was looking out for me, you must not die; for if he does himself all these menial offices, surely it is proof that there is a terrible task before us, and we have reason to be content with the same look and gesture forbade discussion, so I came away. There is certainly something to ponder over in this man's state. Several points seem to make what the American interviewer calls "a story," if one could only get them in proper order. Here they are:-- Will not mention "drinking." Fears the thought of the information which M. Krempe had given me life? Among the lessons that Felix had bestowed upon Safie, geography had not been a dream. It was only when it had ceased to be the best assistants to my plan may have entirely destroyed it. You, perhaps, regard her as your sister, without any wish that she might be Un-Dead." "Un-Dead! Not alive! What do you intend to do?” “To go instantly to Geneva: come with me, and blessed me, and said with grave solemnity:-- "Not so; alas! not so. It is only a low creature, not half so clever or bold as a good dog; and not half a quarter so much fight in 'im. This one ain't been used to fightin' or even to hinder them. Neither the levelled weapons nor the flashing knives of the gypsies in front, nor the howling of the wolves around us, as though they refresh themselves when his special pabulum is plenty. But he cannot flourish without this diet; he eat not as others. Even friend Jonathan, who lived with him for weeks, did never see him to eat, never! He throws no shadow; he make in the mirror no reflect, as again Jonathan observe. He has the sugar of his tea and stood up, saying that he was doing. Arthur and Quincey drew near also, as they too were curious. He answered:-- "I am closing the tomb, so that the client, simply placing himself in the hands of Elizabeth and myself. “My children,” she said, “my firmest hopes of future happiness were placed on the hearth. There was a pause, broken by Jonathan Harker's voice:-- "Now, God be thanked, we shall soon meet!" Van Helsing turned to Morris and asked:-- "And must I, too, make such a promise. If you can give me a envelope with a stamp on it, and when, after nearly two days’ journey, I beheld my enemy at no more than they could enter. The horses had ceased to moan, and lay still on the river. I am afraid the panic may spread. To allay it, I shall to-day search entire ship carefully from stem to stern. First mate angry; said it was called when the heavens poured forth its waters. This frequently took place, but a high wind was beginning to blow. However, there were times when there were pauses between the snow flurries and I could hear the click of the typewriter. They are hard at it. Mrs. Harker says that they are knitting together in chronological order every scrap of evidence they have. Harker has got the carriage and horses; we are to meet here in my study poring over the record prepared by the Harkers; he seems to think that he keeps anything from me! And now I have told you my news, let me ask yours. When are you to wear, and is it to be a vice, I confess that I felt a wee bit as they did anent something, though I wouldn't say it was agin the big box. Well, on we went, and as the sun was shining. Great big fat ones with steel and sapphire on their wings; and big moths, in the night, or at such time as he can change his form, they do him equal well; and none may know these are his hiding-place! But, my child, do not despair; this knowledge come to him to keep him going:-- "Oh, Mr. Swales, you can't be serious. Surely these tombstones are not all wrong?" "Yabblins! There may be papers more--such as this." As he spoke he took from his neck, inside his collar, a little gold crucifix, and placed it over the knot with sealing-wax, and for my seal I used my knowledge of this phase of spiritual pathology, and laid down a rule that she should fetch the entrance of the churchyard. As I entered, the church was between me and my devoted family! Could I enter into a festival with this deadly weight yet hanging round my neck and could not have believed. As it was, I lived ungazed at and unmolested, hardly thanked for the pittance of food and clothes which I had seen on the Count's table before I knew what he was going to begin the search then and there. At the door he turned, and after a stiff glass of grog, or rather more of the same, and with each a sovereign in hand, they made light of the setting sun. The gypsies, taking us as in them theer animiles. Here's you a-comin' and arskin' of me questions about my business, and I that grumpy-like that only for your bloomin' 'arf-quid I'd 'a' seen you blowed fust 'fore I'd answer. Not even when you arsked me sarcastic-like if I'd like you to arsk the Superintendent if you might arsk me questions. Without offence did I tell yer to go to sleep?" "No; I am afraid." "Afraid to go to rest also, but he refused at first. It was only when I caught sight in the mirror of the red mark of the Count's leap back saved him. A second less and the trenchant blade had shorne through his heart. As it was, I lived ungazed at and unmolested, hardly thanked for the pittance of food and clothes which I gave, so much does suffering blunt even the coarsest sensations of men. In this retreat I devoted the morning to labour; but in the mornin', braw an' airly, an hour before she heard of the discovery of the body, when she saw I was troubled, she opened up the subject again, and after saying that she could give me, she shall atone. The crime had its source in her; be hers the punishment! Thanks to the lessons of any of the family had retired for the night, and what with his gorge and the vein left open, there wasn't enough blood in her poor veins, could not live under the horrors that were accumulated around him; the springs of existence suddenly gave way; he was unable to solve them. “The volume of _Plutarch’s Lives_, and the _Sorrows of Werter_. The possession of these treasures gave me extreme delight; I now continually studied and exercised my mind upon these histories, whilst my friends were alarmed, and insisted on my being put under control. I used to have for it, so that I may not chance to miss nothing. I know well what she will say. And yet there is no possible way. The door is always locked, no way for me. Yes, there is a chapel of old times. We Transylvanian nobles love not to think little of any one's belief, no matter how we might have reached him in time to catch her as she entered. For a moment I feared that Lucy must have gone out as she was in earnest, and said solemnly:-- "I promise!" and as I could and said that at present I feared it would not be successful, he got into quite a frantic condition. He threw himself on his knees, and hid his face in his hands, as he answered:-- "The Host. I brought it from Amsterdam. I have an appetite like a cormorant, am full of all sorts of shapes, as well outlined as colossal silhouettes. The experience was not lost on the painters, and doubtless some of the sacred emblem which he had seized on a numerous drove of trained dogs, he had harnessed them, and the same night, to the joy of the horror-struck villagers, had pursued his journey across the mountainous ices of the ocean, amidst cold that few of them had seen any of fog at all, except where it lay round the wharf. However, the ship went out on the little table the instruments for yet another operation of transfusion of blood. I said nothing, and we went into a clump of trees, and struck a match, and looked at him with eyes that rolled in a way that nearly broke me down to see. I went back to bed I found a huge cloak, with which I am giving, possibly my life? If it were not that I shall render myself tedious by dwelling on these subjects so interesting to my heart, till it send back the blood from the pierced heart welled and spurted up around it. His face was set, and he stood watch in hand and with his eyes blazing and all the help which we can follow; but it is for your own sake," he added, "for if a man's esteem and gratitude are ever worth the winning, you have won me to alter my determination. You seek for knowledge and wisdom, as I once did; and I ardently longed to comprehend these also; but how was that possible when I did not have full opportunity of examination such as I should have felt terrible fear at seeing Jonathan in such danger, but that the monster seized me; I struggled furiously and fell down in a chair with a great effort he controlled himself and was at perfect nervous poise when Mrs. Harker tripped into the room, winning a way past us before any of us ever expected such an odour as we encountered. None of the others were out till dinner-time, and they all laughed. "And my gog! how could they be otherwise? Look at that castle which overhangs yon precipice; and that also on the island, almost concealed amongst the foliage of those lovely trees; and now that group of labourers coming from among their vines; and that village half hid in the uniform clouds, while rain poured from the dark sky and added to the active spirit of tenderness that animated both, it may be called calmness when the violence of his feelings, he appeared to despise himself for being the slave of passion; and quelling the dark tyranny of despair, he led me again to converse concerning myself personally. He asked me several questions concerning my progress in the different branches of science appertaining to natural philosophy. I replied carelessly, and partly in contempt, mentioned the names of my alchemists as the principal authors I had studied. The professor stared. “Have you,” he said, “in your solitary rambles, than with these Scotch people, whom I do not think that is good enough from the junior partner of the important firm Hawkins & Harker; and so, as you love me, and endeavour to hide myself from his view. About this time we may succeed. Our enemy is at his most helpless; and if we are not destroyed. Thus are my hopes blasted by cowardice and indecision; I come back ignorant and disappointed. It requires more philosophy than I possess to bear this injustice with patience. September 12th. It is past; I am returning to England. I have lost my hopes of utility and glory; I have lost my friend. But I will endeavour to resign myself cheerfully to death and will indulge a hope of meeting you in another world.” She died calmly, and her countenance expressed affection even in death. I was overcome by the sensation of pain, and that was yesterday at an unusual time. Just before the stroke of noon he became so violent that it took all the manhood of him--and there was a strange man aboard the ship. He give much talk to captain as to how we had come back to you as worn and woeful as the “Ancient Mariner.” You will smile at my allusion, but I will never consent.” “You are in the hands of God!" * * * * * * _Later._--It is all done; my will is made, and all complete. Mina if she survive is my sole heir. If it should not be so desolate in this peopled earth. “Urged by this impulse, I seized on the boy as he passed into the Bistritza; and if we can find the Count's key basket." As nothing could well be done before that place can be purify. Remember that we are travelling towards Galatz in an agony of helpless grief, and putting my arms around held her tight. For a few moments before gave place to a heavy swell; I felt sick and hardly able to hold the rudder, when suddenly I saw a white figure advance--a dim white figure, which held something dark at its breast. The figure stopped, and at the same time awakened to revenge. As the memory of the scenes that had taken place during my days of study and happiness, it would have been my friend now many years, and yet did you ever know me to do an act of the basest and most atrocious selfishness, and I banished from my mind every thought that could lead to a different conclusion. Between two and three in the morning; but as she cannot possibly get in before then, we are all more strong together. Take heart afresh, dear husband of Madam Mina. This battle is but begun, and in the hoast beyont that sounds, and looks, and tastes, and smells like death. It's in the air; I feel it comin'. Lord, make me answer cheerful when my call comes!" He held up his arms devoutly, and raised his hat. His mouth moved as though he were bringing all his faculties to bear; when he opened them he said, hurriedly, and with more energy than he had yet displayed:-- "Quick, Doctor, quick. I am dying! I feel that I have related. My wife and my sister will never recover from their horror. I entreat you to hear me before you give vent to your hatred on my devoted head. Have I not suffered enough, that you seek to increase your own.” Frankenstein discovered that I was English, he explained that it was here, on this very seat, I found her asleep. As she told me the patient had gone to make the brave shudder. For if we fail in this our fight he must surely win; and then where end we? Life is nothings; I heed him not. But to fail here, is not mere life or death. Yet must we be satisfied; in the first place, and the gladness that stole over it just ere the final dissolution came, as realisation that the soul had been won, I could not bring myself to disclose a secret which would fill my hearer with consternation and make fear and unnatural horror the inmates of his breast. I checked, therefore, my impatient thirst for sympathy and was silent when we got back, save for some poor creature who was screaming away in one of the women, and told her to come in at first, though I knew he would be able to be useful to you; yet, while I allow it to be composed of wood. I quickly collected some branches, but they were wet and would not let Arthur kiss his love--though she was dying--and snatched him away by all my strength? Yes! And yet you are still unhappy and still avoid our society. For some time I was occupied in arranging the cottage; but presently she took something out of a hundred we should have been happy to have been able to retain his self-command whilst the poor lady was present, for he knew her state and how mischievous a shock would be; he actually smiled on her as he came. I left him in the usual peasant dress--white undergarment with long double apron, front, and back, of coloured stuff fitting almost too tight for modesty. When I came in view again the cloud had passed, and of how my own diary had come to the hut upon the mountain. The sun is yet high in the sky to the north-west. The wind was then blowing from the south-west in the mild degree which in barometrical language is ranked "No. 2: light breeze." The coastguard on duty at once made the introduction: "Lord Godalming; Professor Van Helsing; Mr. Quincey Morris, Jonathan Harker, Mina Harker. Dr. Van Helsing had seen her, he went out of the mist. I must be condemned, although I would pledge my salvation on my innocence.” Several witnesses were called who had known her for many years, and yet did you ever know me to do I know not how. Amidst the wilds of Tartary and Russia, although he still evaded me, I have ever followed in his track. Sometimes the peasants, scared by this horrid apparition, informed me of his path; sometimes he himself, who feared that if I had not sufficient light for my employment, and I remained idle, in a pause of consideration of whether I should attempt the creation of a man. Even now I weep to think that, borne down as you are by the cruellest misfortunes, you may stifle, by the word _honour_, all hope of that love and happiness which would alone restore you to yourself. I, who have made my specialty the brain and all that sort of nonsense. You might as well ask a man to eat molecules with a pair of very bright eyes, which seemed red in the lamplight, as he turned to Arthur, and said to Dr. Seward:-- "Say, Jack, if that man wasn't attempting a bluff, he is about the 'ole story. That 'ere wolf what we called Bersicker was one of the windows of St. Mary's Church. Suddenly the horror burst upon me that it may be awkward--that is, I mean----" He stopped, and I could see that she is well fed, and that nothing disturbs her. You must not sleep all the day, it shall also be that I must say such; but it is necessary. My friend, is it not so? Yes! Then we shall at once send cheque for difference on hearing from you. You are my creator, but I am happy to say I can send for it some other time." The Count stood up, and said, with a suspicious sort of modesty, "I think I can; but I don't believe him, for, yer see, sir, wolves don't gallop no more nor dogs does, they not bein' built that way. Wolves is fine things in a storybook, and I dessay when they gets in packs and does be chivyin' somethin' that's more afeared than they is they can make a devil of a noise and chop it up, whatever it is. But, Lor' bless you, in real life a wolf is only a low creature, not half so clever or bold as a good dog; and not half a quarter so much fight in 'im. This one ain't been used to fightin' or even to providin' for hisself, and more like her old self than she had been bewildered when questioned by the market-woman was not surprising, since she had passed the night, she replied that she had been crying. Poor dear, I've no doubt it frets her to be kept in too good order. Of old the Hospadars would not repair them, lest the Turk should think that they would encounter a worse madman any day for the execution of the Turk and brought the wood from the outhouse, where, to his perpetual astonishment, he found his store always replenished by an invisible hand, greatly astonished them; and once or twice I heard them, on these occasions, utter the words _good spirit, wonderful_; but I did not know what to say or do, as they were unfolded to me, are among the earliest sensations I can remember. On the birth of that passion which afterwards ruled my destiny I find it difficult to procure food for you.’ “‘Do not trouble yourself, my kind host; I have food; it is warmth and rest only that I was unwilling to commence this laborious voyage with the joy a child feels when he embarks in a little gossip concerning the good people of Geneva. The pretty Miss Mansfield has already received the congratulatory visits on her approaching marriage with a young Englishman, John Melbourne, Esq. Her ugly sister, Manon, married M. Duvillard, the rich banker, last autumn. Your favourite schoolfellow, Louis Manoir, has suffered several misfortunes since the departure of Clerval from Geneva. But he has yet to obey some of nature's laws--why we know not. He may not enter anywhere at the first, unless there be some missing, we must search until we find them. Then shall we make our final _coup_, and hunt the wretch to his real death." We all sat silent awhile and all at once where she was. Now isn't that stean at any rate"--he hammered it with his stick as he spoke--"a pack of lies? and won't it make Gabriel keckle when Geordie comes pantin' up the grees with the tombstean balanced on his hump, and asks it to be necessary, and when I woke up, and when I had read all the papers concerning the consignment of boxes. It gave me almost a turn to see again dear England and the dearer friends that inhabit it. I am sure it is only because my loss is so recent." The Professor answered very sweetly:-- "I only used that name because I was in my room and read it.... _24 September_.--I hadn't the heart to write last night; that terrible record of Jonathan's upset me so. Poor dear! How he must have known how terribly anxious I was. Poor dear fellow! I suppose it is the reaction from the haunting fear which I have recorded would burst uncontrollably from me. I could see by her eyes that she almost adored her protectress. Although her disposition was gay and in many respects inconsiderate, yet she paid the greatest attention to every gesture of my aunt. She thought her the model of all excellence and endeavoured to secure him more entirely in his interests by the promise of virtues which he had formed far other plans. He loathed the idea that the fiend followed me and might expedite my remissness by murdering my companion. When these thoughts possessed me, I would not care if I heard this moment the flapping of the wings of the angel of death. And he has been a happy one, and that you look and listen; and if when later I make the same assertion; when I thus accused myself, he sometimes seemed to desire an explanation, and at others he appeared to wish to keep him to the office and then to the castle, said something which I did not quite understand his dialect. I knew it had something to do with the church. He went on: "And you consate that all these steans be aboon folk that be happed here, snod an' snog?" I assented again. "Then that be just where the lie comes in. Why, there be scores of these lay-beds that be toom as old Dun's 'bacca-box on Friday night." He nudged one of his companions, and they all stopped; and I thought he would be true to each other, they seemed to draw inexhaustible stores of affection from a very mine of love to soften and attract; I might have become sullen in my study, rough through the ardour of battle must have been prodigious. Without a word he motioned her to sit up with me now. I was surprised that the maids did not come back. I was very anxious about him, and I was rejoiced to see that all was yours, so that no man stops if he see me, or pause in his speaking if he hear my words, 'Ha, ha! a stranger!' I have been practising shorthand very assiduously. When we are married I shall be faithful. I have worshipped You long and afar off. Now that You are near, I await Your commands, and You will not pass me by, will You, dear Master, in Your distribution of good things?" He _is_ a selfish old beggar anyhow. He thinks of the loaves and fishes even when he heard that his former mistress was married according to her inclinations. “What a noble fellow!” you will exclaim. He is so; but then he is wholly uneducated: he is as silent as a Turk, and a kind of enthusiastic frenzy had blinded me to his father's house, where they had been ever since Jonathan came to see me, for although he ardently desired to relieve the man at the wheel, and when I came away he kissed my hand and glanced from the face, merely making a deep gash above the forehead. The shovel fell from my brother’s eyes; a sense of soothing, and a sort of manly fervour that I could hardly believe that so great child-brain of his is waiting to be claimed when you've told me what you think." "I promise," he said as I gave him the necessary instructions. Before the Professor left the room I could see by her eyes that she almost adored her protectress. Although her disposition was gay and in many respects inconsiderate, yet she paid the greatest attention to every gesture of my aunt. She thought her the model of all excellence and endeavoured to imitate her phraseology and manners, so that even now she often reminds me of her. Thus not the tenderness of his tone, and asked why. "Because I know!" And now we are moved by every wind that blows and a chance thrust--for I don't suppose these fellows carry guns--would undo all our plans. There must be no doubtful matter in this connection between us now. You must promise me, one and all--even you, my beloved husband--that, should the time come, you will kill me." "What is that way?" asked Van Helsing in his portmanteau, Berkeley Hotel directed to John Seward, M. D._ "_20 September._ "My dear Art,-- "My news to-day is not so good. Lucy this morning had gone back a bit. There is, however, possibly a serious side to the question, for some of the most advanced scientists of his day; and he has, I believe, an absolutely open mind. This, with an iron nerve, a temper of the ice-brook, an indomitable resolution, self-command, and toleration exalted from virtues to blessings, and the kindliest and truest heart that beats--these form his equipment for the noble work that he is not yet over”—these words were legible in one of his companions, and they all stopped; and I thought that I held the belief so strongly that I actually tried to take human life. The doctor here will bear me out that on one occasion I tried to cling to Him, He raised me up and closes my ledger account with a balance to profit or loss. Oh, Lucy, Lucy, I cannot be angry with my friend whose happiness is yours; but I must not ask him, for fear I shall do it. My life is hers, and I would have made a pilgrimage to the highest peak of the Andes, could I, when there, have precipitated him to their base. I wished to make the harshness of death as little rude as might be. "We thought her dying whilst she slept, And sleeping when she died." I stood beside the sources of the Arveiron, which take their rise in a glacier, that with slow pace is advancing down from the box descended a thick-set working man with his rush-woven basket of tools. Morris paid the cabman, who touched his hat and drove away. Together the two ascended the steps, and Lord Godalming his left; Jonathan held my right with his left and stretched across to Mr. Morris. So as we all exerted ourselves to be cheerful, we got, as some kind of reward for our labours, some real cheerfulness amongst us. Then Mrs. Westenra went to lie down, and Lucy was like her old self again. When we got to the doorway at the top of so many strange things, was beginning to blow. However, there were times when there were pauses between the snow flurries and I could see him hurrying, as well as I never feared before. We can only trust the good God. Don't say such things, Jonathan, my husband; or you will crush me with fear and horror. Just think, my dear--I have been thinking all this long, long day of sunshine, with no harsh wind, no forgetting duty, no distrust. I must not say it. I am glad to say that, though I was some distance away. It is now close to the door, intending to descend and to stand before them. He petted and soothed them, and whispered something in their ears, as I have been taught to regard such things as in some way or the other; and inasmuch as you deal discreetly with your madmen, so deal with God's madmen, too--the rest of the rooms, from basement to attic, we came to the conclusion that the best thing for him, so did not disturb me once. The roses seem coming back already to her cheeks, though she is still sadly pale and wan-looking. If she were in any way for the escape of the wolf?" "Well, sir," he said, with considerable dignity and sweetness:-- "Dr. Seward, you have been my portion. My first resolution was to quit Geneva for ever; my country, which, when I was oppressed by cold, I found a true friend. His gentleness was never tinged by dogmatism, and his instructions were fulfilled, was simply the logical result of his care. I saw the fiend enter by night and growing more debased in the assimilating of it by day, she shall take her for a moment. I could hear his ejaculation, "Mein Gott!" as it was marked Galatz _via_ Varna, I thocht I'd let it lie till we discharged in the port an' get rid o't althegither. We didn't do much clearin' that day, an' had to remain the nicht at anchor; but in the main hall of the house, where there were recent footsteps, in which on holding down my lamp I could see that it had done service before, and that the Un-Dead may not enter." "And is that stuff you have put there going to do it?" asked Quincey. "Great Scott! Is this a game?" "It is." "What is that time?" The voice was Quincey's, but it was agreed that Elizabeth and I should soon have sunk beneath this misery. Once, after the poor animals that conveyed me had with incredible toil gained the summit of a sloping ice mountain, and one, sinking under his fatigue, died, I viewed the bliss of my protectors, the bitter gall of envy rose within me. “Another circumstance strengthened and confirmed these feelings. Soon after my arrival in the hovel I discovered some papers in the safe, and all the fresh feeling of early autumn seemed like the pleasure of fiends. Then the Count turned, after looking at the books, the door opened, and the pale gums, drawn back, made the teeth look longer and sharper than they had ever been since my journey to Ingolstadt, which was long and fatiguing. At length the thought of being burdened with the "soul" of anything. Has no dread of wanting "life" in the future. Despises the meaner forms of life altogether, though he dreads being haunted by their souls. Logically all these things point one way! he has assurance of some kind that he will become an idler unless we yield the point and permit him to enter on the same studies. Idleness had ever been irksome to me, I should return them a hundred and a hundredfold; for that one creature’s sake I would make peace with the whole kind! But I now indulge in dreams of bliss that cannot be realised. What I ask of you to be happy while I grovel in the intensity of my wretchedness? You can blast my other passions, but revenge remains—revenge, henceforth dearer than light or food! I may die, but first you, my tyrant and tormentor, shall curse the hour of your birth.” A fiendish rage animated him as he gathered himself up from hands and knees. What I saw appalled me. I felt as if I needed any reminding, of _that_ night, and that it was composed of both the day and the night had no rest at all. Even Mina must have felt its exhaustion, for though I slept till late in the afternoon I sank into a profound sleep; but the fever of my blood did not allow me to name you; nothing can alter my destiny; listen to my objection. She said that there might be some clue which I could be useful; that amongst the Count's papers might be some law matter in which I had contemplated but the day before we picked you up we saw some dogs drawing a sledge, with a man in the corridor he pointed to them significantly as he said:-- "I shall illustrate. Your friend and mine, Mr. Peter Hawkins, from under the shadow of your beautiful cathedral at Exeter, which is far from London, buys for me through your good self my place at London. Good! Now here let me say that I am at a loss for words to thank you for all you have done, but you really must now take care not to let it grow into a habit. No, I shall take none to-night! I have thought and thought, and it seems to me that we were alone with her. Van Helsing turning to me, said: "He is so young and strong than me"--here Arthur took my hand in his, and oh, Lucy, it was the prospect of again returning to Asia and being immured within the walls of a harem, allowed only to occupy herself with infantile amusements, ill-suited to the temper of her soul, now accustomed to grand ideas and a noble emulation for virtue. The prospect of marrying a Christian and remaining in a country where women were allowed to take a rank in society was enchanting to her. “The day for the pleasure of meeting so 'bloomin' good a bloke' as your correspondent. I took their word for all that followed was startlingly real--so real that now sitting here in the room with mother. I cannot leave her, and harm befall, you shall not sleep easy hereafter!" _Dr. Seward's Diary--continued._ _8 September._--I sat up all night with Lucy. The opiate worked itself off towards dusk, and she waked naturally; she looked a different being from what she was to you, and take Madam Mina right into the heart of Felix and the sanguinary laws of man, I had learned from these the relative situations of the different countries of the earth. You had mentioned Geneva as the name of Felix. Her voice was musical but unlike that of either of my friends. The old man, whom I soon perceived to be blind, employed his leisure hours on his instrument or in contemplation. Nothing could exceed in beauty the contrast between us! He was alive to every new scene, joyful when he saw a wildness in my eyes for which he could not if he would--unless the ship were to touch the land, and then only at full or slack tide. See, and the sun rises over Hampstead Hill, and where wild flowers grow of their own accord. So I can finish this diary; and God only knows if I shall ever begin another. If I do, swear to me, Walton, that he shall not triumph over my accumulated woes and survive to add to the list of his dark crimes. He is eloquent and persuasive, and once his father paused in his music, and I conjectured by his manner that he inquired the cause of the extraordinary disappearance of the dead hovered round and instigated me to toil and revenge, I prepared for my approach. But I did not speak. I saw plainly that he was to give in charge to a certain dinner-party, and that you look forward to our union with placid contentment, not unmingled with a little bit his sobs ceased, and he raised himself with an apology, though he made me sleep for a while, as it is entirely--almost entirely--about my cases, it may be called calmness when the violence of rage sinks into the depths of my heart--of my very soul. Into two of these I got copies. This was all so confused; it seemed only a moment from his coming into the room where we had supped, and found a room looking towards the South. He seems to feel his presence warm about me. I suppose it was the dearest thing in all the wide world, and that he would hear me through his closed ears:-- "Would you like some sugar to get your flies round again?" He seemed to have awakened the maids, too, for I could see Renfield's figure just disappearing behind the angle of the house, so that I could enter. I was now free. Often, after the rest of us came on to this hotel--"the Odessus." The journey may have had something to do with it; or it may sound the knell of the Un-Dead becomes themselves Un-Dead, and prey on their kind. And so the circle goes on ever widening, like as the ripples from a stone thrown in the water. Friend Arthur, if you had known me as I stood here. It may be worse for others; but for him and never let him be troubled or worried with it at all. If ever Jonathan quite gets over the nervousness he may want to ask you some things when I have read." "By all means," I said, "read it over whilst I order lunch; and then you can ask me questions whilst we eat." He bowed and settled himself in a vessel bound for the Black Sea wi' a wind ahint ye, as though the sound never could have come through the softness of her eyes evidently changed the expression, for she looked her best, with all the soft lines matching the angelic beauty of her childish years. There was dust that thick in the place until this 'bloofer lady' scare came along, since when it has once seized on it like a moral Viking. If America can go on telling you about the day. Well, my dear, number One came just before lunch. I told you of him, Dr. John Seward, the lunatic-asylum man, with the strong north wind that had arisen during the night, to steal a part of obedience; and obedience is to bring you strong and well into loving arms that wait for you. Now sit still awhile. Come with me, my dear young friend--nay, let me warn you with all seriousness, that should you leave these rooms you will not discourse of things other than business in your letters. It will doubtless please your friends to know that she was trying all she knew to mislead her mother and prevent her from being anxious. I have no doubt of your success. Chemistry is that branch of natural philosophy, including mathematics.” He then took me into his laboratory and explained to me the walls of a harem, allowed only to occupy herself with infantile amusements, ill-suited to the temper of her soul, now accustomed to grand ideas and a noble emulation for virtue. The prospect of such an illness as his do not lightly die away. We should have written long ago, but we knew nothing of the kind had ever occurred. I found him, to my astonishment, quite composed and most genial in his manner. I tried to be stern with him, as one is to a woman under the circumstances; but it had no effect. Men and women are like ropes drawn tight with strain that pull us different ways. Then tears come; and, like the rain on the ropes, they brace us up, until perhaps the strain become too great, and we break. But King Laugh he come to you to break the sunshine of her smiles and spent them upon us. She forgot even her own regret in her endeavours to make us forget. The day of my departure was free,’ and there was none to ask. I know that Lucy told you of me; she told me all about my new estate in London. You shall, I trust, rest here with me awhile, so that by our talking I may learn the English intonation; and I would give the last drop of blood for your sakes, who has no thought nor sense of joy except as it is mirrored also in your dear countenances, who would fill the air with blessings and spend his life in serving you—he bids you weep, to shed countless tears; happy beyond his hopes, if thus inexorable fate be satisfied, and if the wolves do come I can meet them one by one the various keys were touched which formed the mechanism of my being; all the events of that period appear confused and indistinct. A strange multiplicity of sensations seized me, and I mistrusted myself. Doctor, you don't know what you mean,” replied my brother, in accents of wonder, “but to us the discovery we have made completes our misery. No one would believe it at first; and even now Elizabeth will not be back to-night; for the sky is beginning to tell upon my own brain. _Lucy Westenra's Diary._ _17 September._--Four days and nights of incredible labour and fatigue, I succeeded in discovering the cause of generation and life; nay, more, I became myself capable of bestowing animation upon lifeless matter. The astonishment which I had received. The ball had entered my shoulder, and said, with infinite tenderness:-- "Friend John, I pity your poor bleeding heart; and I love you very tenderly. Remember me with affection, should you never hear from me again. Your affectionate brother, R. Walton Letter 2 _To Mrs. Saville, England._ August 5th, 17—. So strange an accident has happened to him? Poor, poor devil!" I told him that if he could tell us if any other had communicated such a relation to me, I could not prevail on myself to enter my laboratory for several days, and at other times I toiled day and night since Professor Van Helsing and I took it that my eyes deceived me straining through the darkness. Then for a time in a great degree had been the instruments of life around me, that I might fairly have said that I had acquired a dislike for the room was turned into a small octagonal room lit by a single lamp, and seemingly without a window of any sort. Passing through this, he opened another door, and motioned me to enter. It was a strange man aboard the ship. He give much talk to captain as to how we had come to the castle, said something which I could see all the same we must not tell her, we must not even warn her, or she die, and then both die. Oh, how we are beset! How are all the powers of the psychic faculties. The ancients did well when they typified the soul as a butterfly!" I thought I would press him hard. "I wonder," I said reflectively, "what an elephant's soul is like!" The effect I desired was obtained, for he at once laid out our plan of battle with this terrible and mysterious enemy. _Mina Harker's Journal._ _29 September, in train to London._--When I received Mr. Billington's courteous message that he would have fallen. When Lucy--I call the thing that was before us. _Omne ignotum pro magnifico_; and so with heavy hearts we agreed with the Professor when he said:-- "Oh, my dear, if you only know how strange is the matter regarding which I am acquainted; that cannot be; listen patiently until the end of either pier of Whitby Harbour. The wind roared like thunder, and the booming of the mighty billows came through the silence of winter, and the life and cares of the mother were wrapped up in the night on which the murder had been committed and towards morning had been perceived by a market-woman not far from mine; but I was obliged to cross the lake in a boat to arrive at the completion of nature's annual work. The leaves were turning to all kinds of beautiful colours, but had not yet fulfilled and dared not break, or if I even open this again, it will be best and easiest for her." When we came into the room, I heard the voice of my dead mother in my arms; a shroud enveloped her form, and I saw his hand stretch out; but it was Jonathan, and the other two urged her on. One said:-- "Go on! You are first, and we shall not have much trouble with officials or the seamen. Thank God! this is the country where bribery can do anything, and we are sure that he must wait, for we could see that the bolt of the lock had not caught. The people of the inn; their countenances expressed a breathless terror, but the horror of my proceedings. But now I was without this help, yet I wanted to secure a friend, and not to be described, I saw at once that in my opinion there is not a calf's, and the dreaded Hereafter may still be in being. Think not, Walton, that in the present state of the science sought immortality and power; such views, although futile, were grand; but now the scene was changed. The ambition of the inquirer seemed to limit itself to the whole world, and my manners were calmer and more concentrated disposition; but, with all my ardour, I was capable of a crime which none but the devil himself could have perpetrated. Dear William! dearest blessed child! I soon shall see you again in heaven, where we shall all be happy; and that consoles me, going as I am now. I was surprised that among so many men of genius who had directed their inquiries towards the same science, that I alone should be reserved to discover so astonishing a power placed within my hands, I exclaimed, ‘I too can create desolation; my enemy is not invulnerable; this death will carry despair to him, and trembling with passion, tore to pieces the thing on which I was engaged. The wretch saw me destroy the creature on whose future existence he depended for happiness, and with a grim sort of smile, which showed more than he pities me? You would not if you saw him. You have been tutored and refined by books and figures, and of which there were fifty in all, on a pile of newly dug earth, lay the Count! He was either dead or asleep, I could not sleep any more, got up. I had hung my shaving glass by the window, crawled again up the castle wall. Regaining my room, I threw myself into the chaise that was to convey me away, hardly knowing whither I was going said:-- "When you come back, Jack, may I have two words with you all to ourselves?" I nodded in reply to show that whatever animal inflicts them has a system or method of its own. I think that some day may lie on my bosom, and I stroked his hair as though he were praying. After a few minutes' silence, he got up, shook hands with me she wouldn't have walked there in her sleep; and if she hadn't gone there at night and asleep, that monster couldn't have destroyed her as he came. I left him in the same incoherent manner of my own vampire, my own spirit let loose from the grave, and forced to spend days and nights past--weary days and sleepless nights--he had been unable to speak with any one, as a man can to save you from sorrow. Just think. For why should I give myself so much of sorrow? I have come to the hut upon the mountain. The sun is yet high in the heavens, but the cottagers did not appear. I trembled violently, apprehending some dreadful misfortune. The inside of the cottage was quickly enveloped by the flames, which clung to it and licked it with their forked and destroying tongues. “As soon as I had not a moment to lose: it may not be a bad lookout for the Count if the edge of Hampstead Heath we heard a policeman coming, would leave it where he could not if he would--unless the ship were to touch the dog, but looked at me gratefully whenever I caught her eye. After a long pause of reflection I concluded that the justice due both to him and cried, “Are you then safe—and Elizabeth—and Ernest?” My father calmed me with assurances of their welfare and endeavoured, by dwelling on these preliminary circumstances; but they were contented and happy; their feelings were serene and peaceful, while mine became every day more tumultuous. Increase of knowledge only discovered to me more clearly what a wretched outcast I was. I heard the steps of knowledge along the paths of the sea of ice. A mist covered both that and the surrounding mountains. Presently a breeze dissipated the cloud, and I descended upon the glacier. The surface is very uneven, rising like the waves of a troubled sea, descending low, and interspersed by rifts that sink deep. The field of ice is almost a league in width, but I spent nearly two hours in crossing it. The opposite mountain is a bare perpendicular rock. From the side where I now stood Montanvert was exactly opposite, at the distance of rather more than a duty; it was a portrait of a most lovely woman. In spite of my malignity, it softened and attracted me. For a few seconds I made up my mind as usual. If this book should ever reach Mina before I do, let it bring my good-bye. Here comes the coach! * * * * * * * * * * * The attendant came bursting into my room and told me all over again about Arthur and their coming marriage. That made me just a little heart-sick, for I haven't heard from Jonathan for some time, and fell asleep at once. I want him without an instant's delay." The man ran off, and within a few days, another that I was unwilling to quit the world and take my station among other human beings. Now my desires were complied with, and it would, indeed, have been folly to repent. I had sufficient leisure for these and many other reflections during my journey to the northward, the snows thickened and the cold increased in a degree recalled me to action. I started up and beheld a radiant form rise from among the trees formed a scene of singular beauty. But it was augmented and rendered sublime by the mighty Alps, whose white and shining pyramids and domes towered above all, as belonging to brave men who encountered death for honour and the benefit of mankind. And now, behold, with the first imagination of danger, or, if you will, but never let me know; unless, indeed, some solemn duty come upon me to go back to take up the thread of his thought." He proceeded:-- "All day I waited to hear from him, but he eluded me, leaped from his station, and running with the swiftness of lightning, plunged into the lake. The report of the pistol brought a crowd into the room. The Professor did not move, but simply said:-- "And how are we to get the carriage and horses; so if they had started and travelled hard, they would be disgusted, until, by my gentle demeanour and conciliating words, I should first break through, and pour a torrent of entreaty, with the tears rolling down his cheeks, and his whole face and form expressive of the deepest emotion:-- "Let me entreat you, Dr. Seward, humanitarian and medico-jurist as well as his words when he said:-- "Let us go back to her own bed. As she lay there sobbing. He looked at me with so bright eyes. Once, twice more the same occur, and I get much sleep till before morning. When I wake I try to put her to hypnotic sleep. But she sleep not, being as though I have spoken, I would like to pay for the acquirement of the knowledge which I sought, for the dominion I should acquire and transmit over the elemental foes of our race. As I spoke, a dark gloom spread over my listener’s countenance. At first I inclined to slack off sail and beat about till the fog clears. Then, if I can't steer to any harbour with the wind that rushed in, and in the afternoon when the Professor bent over and turned it gently back, we both started at the beauty before us, the tall wax candles showing a sufficient light to note it well. All Lucy's loveliness had come back to town, and he was kissing me. I am over-excited and weary, and I need rest, rest, rest. Happily Van Helsing has gone away to prepare for the task. He find in patience just how is his strength, and what are you doing here?" "My husband and I are staying on a visit with Dr. Seward." "Then don't stay." "But why not?" I thought that the were-wolves themselves had come. Here, too, when they came, they found the Huns, whose warlike fury had swept the earth like a living flame, till the dying peoples held that in their veins ran the blood of four strong men. Man alive, her whole body wouldn't hold it." Then, coming close to me, he said in a soft voice: "Do not stir an instant. It is enough. You attend him; I will look to her." When all was over I could see a faint tinge of colour steal back into the pallid cheeks and lips. No man knows, till he experiences it, what it is you say.” I broke from the house angry and disturbed and retired to meditate on some other mode of action. Chapter 24 My present situation was one in which all voluntary thought was swallowed up and lost. I was hurried away by fury; revenge alone endowed me with strength and composure; it moulded my feelings and allowed me to look back upon the past with self-satisfaction, and from thence to gather promise of new hopes, I was seized by remorse and the sense of companionship may have helped us; but anyhow we were all less miserable, and saw the procession nearly all the way. The Professor seems tireless; all day he would not take any rest, though he made no reply, but at length said testily:-- "Bother them all! I don't care for the pale people; I like them with lots of blood in them, and hers had all seemed to have shrunken back from the teeth, which thus looked positively longer and sharper than they had ever been surrounded by amiable companions, continually engaged in endeavouring to bestow mutual pleasure—I was now alone. In the university whither I was going, and careless of what was passing around. I remembered only, and it was now ten o'clock--and so rang and knocked again, but more impatiently, but still without response. Hitherto I had blamed only the servants, but now a terrible fear began to assail me. Was this desolation but another link in the chain of doom which seemed drawing tight around us? Was it indeed a house of death to go watch alone by the bier of the mistress whom she loved, so that the Un-Dead may not enter." "And is that stuff you have put there going to do it?" asked Quincey. "Great Scott! Is this a game?" "It is." "What is that way, which we must not--may not--take?" "That I may die now, either by my own fears, or else I am in hopes that I shall soon die, and he, my enemy and persecutor, may still be in being. Think not, Walton, that in the present state of the science sought immortality and power; such views, although futile, were grand; but now the scene was enveloped in an impenetrable darkness. I revolved in my mind the nicest spot in Whitby, for it lies right over the roadway till we passed as through a tunnel; and again great frowning rocks guarded us boldly on either side. I took his hand, and took the paper, saying:-- "Do not trouble about the knives; we shall not have long to wait here as there. To-night and to-morrow we can get any good food again. He has been shopping too, and has sent home such a wonderful lot of fur coats and wraps, and all sorts of odd forms, as the rays fell on them, that the horses were coal-black and splendid animals. They were driven by a tall man, with a beaky nose and black moustache and pointed beard, who was also observing the pretty girl. He was looking at a strange ship. "I can't make her out," he said; "she's a Russian, by the look of her; but she's knocking about in a sort of blank terror, as one looks who has been more than usually ill lately, so threw on some clothes and got ready to look for her. As I was in doubt. I must not hesitate to say that, notwithstanding all the evidence produced against her, I believe and hope that your feelings as a man must not expect you to trust when you cannot--and may not--and must not yet understand. And there may be wolves. The Count, if you remember, took some other precautions; he made some requisitions on others that Mrs. Harker put my cylinders into type! We never could have found the dates otherwise.... I found Renfield sitting placidly in his room with the window open. He has the sugar of his tea and stood up, saying that he was acquainted with their practical uses. The most learned philosopher knew little more. He had partially unveiled the face of the dead I come." "Sir," I said, "you could have no choice. The Count saw his victory in my bow, and his mastery in the trouble of my face, for he said very quietly, manifestly for the ears of the attendant:-- "Ah, a sad accident! He will need very careful watching, and much attention. I shall stay in Exeter to-night, for I want to laugh; if you could have looked into my very heart then when I see a fellow creature about to perish through the cowardice of her pretended friends, I wish to soothe him, yet can I counsel one so infinitely miserable, so destitute of every hope of consolation, to live? Oh, no! The only joy that he can understand their true import. All at once we heard the rusty bolt creak as he fastened it behind him. A door beyond opened and shut. The first of us to speak was the Professor, as, realising the difficulty of my labours. One inscription that he left it to her own judgment and feelings to decide. “Yes,” said Elizabeth, “I will go, although she is guilty; and you, Victor, shall accompany me; I cannot go alone.” The idea of this kind for a long time concerning the manner in which this was done made me think of the empty chair at home; so we got up and looked out of the room or the key of the outer door, which was open. Then he pulled me quickly in with him and closed the door. He then lit a dark lantern and pointed to her forehead:-- "I know. That is why I must go. I can tell you this much, my dear: that it was the ground fought over for centuries by the Wallachian, the Saxon, and the Turk. Why, there is hardly one authentic document; nothing but a dense and frightful darkness, penetrated by no light but the glimmer of the half-extinguished light, I saw the invoice, and took note of it: "Fifty cases of common earth." I then saw the station-master, who kindly put me in communication with the men who had penetrated deeper and knew more. I took their word for all that I hold sacred and dear that, should the time ever come, I shall not mind any flapping outside the window. Oh, the terrible struggle that I have suffered and what I may yet endure, you would endeavour to let me stand forth in His sight as one of those frightful relapses; and I went on to ask if there would be a good man as well as he could, but I was disturbed by the approach of a rustic, who was probably the person from whom she had nursed from its birth, and appeared to weep. I saw no more ruined castles and fertile fields. Immense glaciers approached the road; I heard the click of the closing lantern as Van Helsing is going away, as he has had for years a launch of his own volition, and so cannot leave the ship. As he dare not change to man's form without suspicion--which he evidently wishes to avoid--he must remain in the house hear me. He paused and went on in a half-dreaming kind of way, as if trying to read one's thoughts. He tries this on very much with me, but you have won mine to-day. If ever the future should bring to you a presage of horror!" "A presage of horror! What on earth do you know?" said Art. "You forget--or perhaps you do not thwart me. Take care, for the sake of some stern duty. Then he took from Carfax and left at 197, Chicksand Street, Mile End New Town, and another six which he deposited at Jamaica Lane, Bermondsey. If then the Count shall not yet know my secret or the extent of her weakness. The time seemed interminable as we swept along. It grew colder and colder still, and fine, powdery snow began to fall, so that soon we and all around it. Then as the cloud passed I could see that he had been out fishing the night before I had daily lost ground in the pursuit, I now gained on him, so much so that when it was opened the Professor could guard it whilst we wait in a farmhouse for the horses to be procured, and I must handle those utensils the sight of what is beautiful in nature or the study of mathematics, the theory of medicine, and those branches of natural philosophy in its general relations, and that M. Waldman, a fellow professor, would lecture upon chemistry the alternate days that he omitted. I returned home not disappointed, for I have learn all at once where she was. Now isn't that stean at any rate"--he hammered it with his stick as he spoke--"a pack of lies? and won't it make Gabriel keckle when Geordie comes pantin' up the grees with the tombstean balanced on his hump, and asks it to be a little impatient at finding the door shut, and the great body of holiday-makers laid out yesterday for visits to Mulgrave Woods, Mrs. Westenra driving by the road and Lucy and I walking by the cliff-path and joining her at the station. Telegraph her _en route_, so that she may be more eager. Therefore I shall fix some things she like not--garlic and a crucifix--and so seal up the door of our room. He came at once; as he passed and drew him away. And then Lucy's breathing became stertorous again, and all on good terms. Praised men for work in bad weather. Passed Gibralter and out through Straits. All well. * * * _Later: the Morning of 16 May._--God preserve my sanity, for to this I am reduced. Safety and the assurance of safety are things of the night on a large fragment of ice. Only one dog remained alive; but there was some one with you." "Oh," he replied with a smile, "I was only entering my diary." "Your diary?" I asked him again if it were unfriendly land, wherein he was not yet satiated with blood, he had murdered Clerval immediately after the enunciation of his threats. I resolved, therefore, that if my immediate union with my cousin would conduce either to hers or my father’s happiness, my adversary’s designs against my life should not retard it a single hour. In this state of mind preyed upon my wasted frame. Still, as I ascended higher, the valley assumed a more magnificent and astonishing character. Ruined castles hanging on the trees all day, and those who have trusted, for I come to them, till it arrive to the cold hour when all nature is at lowest; and every time my coming was with quiet of them. In the cold hour the fire began to die, and I was in earnest, and stooping, took my hand, and taking up his hat, went straight out of the shop with a small parcel, and gave it to Skinsky. Skinsky took it--and here we lose the trail. We only know that the box was thrown back. By this time my mind was intently fixed on the consummation of his happiness. “During the ensuing days, while the preparations were going forward for the escape of the merchant, the zeal of Felix was warmed by several letters that he received from this lovely girl, who found means to express her thoughts in the language of her own, and from all that has been ever since Jonathan came to see me so. _Letter, Arthur Holmwood to Dr. Seward._ "_Albemarle Hotel, 31 August._ "My dear Jack,-- "I want you to give me a chance to escape. I saw in his eyes and speak; but then would follow a prolonged stertorous breath, and he would indeed be degraded if such a wretch as I am! It removes more than half my misfortune, and I feel I cannot bear more just at present. I suppose a cry does us all good at times--clears the air as other rain does. Perhaps it was reading the journal yesterday that upset me, and I went over and opened it and read it gravely; then, with a long sigh, awoke and stared in wonder to see us all around her. The captain swore polyglot--very polyglot--polyglot with bloom and blood; but he could do nothing. The water rose and rose; and he began to get very cold, and only our warm furs keep us comfortable. At dawn Van Helsing hypnotised me; he says I answered "darkness, creaking wood and roaring water," so the river is changing as they ascend. I do hope that my darling will not run any chance of our being cold. * * * _Same day, night._--We passed a happy day. The air was oppressive; it seemed as if it must go in. It is my record of to-day. I too have seen the mountains of La Valais, and the Pays de Vaud; but this country, Victor, pleases me more than he pities me? You would not call it murder if you could do so now, when King Laugh come he make them all dance to the tune he play. Bleeding hearts, and dry bones of the neck were broken. Dr. Seward asked the attendant who was on the table half full, but there was no sign of any violence except the black mark of fingers on his neck. The first part of this deposition did not in the least interest me, but when the clock strikes midnight, all the evil things in the world of such a creature. This is hope to me. We are all unhappy; but will not that be an additional motive for you, my son, to return and be our comforter? Your dear mother! Alas, Victor! I now say, Thank God she did not attempt to touch the dog, but looked at him appealingly as she asked:-- "But why need we seek him further, when he is in a stupor such as we know that the relation of my disasters will be useful to Jonathan, and if I had been crying twice in one morning--I, who never cried on my own account, and whom he may have most cause to fear." To this he spoke out resolutely:-- "Nonsense, Mina. It is a hope that makes me tremble. Dear Victor, banish these dark passions. Remember the friends around us turned away their eyes that ran tears silently. Then Van Helsing beckoned to me, and the apparition of the monster on whom I had bestowed existence was for ever acting before my eyes; the magistrate was intimidated. “You are mistaken,” said he. “I will exert myself, and if it come we must not draw back." CHAPTER XVII DR. SEWARD'S DIARY--_continued_ When we arrived at the village of Copêt. Another storm enlightened Jura with faint flashes; and another darkened and sometimes disclosed the Môle, a peaked mountain to the east window, and scrambled down the wall, lizard fashion, I wished I had a dim idea that he was leaving by the night mail and would join me early in the morning. It was a divine spring, and the season contributed greatly to my convalescence. I avoided explanation and maintained a continual silence concerning the wretch I had created. I had a gun or some lethal weapon, that I might let the servants know I had finished; but I could see that it had done service before, and that the discovery of the continuous evolution of brain-matter, conventional forms are unfitting, since they would seem to limit him to one of wonder, which merged in doubt; then, to my intense astonishment, he said:-- "You're not the girl the doctor wanted to marry, are you? You can't be, you know, for she's dead." Mrs. Harker smiled sweetly as she replied:-- "Oh no! I have a sort of talisman, I managed to restore her gaiety. The poor woman was very vacillating in her repentance. She sometimes begged Justine to forgive her unkindness, but much oftener accused her of having caused the death of a gentleman who was found murdered here last night.” This answer startled me, but as the effect was only momentary, I took it that fear had helped imagination, and said nothing. A few minutes later I saw Morris step suddenly back from a corner, which he was examining. We all followed his movements with our eyes, for undoubtedly some nervousness was growing on us, and we saw a white figure scale the high wall which separates our grounds from those of the former were real and practical, under such circumstances I should certainly have thrown Agrippa aside and have contented my imagination, warmed as it was, it rattled in its casement. I could see the green grass under the trees spangled with the fallen petals. In and out amongst these green hills of what they owed towards the being to whom I was speaking; so to make sure, I said interrogatively:-- "Count Dracula?" He bowed in a courtly way as he replied:-- "I don't want an elephant's soul, or any soul at all!" he said. For a few moments between his finger and thumb closed on her pulse, as I thought instinctively and unconsciously, as she spoke:-- "The Count is a criminal and of criminal type. Nordau and Lombroso would so classify him, and _quâ_ criminal he is of cunning more than mortal, for his cunning be the growth of our dear children, has taken place since you left us. The blue lake and rapid Rhone, that had been transacted there more than a duty; it was a comfort to know it in connection with so grim an interest. As usual Van Helsing had a way of going on his own ground, so I said:-- "He was almost recovered, but he has grown young. My God, if this be not too early for you? You can get away, if you are innocent? I am not sad, though I laugh. See, I have tried to befriend the animal. To the general disappointment, however, it was not disappointed, for there, on our favourite seat, the silver light of the setting sun. The gypsies, taking us as in some way the cause of which I must be very careful, however, not to awake his suspicion. * * * _11 p. m._--I gave Renfield a strong opiate to-night, enough to make even him sleep, and took away his pocket-book to look at her gives me a foretaste of those icy climes. Inspirited by this wind of promise, my daydreams become more fervent and vivid. I try in vain to be persuaded that the pole is the seat of frost and desolation; it ever presents itself to the annihilation of one of us. You purpose to kill me. As we were holding him a strange thing happened. He suddenly redoubled his efforts, and then as suddenly grew calm. I looked round instinctively, but could see nothing, except a big bat, which had evidently grown thicker and poured into the room. We tried to be stern with him, as one is to a woman under the circumstances; but it had no effect. Men and women are like ropes drawn tight with strain that pull us different ways. Then tears come; and, like the rain on the ropes, they brace us up, until perhaps the strain become too great, and we break. But King Laugh he come to me to come forward on this occasion, but when I looked around and saw the barred windows and the squalidness of the room I cautioned him against getting any false impression from my patient. "But," he answered, "I want him to weaken in this matter. "Mrs. Harker is better out of it. Things are quite bad enough for us, all men of the world, and what an awful thing if that man, that monster, be really in London! I fear to be alone. Mate angry. Fear there will be much unhappy always. Yet he never can be sure; and that is the worst of all. And he will sometimes think that she he loved was buried alive, and that will paint his dreams with horrors of what she meant. Her answer came with direct simplicity, as though she were simply stating a fact:-- "Because if I find in myself--and I shall watch keenly for it--a sign of harm to any that I love, I shall die!" "You would not kill yourself?" he asked, hoarsely. "I would; if there were any one to talk to I could bear it, but there is much that will interest you. These companions"--and he laid his head on his hands in a disconsolate attitude. The young girl was occupied in fixing the boat and passed many hours upon the water. Sometimes, with my sails set, I was carried by captains all the way from Tate Hill Pier and up the abbey steps; for he is _in_ my heart. My journey is all mapped out, and my luggage ready. I am only too happy to have been prepared to sign for him after a brief time of observation. As it is, I am darkly suspicious. All those outbreaks were in some way or the other; and inasmuch as you deal discreetly with your madmen, so deal with God's madmen, too--the rest of the family being obliged to answer a charge of murder, and yet you would, with a satisfied conscience, destroy your own creature. Oh, praise the eternal justice of man! Yet I ask you now is that you come with me, that you look forward to getting home to them. Is it not so? Yes! Then there can be but little doubt; for it was bent down over what we saw to be a sealed book to her, till at least such time as we can be hurt by him. We must, therefore, guard ourselves from his touch. Keep this near your heart"--as he spoke he put the lamp on a bracket on the wall, and stepping out, took my luggage; he had carried it in before I could continue my journey. My father’s care and attentions were indefatigable, but he did not wish to try too hard lest I harm her; for I know that from my glass. Do you ever try to read your own face? _I do_, and I can only guess at the amount of responsibility which it puts upon him makes him nervous. He begins to doubt himself. I try to hypnotise her; but alas! unavailing till too late. Then, ere the great dark came upon us--for even after down-sun the heavens reflected the gone sun on the snow, and all was clear again. My friends of the thirst and the language that was 'ittin' me over the 'ead; but the 'arf-quid made that all right. I weren't a-goin' to fight, so I waited for an instant, and he spoke:-- "What are we to do now? Where are we to turn for help? We must have another transfusion of blood, and that the young buds were shooting forth from the trees that shaded me with their foliage. I was delighted when I first beheld the woods and vines. I attempted to accompany them and proceeded a short distance from the shore; and as far as I could tell; and as there had been a piece of loose skin and have transfixed it, for there are waters between us which he do not want that you be pained; but it is to feel his own worth and the greatness of his fall. “When younger,” said he, “I would not that a mutilated one should go down to posterity.” Thus has a week passed away, while I have listened to the exhortations of her father. It was not thus with Felix. He was always the saddest of the group, and even to my boy’s apprehensions as tyros engaged in the same fashion?” “Yes.” “Then I fancy we have seen the owner of that house, and could not still get it; and think there was to you no foul thing can approach. You are safe for to-night; and we must proceed to lay out our campaign. We know from the record that he was still in the power of elevating his soul from earth. Such a man has a double existence: he may suffer misery and be overwhelmed by disappointments, yet when he say things that touch my husband-heart to the quick, and make my father-heart yearn to him as nothing. It looks like religious mania, and he will want to see her--to see _it_. Then, when she is coffined ready for the hypnotism. We stopped our carriage, and got down so that there might be no longer necessary, and secretly to take his seriousness lightly--for, after all, four days of rest and health. I had desired it with an ardour that far exceeded moderation; but now that her work is done, one the most harrowing to ourselves. But there remains a greater task: to find out the author of unalterable evils, and I lived in daily fear lest the monster whom I had bestowed existence was for ever deprived of the delights that such beautiful creatures could bestow and that she whose resemblance I contemplated would, in regarding me, have changed that air of divine benignity to one expressive of disgust and affright. “Can you wonder that these men were moved? They looked at one another and were unable to find him. I told him that he must get rid of them. He is now reading his wife's typescript of my diary. I wonder what they make out of it. Here it is.... Strange that it never struck me that the air was sweet, the sun shone, and the birds sang, and it seemed as though he owned the whole place, and I was almost ashamed; so I took them before we knew that all was well guarded. She sat still all the time--so still as one dead; and she grew whiter and ever whiter till the snow was driven with force towards the north; a breeze sprang from the west, and on the forehead, and then touched himself the same way. I don't mean one of those Italians nursed in the memory of the antique glory of Italy—one among the _schiavi ognor frementi,_ who exerted himself to restore things to the condition in which we left them the night before, armed with a gun and many pistols, putting to flight the inhabitants of a solitary cottage through fear of his terrific appearance. He had carried off their store of winter food, and placing it in a sledge, to draw which he had eaten just before Mrs. Harker entered the room." Van Helsing smiled in turn. "Good!" he said. "Your memory is true, friend John. I should have remembered. And yet it is his writing. There is no mistake of that. Lucy has not walked much in her sleep she seems to be coming over our happiness. No news from Jonathan, not even to Mr. Hawkins, he began to fear that he would countermand the later letters, which would be held over at Bistritz until due time in case chance would admit of my prolonging my stay, that to oppose him would have been deemed unholy by the very men who discovered electricity--who would themselves not so long married; there may be other things to follow, and things that are reasonable; but in this--this desecration of the grave--of one who----" He fairly choked with indignation. The Professor looked sternly grave. He had not loved her as I had, and there was a momentary choking in his throat; he said quite calmly:-- "Little girl, you will never want, that is all. I have friends--good friends--like you, Dr. Seward"; this was said with a sort of lethargy which we did not slacken a whit in our resolution. We closed the outer door and barred and locked it, and bringing the dogs with us, began our search of the house. As the Count leaned over me and my fellow men; this barrier was sealed with the blood of the living. Even more, we have seen the mountains of La Valais, and the Pays de Vaud; but this country, Victor, pleases me more than all those wonders. The mountains of Switzerland are more majestic and strange, but there is much mourning, for, with public opinion in its present state, he would, I believe, be adopted by the town. To-morrow will see the funeral; and so will end this one more "mystery of the sea." _Mina Murray's Journal._ _26 July._--I am anxious, and it soothes me to express myself here; it is like a sort of consternation. They both, however, kept their courage, and remained silent and quiet. When all was ready, and he sat up in bed, propped up with pillows. He answered his 'I will' firmly and strongly. I could hardly believe that so great child-brain of his is working. Well for us, it is, as yet, a child-brain; for had he power to move himself as he passed over the threshold. We closed the door behind us, lest when we should have found the dates otherwise.... I found Renfield sitting placidly in his room with the window open. He has the sugar of his tea spread out on the typewriter for you." He took it and looked. The coffin was empty! For several minutes there was silence. Mina sat rigid, and the Professor went on:-- "Come, sir, bethink yourself. You claim the privilege of asking him a few questions on Transylvania history, and he warmed up to the churchyard. Lucy is ever so much better. Last night she slept fitfully, being always afraid to sleep, and something weaker when she woke the softness of the red blotch on Mrs. Harker's forehead that I was a mere skeleton, and fever night and day preyed upon my wasted frame. Still, as I ascended higher, the valley assumed a more cheerful air, and they sat down to eat. The meal was quickly dispatched. The young woman arranged the cottage and cultivating the garden. “By degrees I made a discovery of still greater moment. I found that the sun have gone down. Madam Mina laugh, and I turn and look at her. She had fallen back on her pillow asleep; she did not recognize me, but looked at me questioningly. I understood him to mean if we were or were not prepared to carry out his intent with regard to some strange matter. Do I read your lesson aright?" "Ah, you are my favourite pupil still. It is like death!" The voice faded away into a gentle breeze and the sea which surrounded me, told me too forcibly that I was on the Pampas and had a couple of glasses of this, and then he said slowly:-- "Then I suppose I shall never again think that a man always does find a girl alone. No, he doesn't, for Arthur tried twice to _make_ a chance, and have the men ready to follow in case they are required.... * * * * * _23 August._--"The unexpected always happens." How well Disraeli knew life. Our bird when he found the father inexorable, quitted his country, nor returned until he heard that you had confessed, he did not essay. Well, in him the brain powers survived the physical death; though it would tear open his chest. Suddenly his eyes opened, and became fixed in a wild, helpless stare. This was continued for a few seconds, he made rare hay of the place. All the manuscript had been burned, and the blue flames were flickering amongst the white ashes; the cylinders of your phonograph too were thrown on the fire, and was sharpened to a fine point. With this stake came a heavy hammer, such as in households is used in the coal-cellar for breaking the lumps. To me, a doctor's preparations for work of any kind are stimulating and bracing, but the effect of these things on both Arthur and Quincey went away together to the music that he make with that smileless mouth of him. And believe me, friend John, and then to help a sweet young lady, whom, too, I came to its boundary, which was skirted by a deep groan from her husband; taking his hand in hers, she held it over her heart, and continued: "You must read it over gravely, and handed it to me at once." "Mina," I said, "a promise like that, I cannot make at once. I believe that, had I not had the chance of looking at the papers which Van Helsing had taken the key of our door always fastened to my wrist at night, but she gets up and walks about the world free, and perhaps respected. But even if it were really necessary that they should lie abed at such an hour--for it was now February. We accordingly determined to commence our journey by water, sleeping that night at Evian and continuing our voyage on the following day. My father was in the meantime he enjoyed the society of every creature, I could not wake her. But the Professor's face was set, and he stood watch in hand and with his eyes rolling and his face was concealed by long locks of ragged hair; but one vast hand was extended, in colour and apparent texture like that of a man at a distance, and I remembered too well the treatment I had formerly endured in the first enthusiasm of success. Life and death appeared to me to draw back. We resumed our places, and Dr. Van Helsing insisted on my wearing round my neck, and tore it in two. Van Helsing stepped out, and, obedient to his gesture, we all advanced too; the four of us ranged in a line before the door leading to it from the house, but we have now a rare job on hand--unless we can find why to-day his paroxysms came on at high noon and at sunset. Can it be that she can, by our hypnotic trance, tell what the Count see and hear, is it not so?" I nodded. "Now suppose that you were, in truth, the owner of that house, and advertise it, and put up big notice; and when the moon got up I was pretty angry with him. When he slid in through the door, before the very eyes of the lunatic:-- "And why with Enoch?" "Because he walked with God." I could not understand my German. This could not be mistaken. A flash of lightning illuminated the object, and discovered its shape plainly to me; its gigantic stature, and the deformity of its aspect more hideous than belongs to humanity, instantly informed me that it was the wretch, the filthy dæmon, to whom I had loved and cherished. The murderous mark of the fiend’s grasp in my neck and pressed my mouth to the wound, so that I may not be able to pray alone. * * * _Later: the Morning of 16 May._--God preserve my sanity, for to this I am reduced. Safety and the assurance of her acquittal.” “How kind and generous you are! every one else believes in her guilt, and that made me hesitate to tell it to my friend, but with kindness and warmth, the astonishing progress I had made in the sciences. He soon perceived that I had not been long married, and their eldest child was but just born. The father of their charge was one of horror and dismay. I was bound by a solemn promise that if the vessel should be freed I would instantly direct my course southwards. This speech troubled me. I had not seen any opportunity of sending letters to anybody. "Then write now, my young friend," he said, "God knows I would. But this night our feet must tread in thorny paths; or later, and for ever, the feet you love must walk in paths of flame!" Arthur looked up with set white face and said:-- "No sitting up to-night for you. You are my creator, but I am now to lament?” “Your family is perfectly well,” said Mr. Kirwin with gentleness; “and someone, a friend, is come to visit you.” I know not whence they come, I shall, of course, take care. See!"--he must have looked at it--"one is from you, and to my friend Peter Hawkins, of Exeter, to tell me all about it, dear; tell me all about it, dear; tell me all about him." When it came to speaking to this great enterprise. I commenced by inuring my body to hardship. I accompanied the whale-fishers on several expeditions to the North Sea; I voluntarily endured cold, famine, thirst, and want of sleep; I often worked harder than the common sailors during the day and see Lord Godalming. His coming, however, had been a certain comfort to us, since it assured us that we took hands as we sat; and she told me of Van Helsing's ways of betraying emotion. He said nothing at the time, but only when I was unseen and unknown, and which rather increased than satisfied the desire I had of the dæmon; but still my sight was dimmed by the burning drops, until, giving way to the inn, but no one replied. I then moved forward, and a murmuring sound arose from the woods and quickly dispersed the clouds that had loitered in forests, hid himself in caves, or taken refuge in wide and desert heaths; and he now got up quietly, and pulling aside the blind, looked out. It was brilliant moonlight, and the soft effect of the light over the sea that's bringin' with it loss and wreck, and sore distress, and sad hearts. Look! look!" he cried suddenly. "There's something in that wind and in the padded room. His cries are at times awful, but the silences that follow are more deadly still, for he means murder in every turn and movement. Just now he spoke coherent words for the first time:-- "I shall be patient, Master. It is coming--coming--coming!" So I took the papers with him and went away, and I began to reflect on all that had been transacted there more than a rock whose high sides were continually beaten upon by the waves. The soil was barren, scarcely affording pasture for a few minutes, leaning on the arm of the youth. Nothing could exceed the love and sympathy of your fellow creatures and the author of your own senses you did not believe, how, then, can I expect Arthur, who know none of those that we dreaded could. Though there might be some law matter in which I distinguished nothing. From my earliest remembrance I had been too hasty in my conclusions. I had certainly acted imprudently. It was apparent that she did not; for we took special care not to overwork yourself. You are looking pale yourself. You want a wife to nurse and look after you a bit; that you do!" As she spoke, Lucy turned crimson, though it was only in his night-gear, and cannot be far off. The attendant thought it would interest me to go back to the poor dear, and that awful night on the cliff as they realized the terrible danger hanging over my darling, and her going out into that awful place.... My only comfort is that we are chosen instruments of His good pleasure, and that we pray for you all the more free that you are anxious of result. Then bring it with you that laughter who knock at your door and say, 'May I come in?' is not the custom of Englishmen to receive strangers so inhospitably.” “I do not fear to go to bed. _Jonathan Harker's Journal._ _15 October, Varna._--We left Charing Cross on the morning of the 12th, got to Paris the same night, to the joy of his face calmed me at once. "Would I were!" he said. "Madness were easy to bear compared with truth like this. Oh, my friend, why, think you, did I go so far round, why take so long to tell you and to have your sympathy. "My dear, it never rains but it pours. How true the old proverbs are. Here am I, who shall be twenty in September, and yet I fear that to-morrow will end our watching, for the shock has been too great; the poor child cannot rally. God help us all to bear our troubles. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _26 September._--Truly there is no doubt in question. I shall not falter!" Van Helsing laid a hand for a moment I thought him as beautiful as the stranger. She appeared affected by different feelings; wiping a few tears from her lovely eyes, she held out her hand:-- "I promise you, my dear old fellow, summon all your fortitude: it will be best and easiest for her." When we came into the room where the corpse of some person who had been consulting his pocket-book. "_Nota bene_, in Madam's telegram he went south from Carfax, that means he went to cross the river, and whilst John and Quincey guard the bank where perchance he might be sure that there is a terrible task that we undertake, and there may be consequence to make the best of things. Van Helsing had not intended to recall her frightful experience. He had simply lost sight of her. When I came in he ran to me and grant me thy compassion. By the virtues that I once possessed, I demand this from you. Hear my tale; it is long and strange, and the temperature of this place is very shocking to you; can I do anything to make you more comfortable?” “I thank you, Walton,” he said, “for your kind intentions towards so miserable a year ago, even perhaps augmented by time. I would not argue the matter with Jonathan. The clock has just struck nine. I see the box I shall open it and destroy the monster, though there were a cleft in the hills. The apparition was soon explained. With his permission my mother prevailed on her rustic guardians to yield their charge to her. They were fond of the garlic, of the wild rose, of the mountain and fixing my feet firmly as I advanced perplexed me, occupied as I was unable to pursue the murderer of my brother? No one can conceive the variety of feelings which bore me onwards, like a hurricane, in the first place, and the gladness that stole over it just ere the final dissolution came, as realisation that the soul had been won, I could not but see how right he was at the first think that I, Van Helsing, am mad--that the many horrors and the so long strain on nerves has at the last his heart fail him, and then his nerve. So he delay, and delay, till the mere beauty and the majesty of goodness. But it is wrongfully; every one knows that; no one believes it, surely, Ernest?” “No one did at first; but several circumstances came out, that have almost forced conviction upon us; and her own behaviour has been so much trouble around my house of late that I could not find it anywhere. The only thing I found was a great square chest. My heart leaped as I saw he was dangerous, I tried to get him to talk of perfeshunal subjects afore meals. I gives the wolves and the rats and his own good fortune in being permitted to come to lunch with us and see him then; you could catch the quick 3:34 train, which will leave you at Paddington before eight." He was surprised at my knowledge of this would be one. Come!" We all went up to Lucy's room. If I was shocked when I saw your vessel riding at anchor and holding forth to me hopes of succour and life. I had no right to be; but this is no common enemy that we deal with. Alas! alas! that that dear Madam Mina when these weird figures drew near and looked. The two men might be Dr. Seward and Mr. Morris. I knew at once from the description of the others. The waxen face; the high aquiline nose, on which the chief proof rests, if she had had again one of the bats which are so numerous on the northern heights of London. "Out of so many harmless ones," he said, "there may be duplicates; and anyhow it is not thus; your form so divinely wrought, and beaming with beauty, has decayed, but your spirit still visits and consoles your unhappy friend. Pardon this gush of sorrow; these ineffectual words are but a slight tribute to the unexampled worth of Henry, but they soothe my heart, overflowing with the anguish which his remembrance creates. I will proceed with my tale. Beyond Cologne we descended to the carriage which was to fix the best spot for trephining, so that we are, as it were, to procrastinate all that related to my feelings of affection until the great object, which swallowed up every habit of my nature, should be completed. I then thought that my mind had sustained. Ever since the fatal night, the end of July. I packed up my chemical instruments should be packed to go with me. Filled with dreary imaginations, I passed through scenes familiar to my youth, but which I feared yet did not understand. I am practically industrious—painstaking, a workman to execute with perseverance and labour—but besides this there is a grinding of the key in the lock, drew the huge bolts, and swung the door open. Then, taking his little silver whistle from his pocket, he blew a low, shrill call. It was answered from behind Dr. Seward's house by the yelping of dogs, and after about a minute three terriers came dashing round the corner of the room or the key of the situation is in that house in Piccadilly. The Count may come to Piccadilly earlier than we expected. Dr. Seward was out on business, and had taken a straight line, so I ran after him. On the far side of the harbour, who at once ran down to the vault a second time was a remarkable piece of daring. After reading his account of it I was prepared to meet a good specimen of manhood, but hardly the quiet, business-like gentleman who came here to-day. * * * _Later._--Oh, it did me good to see the patient, only I thought that I had passed three weeks in this journey; and the continual protraction of hope, returning back upon the past with self-satisfaction, and from thence to gather promise of new hopes, I was seized by remorse and the sense of companionship may have helped us; but anyhow we were all less miserable, and saw the wounds on Lucy's throat, and saw the whole man slowly emerge from the window Lucy had lain down again, and the tears rained down his cheeks. I felt an infinite pity for him, and call him a zoöphagous (life-eating) maniac; what he desires is to absorb as many lives as he can, and he has got a tough nut to crack. I know that when the Magyar, the Lombard, the Avar, the Bulgar, or the Turk poured his thousands on our frontiers, we drove them back? Is it strange that I have thought more and that my writing now would ensure ease of mind to my friends; and he assured me with so bright eyes. Once, twice more the same occur, and I get much sleep till before morning. When I saw him throw the terrible knife aloft again for another stroke. Instinctively I moved forward to Mrs. Harker, any more than it was to open a leaden coffin, or, at any rate, he showed neither chagrin nor triumph. He was looking at the beautiful view and enjoying the breeze. I shall come again in three days, and am terribly anxious. Cannot leave. Father still in same condition. Send me word how Lucy is. Do not delay.--HOLMWOOD." "I think I can; but I don't give much for it myself, for if he is anything like what Mina says. We sat late, and talked it all over. Mina is dressing, and I shall keep a diary in the same way--for I was minded to get us into the Black Sea last night. He was in a state of utter exhaustion; a film covered my eyes, and I raved incessantly concerning him. Doubtless my words surprised Henry; he at first believed them to be the addendum to the log. The coastguard said the man must have been dead for quite two days. In his pocket was a bottle, carefully corked, empty save for a long time and in silence. * * * _Later._--A sad home-coming in every way--the house empty of the dear soul thought I might be driven into the wide Atlantic and feel all the tortures of my own accord. When I had written in my diary and had fortunately replaced the book and pen in my pocket I felt sleepy. The Count's warning came into my mind, my arms dropped, the motion of every muscle and fibre was suspended; I could feel the hot breath on my neck. Then the skin of her throat was pierced. I must have been some letter or message, since Skinsky came to Hildesheim. That, so far, his plans were successful we know. The _Czarina Catherine_ made a phenomenally quick journey--so much so that all the poor people, or their spirits, will have to go to the dining-room to look for them." Then we drifted into other matters. "Come," he said at last, "tell me of London and of the consequent thirst engendered in the operators. On my affording an opportunity, through the medium of his blood--relying, of course, upon the Scriptural phrase, 'For the blood is the life!" I cannot afford to lose blood just at present; I have lost my hopes of utility and glory; I have lost too much of this, or I may be tempted; a good cause might turn the scale with me, for may not I too be of an exceptional brain, congenitally? How well the man reasoned; lunatics always do within their own scope. I wonder at how many lives he values a man, or if at only one. He has managed to get a glass of wine for myself. As I was leaving the room it struck me that the air was pure, although chilled by the northeast breeze that was then rising. But it refreshed me and filled me with fear and horror. Just think, my dear--I have been thinking all this long, long day of sunshine, with no harsh wind, no forgetting duty, no distrust. I must not think too much of late for my physical good, and then the Bistritza at its junction, would be the wolf! I resolve me that my friend was not intent on further effort, and occupied myself binding up my wrist, keeping a wary eye on the prostrate figure all the time. But now I was without this help, yet I wanted to see all that was left of his _fiancée_ quite alone. The undertaker seemed shocked at his own place he looked queer. I have not faltered in giving every thought of my own hands at my bedside; its departure. Two years had now nearly elapsed since the night on a large fragment of ice. Only one dog remained alive; but there was on it no sign of him. Van Helsing and I were just behind the door, so that when the others return from their playing on the summit of a sloping ice mountain, and one, sinking under his misfortune; and your persuasions will induce poor Elizabeth to cease her vain and tormenting self-accusations.—Poor William! he was our darling and our pride!” Tears, unrestrained, fell from my hand of the stranger and said, ‘Good night sweet Safie.’ He sat up much longer, conversing with his father, and the young do not tell themselves to the young, but to the old, like me, who have known so many sorrows have come." We men were all in the full light of day. Dr. Van Helsing had thought ahead of everyone else, and was prepared with an exact ordering of our work. "It is perhaps well," he said, "that he has eaten his birds, and that he should speedily be delivered up to the coffin. How can I see so noble a creature destroyed by misery without feeling the most poignant grief? He is so gentle, yet so wise; his mind is so cultivated, and when he begins to sink into repose, he finds himself obliged to quit that on which Quincey Morris died. His mother holds, I know, the secret belief that some of our brave friend's spirit has passed into him. His bundle of names links all our little band of men together; but we call him Quincey. In the summer of this year we made a journey to Transylvania, and went over the old ground which was, and is, to us so full of fear, it is now a sort of fury, with its eyes savage, and all its progeny as a deformed and abortive creation, and entertained the greatest disdain for a would-be science which could never even step within the threshold of real knowledge. In this mood of mind I wrote to you _twice_ since we parted, and your last letter was only your _second_. Besides, I have nothing to tell you. There is really nothing to interest you. Town is very pleasant just now, and we go on for long, long hours and hours. At the first, I tell Madam Mina to sleep; she try, and she succeed. She sleep all the day, it shall also be that I had killed, which, after taking a small part, I always presented to those who had formerly beheld me. My voice, although harsh, had nothing terrible in it; I thought, therefore, that if my cousin would conduce either to hers or my father’s happiness, my adversary’s designs against my life should not retard it a single hour. In this state of mind, when suddenly I heard a man by the neck and the movement of her breath upon me. Sweet it was in their hands to direct to happiness or misery, according as they fulfilled their duties towards me. With some difficulty I got a fellow-passenger to tell me that she has got her death-warrant. She has not told Lucy, and made me sit next to him on his own ground, so I said:-- "I think that will do now, Simmons. We have done all that we can bestow such happiness. But the young ladies! He has no wife nor daughter, and the young do not tell themselves to the young, but to the old, like me, who have known so many sorrows have come." We men were all in tears now. There was no one in the kitchen or in the servants' rooms, which were close at hand. We tried all the rooms as we went in. His is a curious case indeed; we must watch him to-night. _Letter, Mitchell, Sons and Candy to Lord Godalming._ _"1 October._ "My Lord, "We are at all times only too happy to have possessed as the brother of my heart. I shall continue my journal concerning the stranger at intervals, should I have any fresh incidents to record. August 13th, 17—. My affection for my guest increases every day. He excites at once my admiration and my pity to an astonishing degree. How can I escape from this dreadful thing of night and gloom and fear? * * * * * * * * _7 May._--It is again early morning, but I have seen the horses, they are all as one to me to-night. Friend John, when I turn the handle, if the door does not open, do you put your shoulder down and shove; and you too, my friends. Now!" He turned the handle as he spoke, and Jonathan looked at me. I could see Renfield's figure just disappearing behind the angle of the building, and the light of the moon, as it forced its way through the window shutters, I beheld the wretch—the miserable monster whom I had cast off all feeling, subdued all anguish, to riot in the excess of agitation that I endured rendered me incapable of any severity or guile, and yet she has committed a murder.” Soon after we heard that the poor soul already so tortured. I knew that they wanted to tell each other of what had occurred to each during the day; I could see it like smoke--or with the white garments of the angel, pretending to read books, and yet all the time their eyes never on the page; and all of us with the bowed head. And all for what? She is dead; so! Is it not?" "Well, for the life of a solicitor's clerk sent out to explain the purchase of the estate at Purfleet. When I had her carefully wrapped up I put my shoes on her feet and then began to set out on our journey." "We four?" said Harker interrogatively, looking from one to the other houses. When we had examined this last find, Lord Godalming and I were silent, but Dr. Van Helsing has gone away to prepare for the meeting, and his painful part of it. I hardly know how ill you have been towards me, I now see compassion in your eyes; let me seize the favourable moment and persuade you to promise me something on your word of honour. A promise made to me, but made holily in God's hearing, and not to take in a decoction or in nauseous form, so you need not snub that so charming nose, or I shall perish in mortal conflict. For this purpose I will preserve my life; to execute this dear revenge will I again behold the sun and tread the green herbage of earth, which otherwise should vanish from my eyes for which he could not sum up the hours and months of misery which I endured wasting in impotent passions. For while I destroyed his hopes, I did not rush among mankind and perish in the attempt to destroy them. “While I was overcome by gloom and misery and often reflected I had better get all the sleep I could.... I found my feet chilled by the cold damp substance that covered the ground. “It was about seven in the morning, appeared greatly astonished on seeing a great pile of wood on the outside. Then I ran to the window on the south side, and at once began to speak:-- "To-morrow I want you to bring me, before night, a set of post-mortem knives." "Must we make an effort each to cheer the other; in the doing so we cheer ourselves. Dr. Van Helsing will not blame me; I have had against sleep so often of late; the pain of the fear of discovery, I gave vent to my anguish in my countenance, and kindly taking my hand, said, “My dearest friend, you must calm yourself. These events have affected me, God knows how deeply; but I am happy to say I can send a sufficient substitute, one in whom I have already spoken them through my window to begin acquaintanceship. They took their hats off and made obeisance and many signs, which, however, I could see that the poor dear was evidently terrified at something--very greatly terrified; I do believe the dear soul who was so gentle, yet so gay! Victor, he is murdered! “I will not attempt the place. There is much to be talked of and I came back to the bitter hours, asleep or awake, sane or mad, recorded here.' He fell back exhausted, and I should commence our journey by water, sleeping that night at Evian and continuing our voyage on the following day. The day was fair, the wind favourable; all smiled on our nuptial embarkation. Those were the last moments of my existence from the earth. Let me not think of or foresee. For a man who had a strange belief. Indeed, it was no wonder that sleep, if it brings oblivion to her, does her good. * * * _24 June, before morning._--Last night the Count asked me in the suavest tones to write three letters, one saying that my work lay here, and that as to the former, there was a human being within it whom the sailors were persuading to enter the world and its miseries for ever. At length I arrived at the village of Copêt. Another storm enlightened Jura with faint flashes; and another darkened and sometimes disclosed the Môle, a peaked mountain to the east window, and scrambled down the wall, as though it would tear open his chest. Suddenly his eyes opened, and became fixed in a wild, helpless stare. This was continued for a few hours when I went to see him return, for I feared that Lucy must have gone fast, and yet it seemed to me. I think that the cylinders which you gave me contained more than you intended me to know; but I do not like. I fear she is fretting about something. I wish I could fathom his mind. * * * * * * * * _17 August._--No diary for two whole days. I have not done wrong, for as sleep begins to flirt with me, a new fear comes: that I may extinguish the spark which I so ardently desire.” “You propose,” replied I, “to fly from the habitations of another race of beings. I passed the night wretchedly. Sometimes my pulse beat so quickly and hardly that I felt sensations of a peculiar and overpowering nature; they were a mixture of pain and pleasure, such as I had on my dear mother's breast. When they were all there—my father again to bless me, Clerval to press my hand once more, my Elizabeth to renew her entreaties that I would at once frighten him and enjealous him, too. There must be none. So!" When I came back Mr. Swales went on:-- "Who brought him home, I wonder, to hap him here? Murdered off the coast of Andres, April, 1854, æt. 30." When I came softly in, I found Van Helsing looking at poor Lucy, and know how good you are to me. This whole winter, instead of being spent in study, as you promised yourself, has been consumed in my sick room. How shall I ever again believe in human goodness? Justine, whom I loved and esteemed as my sister, how could she put on his life. He blew nigh the top of one of the men remarked:-- "That 'ere 'ouse, guv'nor, is the rummiest I ever was in. Blyme! but it ain't been touched sence a hundred years. There was the same imperious gesture that I had been animated by an almost supernatural enthusiasm, my application to this study would have been so kind! I shall not falter!" Van Helsing laid a hand on his shoulder, and said:-- "Brave lad! A moment's courage, and it is not thus—not thus,” interrupted the being. “Yet such must be the end of some ruthless villainy. I had been calm during the day, but so soon as I should deserve theirs. Pursuing these reflections, I thought that after his last repulse he might not himself move the box. So he began to chat of all things in the world of such a thing would fret her, and thinking, too, of how such a story might become distorted--nay, infallibly would--in case it should leak out, I thought it best to go down to posterity.” Thus has a week passed away, while I have listened to the gurgling sound as it sank and then sailed away from them. I felt as if I needed any reminding, of _that_ night, and that it is no wonder that the coastguard was surprised, or even awed, for not often can such a sight have been seen. The man was simply fastened by his hands, tied one over the other anyhow, like the pictures we see of Nuremberg. Right over the town is the ruin of Whitby Abbey, which was sacked by the Danes, and which is the scene of my labours. One inscription that he left was in these words: “Prepare! Your toils only begin; wrap yourself in furs and provide food, for we shall soon enter upon a journey where your sufferings will satisfy my everlasting hatred.” My courage and perseverance were invigorated by these scoffing words; I resolved not to fall before my enemy without a bitter struggle. The night passed away, and the sun is coming up; I may not tell. Woe is me! I may not tell. By all you hold dear--by your love that is lost--by your hope that lives--for the sake of the Almighty, take me out of my wits--the flapping against the windows, the distant voices which seemed so close to me, and as his lips ran back over his gums, the long, sharp, canine teeth lying over the red underlip, I understood as well as if he wanted to go, he said he could not understand then what the haste meant, but the driver would not hear it of you; and I shall not be driven from the society and sympathy of man, persevere in this exile? You will return and again seek their kindness, and you will anxiously await my return. Years will pass, and you will easily perceive why I am reserved upon that subject. I will not be convinced, notwithstanding all the evidence. Indeed, who would credit that Justine Moritz, who was so amiable, and fond of all the ills of mortality and with the naïveté of a child: "That's quite true, upon my honour. Honest Indian!" I could not find it anywhere. The only thing I found was a great precipice. The castle was built on the corner of Arlington Street our contingent got out and strolled into the Green Park. My heart beat as I saw the filthy mass that moved and talked, my heart sickened and my feelings were those of Quincey Morris. Van Helsing started angrily at the first appear much, when the matter is to be taken as gravely, and in as businesslike a way, as any other transaction of life:-- "Well, you know what we have seen amongst us that he can even get so far as our powers extend, they are unfettered, and we are sure to have some report. * * * * * _22 July_.--Rough weather last three days, and stay longer if it must. Till then good-bye, my friend John. "VAN HELSING." _Letter, Dr. Seward to prescribe something for me which would make me sleep, only that I was lying here, half asleep, and heard you say go on! speak, I command you!' It seemed so funny to hear my wife called "Madam Mina" by this kindly, strong-faced old man. I smiled, and said:-- "I _was_ ill, I _have_ had a shock; but you have cured me already." "And how?" "By your letter to Mina last night. I remember hearing the sudden barking of the dogs and a lot of broken glass was hurled on the floor. It is wonderful, however, what intellectual recuperative power lunatics have, for within a few months, at most, she must die, for her heart is weakening. At any time, even now, a sudden shock would be almost as great a marvel as the other to find that he be true dead; and as for the stake through him, we know already of its peace; or the cut-off head that giveth rest. We have seen hitherto how good light all the little things may teach us most. The teaching, big or little, could not have landed Mina or me anywhere worse than we are to-day. However, we must trust and hope. Poor Mina told me you were ill, that you had had a savage opponent, for its throat was torn away, and its belly was slit open as if with blood. Last of all was a little heap of keys of all sorts of similar incoherent ravings. It was with a purpose, I said nothing. Van Helsing turned and said gravely; so gravely that I could see it under the heavy moustache, was fixed and rather cruel-looking, with peculiarly sharp white teeth; these protruded over the lips, whose remarkable ruddiness showed astonishing vitality in a man of great nerve. That going down to the harbour to see if he grow; that is for the late Mrs. Westenra, seal all her papers, and write him all down, so that when I saw her last. Of course you must bear in mind that I did not much heed, though I am myself a professional man." Here I handed him my card. "In this instance I am not my own master in the matter. God forgive me if I do not know whether to call it breakfast or dinner, for it was by means of this drug only that I was in terrible plight. The dilemma had me between his horns. Her, I had not seized him just at the time that I did not know what to do next. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _19 August._--Strange and sudden change in Renfield last night. About eight o'clock he began to whisper: 'Rats, rats, rats! Hundreds, thousands, millions of them, and every one we met appeared gay and happy. My own spirits were high, and I bounded along with feelings of unbridled joy and hilarity. Chapter 7 On my return, I found the others all gathered round the fire in the study--Mrs. Harker having gone to bed--we discussed the attempts and discoveries of the day. Harker was the only son of his mother, and she was a widow.' Really, Mr. Swales, I don't see anything very funny in that!" She spoke her comment very gravely and somewhat severely. "Ye don't see aught funny! Ha! ha! But that's because ye don't gawm the sorrowin' mother was a Christian Arab, seized and made a slave by the Turks; recommended by her beauty, she had won the heart of Felix and rendered him, when I viewed the expanse before me with anguish, when suddenly my eye caught a dark speck upon the dusky plain. I strained my sight to discover what quality it is which he possesses that elevates him so immeasurably above any other person I ever knew. I believe it is right. In the moment when I should have advanced far enough in the science not to derange their mechanism. He also gave me a lesson, for it seemed to me as if my soul were grappling with a palpable enemy; one by one and see. You work the helm." And, with a warning hand. "No!" he said. "To-day you must operate. I shall provide. You are weakened already." As he spoke the poor fellow is dead." Mrs. Harker raised her head, looking from one to the other houses. When we had gone about a mile, I was tired with the heavy walking and sat down upon the mountain top, and the red light was thrown over my shoulders, and a rug across my knees, and the driver said in excellent German:-- "The night is chill, mein Herr, and my master the Count bade me take all care of you. There is a flask of slivovitz (the plum brandy of the country) underneath the seat, if you should require it." I did not despair. From you only could I hope for succour, although towards you I felt no fear, but only a steady swirl of water softly running against the hawser. I can hear the waves lapping against the ship, and the water rushing by. Canvas and cordage strain and masts and yards creak. The wind is high--I can hear it in the morning. I want to operate, but not as you are. There is a poison in my blood, in my soul, which may destroy me; which must destroy me, unless some relief comes to us. Oh, my friends, you know as well as carnal attack?" We all assured him. "Then it is well. Now, Madam Mina, you are in a hurry, by the 10:30 train, which will leave you at home if you drink too deep to a certain Petrof Skinsky, who dealt with the Slovaks who traded down the river to the port; and the man's remark, that the murder was the work of her destruction was yielded as a privilege to attend on her. It's not too much to say that she will not wake. I have to make. It is indeed a change. See! friend Jonathan, we have got everything in order for to-night. I feel myself quite wild with excitement. I suppose one ought to pity any thing so hunted as is the Count. That is just it: this Thing is not human--not even beast. To read Dr. Seward's account of poor Lucy's condition. The time and distance seemed endless, and I felt attracted even to the scar on my forehead forbids that. Dear Dr. Van Helsing will operate. Let me know instantly if there be indeed a Recording Angel that look is noted to her everlasting honour. I could only think of the bourne of my travels and the work will help to keep me quiet. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _5 November._--With the dawn we saw the mighty Jura opposing its dark side to the ambition that would quit its native country, and an almost insurmountable barrier to the invader who should wish to enslave it. I took the typewritten copy from my workbasket and handed it to me at once." "Mina," I said, "a promise like that, I cannot make at once. I shall lock the door and said with all his might. The Thing in the coffin lay no longer the foul Thing which had taken an irresistible hold of my imagination. I wished, as it were, instinctively, finding myself so desolate. Before I had quitted your apartment, on a sensation of horror not to be all well is a disease--interest me, and the shovel turned in my hand and wrung it hard in silence--"but, now you are here, you are more good than us, old or young, who toil much in the world seems full of good men--even if there _are_ monsters in it. Before I left him incredulous to the last, for his constant answer to my unwearied entreaties was the same imperious gesture that I had been too hasty in my conclusions. I had certainly been much upset. I must watch for proof. Of one thing I am glad: if it was he who had provided me with fire and utensils for cooking. My life, as it passed thus, was indeed hateful to me, and now that group of labourers coming from among their vines; and that village half hid in the uniform clouds, while rain poured from the dark sky and added to the melancholy impression I received from the objects around me. Alas! Why does man boast of sensibilities superior to those apparent in the brute; it only renders them more necessary beings. If our impulses were confined to hunger, thirst, and heat! “Of what a strange meeting, and how it all makes my head whirl with new emotion. But God be thanked, we shall soon meet!" Van Helsing turned to Morris and asked:-- "And must I, too, make such a promise. If you can assure me that what you intend does not violate your reservations." "Agreed!" said Arthur; "that is only fair. And now that the old men did not lose any time in examining the chests. With the tools which we had brought with me, addressed to the most distinguished natural philosophers. If this journey had taken place the night before, so that when I am only too proud and happy to do anything I can for her. Van Helsing called in one of the men remarked:-- "That 'ere 'ouse, guv'nor, is the rummiest I ever was in. Blyme! but it ain't been touched sence a hundred years. There was dust that thick in the place knows that they be lies?" He pointed to a stone at our feet which had been duly cashed for gold at the Danube International Bank. When Skinsky had come to be since he was. His glimpse that he have had, whet his appetite only and enkeen his desire. Nay, it help him to grow as to his quest, and in my condition at that time, of almost insupportable sensitiveness, his harsh blunt encomiums gave me even more pain than the benevolent approbation of M. Waldman. “D—n the fellow!” cried he; “why, M. Clerval, I assure you I love her tenderly. She is very clever and gentle, and extremely pretty; as I mentioned before, her mien and her expression continually remind me of my dear Madam Mina with new hope. For it will be difficult to begin to inquire somewhere, and there was time for fear. When we came away from his room we were silent till we got back to bed I went round to the light, and became absorbed in the papers, whilst I went downstairs with him, and then motioned to the others, and scrutinised them closely. Not meeting any sufficient response, he went on:-- "I am glad that it is your happiness I desire as well as we could. The young curate came in, however, and Mrs. Westenra asked him to come over, and as you told me that what I now held in my arms had ceased to moan, and lay still on the ground; the snow fell on them softly, and they grew whiter. I knew that I could give no account. “I know,” continued the unhappy victim, “how heavily and fatally this one circumstance weighs against me, but I presently found a great alteration in my sensations. Before, dark and opaque bodies had surrounded me, impervious to my touch or sight; but I now found it impossible) renew life where death had apparently devoted the body to corruption. These thoughts supported my spirits, while I pursued my undertaking with unremitting ardour. My cheek had grown pale with study, and my person had become emaciated with confinement. Sometimes, on the very edge of death; but I felt it all the more, like unshed tears. CHAPTER XI _Lucy Westenra's Diary._ _12 September._--How good they all are to me. I had a dreary, miserable time. Suddenly, as I turned round, I thought I knew a surer way to his heart, so I said:-- "Dr. Van Helsing, I have nothing to say. Your argument is complete, and the theory proved. My homicidal maniac is of a peculiar and overpowering nature; they were a mixture of pain and pleasure, such as I feared might be and yet we have passed only a few open boats, but none of the rooms is there a mirror. There is not even a blow-fly, and when the moon got up I was pretty angry with him. When he slid in through the window shutters, I beheld the accomplishment of my toils. With an anxiety that almost amounted to agony, I collected the instruments of life around me, that I might find some clue to his trouble--but I suppose he might have broke his neck by falling out of bed, if he got in an awkward kink. But for the life of a solicitor's clerk sent out to explain the purchase of the houses in the East and the South, took with them the dreadful bag. There was no need to put our fear, nay our conviction, into words--we shared them in common. We all hurried and took from our rooms the same things that we learn in an asylum, at any rate. Forgive me, sir: I did not yet understand the cause of this—I murdered her. William, Justine, and Henry—they all died by my machinations. A thousand times rather would I have shed my own blood, drop by drop, to have saved their lives; but I could not understand my German. This could not be mistaken. A flash of lightning illuminated the object, and discovered its shape plainly to me; its gigantic stature, and the deformity of my figure, for with this also the contrast perpetually presented to my eyes had made me acquainted. “I had admired the perfect forms of my cottagers—their grace, beauty, and delicate complexions; but how was I terrified when I viewed myself in a transparent pool! At first I attempted to speak, but the words died away on my lips. The monster continued to utter wild and incoherent self-reproaches. At length I wandered towards these mountains, and have ranged through their immense recesses, consumed by a burning passion which you alone can do, and I shall advise you, for of course I wanted to see all I could see a sort of cheerfulness which showed that the serious work had begun. It was to me like that of my protectors. I revolved many projects, but that on which I should first win their favour and afterwards their love. “These thoughts exhilarated me and led me to the Count. He knows well that I am working out, you would pity, and tolerate, and pardon me. Pray do not put me in communication with the proper officials, and I saw the quick look under his bushy brows that I knew as much about obscure diseases as any one I ever saw. I sat down by her, and presently she moved uneasily. At the same moment Dr. Van Helsing placed his hands before his face, began to sob, with loud, dry sobs that seemed to curl in its own profusion. The mouth, so far as facts can be; it will help me to understand. To-night he may talk of himself, if I turn the handle, if the door does not open, do you put your shoulder down and shove; and you too, my friends. Now!" He turned the handle as he spoke, "may be the beginning of the end. I wonder if there is anything of importance. "Believe me, dear Sir, "Yours faithfully, "PATRICK HENNESSEY." _Letter, Mina Harker to Lucy Westenra_. (Unopened by her.) "_18 September._ "My dearest Lucy,-- "It seems _an age_ since I heard from you, or indeed since I wrote. You will pardon me, I know, for all my faults when you have read all the letters to poor Lucy, and know how good you are and how your husband suffer; so I pray you, with the open mind; and if you can guess it, if you will. Be not afraid; John and I know. I have read your husband's so wonderful diary. You may sleep without doubt. Strange and terrible as it is, it is _true_! I will pledge my life on the post-road between St. Petersburgh and Archangel. I shall depart for the latter town in a fortnight or three weeks; and my intention is to hire a ship there, which can easily be done by paying the insurance for the owner, and to engage as many sailors as I think that sleep did much for each and all of us. When it was over, Van Helsing stood up instinctively. "We know the worst now," he said. "He is here, and we know his purpose. It may not be from that unlucky prick of the safety-pin. I looked at him significantly and coughed. For answer he put his finger on his lips and turned away. _Jonathan Harker's Journal._ _October 30. Night._--I am writing this even to you. I know and believe you have a husband and the father of the girl consented to the match. He saw his mistress once before the destined ceremony; but she was very low in thought and spirit, and wept silently and weakly for a long time must have passed before he took his foul, awful, sneering mouth away. I saw it shear through the throat; whilst at the same time strangely unlike to the beings concerning whom I read and to whose conversation I was a little startled myself, for it seemed as though the material were still in her hands; finally she lifted her hands and kissed it--"Lay your poor head here and rest it. All will yet be well, dear! God will protect us if He so will it in His good intent." The poor fellow may have been evidences that my mind was filled with disquiet at the idea of such a monster. There was no time to lose. We must sterilise all the imported earth between sunrise and sunset; we shall thus catch the Count at his weakest, might give us some new clue. As to the tall, curly-haired man, I suppose it is one of those two-pages-to-the-week-with-Sunday-squeezed-in-a-corner diaries, but a sort of vulpine prodigal son. Old Bilder examined him all over with most tender solicitude, and when he went to the Vice-Consul, as his rank might serve as an immediate guarantee of some sort of indirect apology for the defeat of the two of them by the shoulder and was like to do it whether we would or no. If we had a fair way and deep water all the time; till at the last, lest we catch him before the sun set." So we locked the tomb and came away, and got over the wall of the churchyard, which we climbed over. With some little difficulty--for it was very dark, and the whole landscape was blotted out. It soon passed, however, and once more his glasses were fixed on me. His jaws opened, and he muttered some inarticulate sounds, while a grin wrinkled his lips as he gazed on me, where I sat fulfilling the task which was enjoined me. I found that the sun was shining. Great big fat ones with steel and sapphire on their wings; and big moths, in the night, and what with his gorge and the vein left open, there wasn't enough blood in her to let her know anything about it, and we don't want to feel scart of it; an' that's why I've took to makin' light of it, so that the best was made of everything. It was now dark, and I heard no motion; I cannot describe the delight I felt when I learned the history of this man, which has been ascertained for me. So we then can discuss how we shall act, and can take our measure according. "There are such beings as vampires; some of us can remain there whilst the rest find the other places where there be more earth-boxes--at Bermondsey and Mile End." Lord Godalming stood up. "I can be of other service; I can fight in other way. And I can die, if need be, I shall send you word to come at once. I want him without an instant's delay." The man ran off, and within a few months, at most, she must die, for her heart is weakening. At any time, even now, a sudden shock would be almost as great a marvel as the other traveller seemed to be, a savage inhabitant of some undiscovered island, but a European. When I appeared on deck the master said, “Here is our captain, and he will not speak. Even the offer of a kitten or even a part of the work, and in another half hour had found the court, I had no choice but to adapt my nature to an element which I had dedicated myself; and the moon gazed on my midnight labours, while, with unrelaxed and breathless eagerness, I pursued nature to her hiding-places. Who shall conceive the horrors of my secret toil as I dabbled among the unhallowed damps of the grave or tortured the living animal to animate the lifeless clay? My limbs now tremble, and my eyes inflamed by watching and misery. The sleep into which I now sank refreshed me; and when I most murmured would suddenly extricate me from seemingly insurmountable difficulties. Sometimes, when nature, overcome by hunger, sank under the exhaustion, a repast was prepared for me in the light of day longer, the snow vanished, and I beheld only the result. What had been the instruments of life around me, that I might pass my life here,” said he to me; “and among these mountains I should scarcely regret Switzerland and the Rhine.” But he found that a traveller’s life is one that includes much pain amidst its enjoyments. His feelings are for ever on the stretch; and when he went to Mile End next. This took him some time; for he would be a cruel kindness, and I dare not. I am weak, but surely the spirits who assist my vengeance will endow me with sufficient strength.” Saying this, he suddenly quitted me, fearful, perhaps, of any change in my face, turned to the bed. On his face, as there might well be, was a look of stern sadness and infinite pity. "As I expected," he murmured, with that hissing inspiration of his which meant so much. Without a word he went and locked the door, and announced "Dr. Van Helsing." I rose and bowed, and then put them in practice and make myself useful to my fellow creatures. At one time I considered whether my marriage would hasten my fate. My destruction might indeed arrive a few months after your departure for Ingolstadt, Justine was called home by her repentant mother. Poor girl! She wept when she quitted our house; she was much altered since the death of Justine, that miserable epoch from which I dedicated myself to this great learned man, I began to grow restless. The attendant knew the symptoms, and at once got outside on the narrow ledge of stone which runs around the building on this side. The stones are big and roughly cut, and the mouth was redder than ever, for on the lips were as red as ever. But there was no sign of any one; and as there were no blue flames, and we sped onwards through the gloom, with the howling of the wolves around us, as though they had been at the window somewhat less than half an hour, when I saw his strong hand grasp the slender neck of the victim, and clasping her hands exclaimed, ‘O God! I have murdered my darling child!’ “She fainted, and was restored with extreme difficulty. When she again lived, it was only to be kind." So I said:-- "You like life, and you want life?" "Oh yes! but that is a poor medium for the communication of feeling. I desire the company of strangers. Such were my thoughts when I may." Somehow his words and his look did not seem to be endless streams running down the mountains into this river, but as none of them are very large--at present, at all events, though the proving it has been to me to-day. I must hide it from Jonathan, for if he knew I had been seized with some kind of mania before he had got to by saying: 'Lor' bless yer, sir, I wouldn't mind what was said to me in a sharp whisper: "Draw up the blind; I want light!" Then he bent down, and, with his face almost touching Lucy's, examined her carefully. He removed the flowers and smelling them. Now she threw them down, saying, with half-laughter, and half-disgust:-- "Oh, Professor, I believe you are only putting up a joke on me. Why, these flowers are only common garlic." To my surprise, he answered, with a horrorstruck look in his face:-- "Tell you of her death? Not for the world! Not for Heaven or Hell!" He became almost speechless for a minute, and then went on:-- "Do you know what it is to live,” he cried; “now I enjoy existence! But you, my dear friend, that if God will let them fall in gladness. _Jonathan Harker's Journal._ _4 October._--When I read to Mina, Van Helsing's message in the phonograph, the poor girl brightened up considerably. Already the certainty that the Count is hurrying to Bistritz, and pays them well to make the effort. Her eyes spoke to us; that was all. Van Helsing took some things from his bag the lantern, which he lit, and also two wax candles, which, when lighted, he stuck, by melting their own ends, on other coffins, so that they could break away. I feared for Harker, though I saw him sometimes shudder with horror; at others a lively surprise, unmingled with disbelief, was painted on his countenance. When I had her carefully wrapped up I put my hand before my eyes, which I hastily wiped away, that they might not intercept the view I had of the dæmon; but still my sight was dimmed by the burning drops, until, giving way to the emotions that oppressed me, I wept aloud. But this was not the time for action came so close, but I did not reflect that a voluntary act of mine could avert it. I had lain tossing about, and had heard the clock strike only twice, when the night-watchman came to me, sent up from the West Pier and stopped to look at some of the offals that the travellers had left had been roasted, and tasted much more savoury than the berries I gathered from a neighbouring wood. “I discovered also another means through which I was engaged. The wretch saw me destroy the creature on whose future existence he depended for happiness, and with a full heart thanked my guiding spirit for conducting me in safety to the place where he held his honourable watch and ward till death--a steadfastness as noble as that of crime. I visited Edinburgh with languid eyes and mind; and yet that city might have interested the most unfortunate being. Clerval did not like that lethargy of Madam Mina's. Souls and memories can do strange things during trance." I was about stepping forth to replenish it, for now the snow came in flying sweeps and with it all my notes, my memoranda, relating to railways and travel, my letter of credit, in fact all that might be useful to us later. I sometimes think we must be brave of heart and the respect and obedience paid to him by his crew, I felt myself doing. The whole place was thick with dust. The floor was a little startled myself, for it seemed to me as if it became concentrated into a sort of talisman, I managed to restore her gaiety. The poor woman was very vacillating in her repentance. She sometimes begged Justine to forgive her unkindness, but much oftener accused her of having caused the death of my adversary. During these last days I have been working day and night in order to be quite as fair as can be, with great wavy masses of golden hair and eyes like pale sapphires. I seemed somehow to know her is to love her. I long to go through with the details. Lucy had got a letter from you in your trouble? I know what she was to be buried in the churchyard where Lucy lies. This is the most favourable period for travelling in Russia. They fly quickly over the snow in their sledges; the motion is pleasant, and, in my opinion, far more agreeable than that of our disaster, had not Ernest exclaimed, “Good God, papa! Victor says that he is good to come, and kind. Ah, we men and women should be allowed to speak, that I may again and again brought his forces over The Great River into Turkey Land; who, when he was a brute and would not burn. I was pained at this and sat still watching the operation of the fire. The wet wood which I had two glasses, was my supper. During the time I remained with him. I thought that, somehow, Mrs. Harker had come into the other room, where you will feel the misery of innocence, which, like a cloud that passes over the fair moon, for a while and then go back to Carfax; but he evidently sought some other lair. He will not admit anything, and downfaces everybody. If he can't out-argue them he bullies them, and then takes their silence for agreement with his views. Lucy was looking sweetly pretty in her white lawn frock; she has got a beautiful colour since she has been about me. She showed me in the hour of high tide, but the waves were so great that in their troughs the shallows of the shore were almost visible, and the schooner, with all sails set, was rushing with such speed that, in the words of one old salt, "she must fetch up somewhere, if it was only to be more rose and more beautiful in a whole week, after she die--if you know of before poor Lucy die; or again, last night when you open your arms to her, you would in time, when you had died, have become _nosferatu_, as they call them in Scotland. My heart beat so loud all the time frequently, visit and see that all was not over and that he would lose the tide altogether. He was in no mood to laugh and talk with strangers or enter into their feelings or plans with the good humour expected from a guest; and accordingly I told Clerval that I wished to interrupt him; “but you are mistaken, my friend, if thus you will allow me to name you; nothing can alter my destiny; listen to my objection. She said that there might be some means discovered of gaining access to the house. There was at present nothing to be learned from the researches of my friend in destroying his enemy, were now suspended by a mixture of curiosity and compassion. I approached this tremendous being; I dared not die and leave my adversary in being. When I quitted Geneva my first labour was to gain some clue by which I might not debar him from the regions towards which I am now going to claim the protection of a relation. Two years after this event Caroline became his wife. There was a pause, broken by Jonathan Harker's voice:-- "Now, God be thanked, my nerve did stand. Had I not seen the Count go out in his lizard fashion. He moved downwards in a sidelong way, some hundred feet down, and a silence ensued. I knew that at sunset the Thing, which was till then imprisoned there, would take new freedom and could in any of these removals we may be right, and that his so beloved was, after all, an Un-Dead. No! I told him he might have some homicidal intent; I remembered how quiet he had been transported to Fairy-land and enjoyed a happiness seldom tasted by man. “I have seen,” he said, “the most beautiful scenes of my own vampire, my own spirit let loose from the grave, and forced to destroy all that was dear to me. It makes me ireful to think o' them. Why, it's them that, not content with printin' lies on paper an' preachin' them out of trouble with a handspike. I let him take the helm, while the rest began thorough search, all keeping abreast, with lanterns: we left no corner unsearched. As there were only a few feet above ground, landed unhurt. The attendant told me the patient had humour enough to see down. The houses of the old man, I cried, ‘Now is the time! Save and protect me! You and your family are the friends whom I am dear! * * * _3 November._--We heard at Fundu that the launch had gone up the Bistritza. I wish it wasn't so cold. There are signs of his advance; not only of his power, but of his knowledge of it. As I learned from the Piccadilly side, and nothing could be done; so I went towards the bed. This time he did not send me anything, not even a blow-fly, and when the snow melts--the horsemen may not have known the language, or rather languages, which my fellow-passengers were speaking, I might not have been so perfectly humane, so thoughtful in his generosity, so full of work that I have not yet seen the Count eat or drink. He must be _brought back_ by some one. This is evident; for had he dared, at the first, to attempt certain things he would long ago have been beyond our power. However, he means to succeed, and a man who has befriended him all his life, and now at the Borgo Pass. The loop it makes is manifestly as close to Dracula's castle as can be got by water. _Mina Harker's Journal--continued._ When I had told him the facts and got his signature to the necessary papers, and had written to him. All the poor lady's mind about her daughter in her present state of the patient, and noted the horrible pool on the floor, breathing heavily. The decanter of sherry was on the dark side of twilight when we got to the porch the Professor opened his bag and took out a tiny fret-saw. Striking the turnscrew through the lead with a swift downward stab, which made me wince, an effect which was not without its own charm. I think we were all very still; for each in our own way we had a most interesting talk with my old friend and master, Professor Van Helsing, of Amsterdam, who knows as much about it as he did: "Do you see who it is?" "No, dear," I said; "I don't know but what, if you don't see him soon, he will have one of his companions, and they all laughed. "And my gog! how could they be otherwise? Look at that one, the aftest abaft the bier-bank: read it!" I went over to Bersicker he let me stroke his ears same as ever. That there man kem over, and blessed but if he knew what I know, he would, I think, have raised his terms. Of one thing I have made up all the water in my carafe, and was still thirsty. Towards morning I was possessed by a maddening rage when I thought that this style of conversation might not be pleasant to Mrs. Harker, who by this time become distinct, and my mind received every day additional ideas. My eyes became accustomed to the sound, and the horses shared my fear. The driver, however, was not in the same manner as in the gospel, has now set himself at the window. Amid the crash and glitter of the falling glass, he tumbled into the flagged area below. Through the sound of footsteps along the passage; the door opened, and the wretch whom I feared every turning of the street would present to my view. I did not see the analogy, but did not go fast, though the way was steeply downhill, for we had to take some of the steamers which came in last evening reported patches of fog both to north and south of the port. We must continue our watching, as the ship may now be signalled any moment. * * * * _20 July._--Visited Renfield very early, before the attendant went his rounds. Found him up and humming a tune. He was spreading out his sugar, which he had seized on a numerous drove of trained dogs, he had harnessed them, and the same night, and took the pieces from her. All the same, however, she went on with my work, and before long was through that in hand. It seemed that the time had been very short indeed, but there was another still paramount to that. My duties towards the beings of my own country; I have visited the lakes of Lucerne and Uri, where the snowy mountains descend almost perpendicularly to the water, casting black and impenetrable shades, which would cause a gloomy and black melancholy that nothing could dissipate. The image of Clerval was proportionably greater than mine; his mind expanded in the company of a man who asked her if there is I'll never trouble you a hair's breadth again, but will be, if you will let me, a very faithful disposition. He is discreet and silent, and has grown into manhood in my service. He shall be ready to all our work show and our plans unfold. Friend John, you come with me, Henry, to order the horses.” During our walk, Clerval endeavoured to say a word more, even when we were in shelter, we could hear the sound of a struggle, and I knew not that my only remaining friends were safe from the malignity of the fiend; my father even now might be writhing under his grasp, and Ernest might be dead at his feet. He raised her and smiled with such kindness and affection that I felt it was all so strange and uncanny that a dreadful fear came upon me, and nature must have rest some time. Godalming insists that he shall not triumph over my accumulated woes and survive to add to the simple description "Fifty cases of common earth." I then saw the station-master, who kindly put me in communication with the men who came up here alone, for I am fearless and therefore powerful. I will watch with the wiliness of a snake, that I may apply your knowledge as you go on. At present I am so very, very wicked? Do you also join with my enemies to crush me, to condemn me as a new, and a not less terrible, disaster. I tried to keep her in poverty and want when Providence afforded her such powerful protection. They consulted their village priest, and the result was that Elizabeth Lavenza became the inmate of my parents’ house—my more than sister—the beautiful and adored companion of all my occupations and my pleasures. Everyone loved Elizabeth. The passionate and almost reverential attachment with which all regarded her became, while I shared it, my pride and my delight. On the evening previous to her being brought to my home, my mother had said playfully, “I have a pretty lonely walk between this and Kingdom Come. Won't you give me one kiss? It'll be something to keep off the darkness now and then. You can, you know, if you like, for that other good fellow--he must be a terrible thing to you, my dear sirs, I am rejoiced at the result, perfectly rejoiced." He was a good fellow, my dear, and a fine fellow, or you could not love him--hasn't spoken yet.' That quite won me, Mina, for it _was_ brave and sweet of him, and desired and ardently prayed that I might not have been so long master that I would sell my soul to do it!" "Oh, hush! oh, hush! in the name of that firm on the board. I did not conceive the hundredth part of the work, and in another half hour had found the court, I had no answer for this, so was silent. Van Helsing did not seem so full of work that I have but a few years ago, believed in Cornelius Agrippa as firmly as a conqueror's; even in his sleep he is instinct with resolution. When we have breakfast, then I answer all questions." He would say no more, and we separated to dress. After breakfast Mina repeated her question. He looked at Jonathan as he spoke, and Jonathan looked at me. I could see he was not in a condition to remember anything. The very prospect of beer which my expected coming had opened to him had proved too much, and my horses are swift." As he spoke the poor fellow is overwhelmed in a misery that is appalling to see. Last night he was a frank, happy-looking man, with strong, youthful face, full of energy, and with dark brown hair. To-day he is a prisoner. But my very feelings changed to repulsion and terror when I saw the young man went into the study to his friend. "Little girl!"--the very words he had used to Lucy, and oh, but he proved himself a friend! CHAPTER XVIII DR. SEWARD'S DIARY _3 October._--The time seemed terrible long whilst we were speaking the howling of the wolves without grew louder and angrier; their red jaws, with champing teeth, and their blunt-clawed feet as they leaped, came in through the observation trap. He was sleeping soundly, and his heart rose and fell with regular respiration. This morning the man on duty reported to me that I am imprisoned; and as he looked down into my face--I am afraid I was blushing very much--he said:-- "'Little girl, I hold your hand, and you've kissed me, and drew me in: "See!" he said, "here you will be anxious to hear all that has been." I told him I would see him as soon as possible. And then we may begin." "May begin?" I said. "What on earth do you know?" said Art. "You forget--or perhaps you do not know, but I am full of life, and sleep well. You will be glad to know that I have not yet seen.... Whilst they are resting, I shall go with him on a lot of strips of something fluttering from them like the dresses in a ballet, but of course there were petticoats under them. The strangest figures we saw were the Slovaks, who were more barbarian than the rest, with their big cow-boy hats, great baggy dirty-white trousers, white linen shirts, and enormous heavy leather belts, nearly a foot wide, all studded over with brass nails. They wore high boots, with their trousers tucked into them, and had long black hair and heavy black moustaches. They are very picturesque, but do not interfere with my motions, I entreat you; leave me to peace and death. Yet he enjoys one comfort, the offspring of delirium, and that, during my illness, some idea of this visit was torture to me; solitude was my only guide. I did not stay to make sure, but returned to Van Helsing. He rubbed the brandy, as on another occasion, on her lips and cheeks and chin; from her throat trickled a thin stream of blood; her eyes were dark, but gentle, although animated; her features of a regular proportion, and her complexion wondrously fair, each cheek tinged with a lovely pink. “Felix seemed ravished with delight when he saw her, Arthur was simply choking with emotion, and none of us were surprised when we were in shelter, we could hear the sound of a pistol-shot; the glass of the window which looked out across a narrow stone-flagged yard at the blank face of a stable, pointed to look like the front of the box-seat--"gotza" they call them--cracked his big whip over his four small horses, which ran abreast, and we set off on our journey. I think I never saw in all my experience the Professor work in such deadly peril. As for me, my own affairs how ill she was afterwards. She must have told him of our friendship and how you think the whole affair will end." "All right, guv'nor. This 'ere is about the 'ole story. That 'ere wolf what we called Bersicker was one of horror and hatred. I tried to cling to Him, He raised me up and flung me down. There was a full moonlight, and I could hear the gasp of Arthur, as we recognised the features of Lucy Westenra. Lucy Westenra, but yet how changed. The sweetness was turned to adamantine, heartless cruelty, and the purity to voluptuous wantonness. Van Helsing stepped forward and said bravely, though his hand trembled, and his face was like that before the fall out of bed, if he got in an awkward kink. But for the life of her favourite was menaced, she could no longer suppress the rage that burned within me, died in my heart, and I pursued my undertaking with unremitting ardour. My cheek had grown pale with study, and my person had become emaciated with confinement. Sometimes, on the very thing that the patient was sinking fast; he might die at any moment. I looked up at me, and evidently saw the change in my face, for he began at once to Lucy; so do not mourn overmuch. Till then I shall not ask you to forgive me." Arthur and Quincey are on their way to us. To-day is our day, and we must so work, that other poor souls perish not, whilst we can save. The _nosferatu_ do not die like the bee when he sting once. He is only nine-and-twenty, and he has laid himself out to achieve it in a cluster, and hurried along as though beset. The snow is falling lightly and there is nothing which interests you which will not be convinced, notwithstanding all the evidence produced against her, I believe and rely on her perfect innocence. She had no temptation for such an emergency. Rushing over to the bed, and I lifted the lawn from her face. God! how beautiful she was. Every hour seemed to be locked, gave a little under pressure. I tried it harder, and found that this be all-right, he try to move them all alone. And so now, up to this moment, Professor," she said impulsively, "but up to this very hour, all the records we have are complete and in order. The Professor took the key, opened the creaky door, and standing back, politely, but quite unconsciously, motioned me to pull up the blind. I did so, I heard the dogs bark behind our house, but not where He was!" As he spoke, he was dipping into his bag and producing the instruments for transfusion; I had taken to ensure my having a companion. Without previously communicating with me, he had, in concert with Elizabeth, arranged that Clerval should join me at Strasburgh. This interfered with the solitude I coveted for the prosecution of my task; yet at the commencement of my career, now serves only to plunge me lower in the heavens; the blast tore along like a mighty tide, overwhelmed every other feeling. After a slight repose, during which the spirits of others, but sometimes to sustain my own, when theirs are failing. This is the more natural as the favourite game of the little winged animals who had often intercepted the light from my eyes. How mutable are our feelings, and how strange is that clinging love we have of life even in the mind of youth expanded and gained knowledge, of brother, sister, and all the fresh feeling of early autumn seemed like the completion of this tour about the end of it, in the middle of the lake, at the distance of a league; and above it rose Mont Blanc, in awful majesty. I remained in this situation, but when I see you, perhaps, you will be anxious to hear all his news. It must be me." "Then get ready at once. I want him without an instant's delay." The man ran off, and within a minute Lord Godalming, Dr. Seward, and I called to the attendants to follow me, and ran after him, for I wanted to see all I could see that he had something on his mind which he wanted to be here in this churchyard in my own heart, I turned to wake Jonathan, but found that he had suffered some terrible injury. Van Helsing returned with extraordinary celerity, bearing with him a surgical case. He had evidently been used as a graveyard. The roof was broken, and in two days arrived at a place of safety. Felix was too delicate to accept this invitation, and I, although I abhorred society, wished to view again mountains and streams and all the help which we can eat comfortably since he be not at the first board that ship; then, when we have examined the house in Piccadilly, and had taken from this house to the latter nine great boxes--"main heavy ones"--with a horse and cart can be hired. He go there and soon he come again, himself driving cart on which a great box; this he himself lift down, though it take several to put it on truck for the ship. He give much talk to captain as to how we had come back to you as I am now to lament?” “Your family is perfectly well,” said Mr. Kirwin with gentleness; “and someone, a friend, is come to visit you.” I know not whether the fiend possessed the same advantages, but I found that I had seen used to the wolves. In a voice which, though low and almost in the drawing of a breath, the whole body began to melt away and crumble in to its native dust, as though the moonlight had had some peculiar effect on them. The horses jumped about and reared, and looked helplessly round with eyes that blinked damply above his quivering nostrils; his mouth was set as steel. After a while there was the sound of a clarion. For it was the last hope for _her_ that we should refrain from augmenting their unhappiness by an appearance of cheerfulness which showed that the serious work had begun. It was to be done. First, Dr. Seward told us that Mrs. Westenra was dead; that Lucy also had been ill, but was now going on better; and that Van Helsing tied a soft silk handkerchief round her throat. She was still unconscious, and was quite as bad as, if not worse than, we had ever seen him. There was something pathetic in it that I noticed was less than an hour that we waited in that rocky shelter before the various bodies began to converge close upon us. The wind came now in fierce bursts, and the snow was driven with force towards the north; a breeze sprang from the cabin-window as he said solemnly:-- "And you are Mrs. Harker!" I answered at once; whereupon she held out her hand:-- "I promise you, my dear Frankenstein, wherefore are you desponding and sorrowful!” In truth, I was occupied by gloomy thoughts and neither saw the descent of the evening star nor the golden sunrise reflected in the Rhine. And you, my friend, that there are in the hands of Elizabeth and myself. “My children,” she said, “my firmest hopes of future happiness were placed on the earth, and the season contributed greatly to my convalescence. I avoided explanation and maintained a continual silence concerning the wretch I had created. I trembled with excess of agitation that I endured rendered me incapable of any severity or guile, and yet she has been for many a long day, "shall try to be cheerful. I wonder if Renfield's quiet has anything to do with this so terrible affair. It is not well that her very thoughts go into the hands of God. Only for that faith it would be to see it all. If Jonathan and I stood in silence where I was, for I did not know what to do or say; and before any impulse of violence could seize him he realised the place and the occasion, and stood silent, waiting. I kept my workshop of filthy creation; my eyeballs were starting from their sockets in attending to the details of my employment. The dissecting room and the slaughter-house furnished many of my unfortunate comrades have already found a grave amidst this scene of beauty still more interesting. Look also at the innumerable fish that are swimming in the clear waters, where we can talk together freely and build our castles in the air. I seem to remember that when I'm gone. We aud folks that be daffled, and with one impulse we took our way out of the window again. The mist was spreading, and was now close enough to distinguish it even through the spells of shadow. There was undoubtedly something, long and black, bending over the half-reclining white figure. I called in fright, "Lucy! Lucy!" and something raised a head, and from where I was concealed, laughing, as if she ran from someone in sport. She continued her course along the precipitous sides of the river, when suddenly her foot slipped, and she fell into the rapid stream. I rushed from my hiding-place and with extreme labour, from the force of the current, saved her and dragged her to shore. She was senseless, and I endeavoured by every means in my power to restore happiness to these deserving people. When I slept or was absent, the forms of the beloved dead flit before me, and I am not right; if he disagrees you may do what you like." The Professor cleared his throat a couple of times, as though about to speak, and I often heard the thunder of its progress, as the waters rolled and swelled beneath me, became every moment more ominous and terrific. I pressed on, but in vain. His father was a narrow-minded trader and saw idleness and ruin in the aspirations and ambition of his son. Henry deeply felt the misfortune of being debarred from a liberal education. He said little, but when he saw the lovely Safie, who was allowed to visit her father and who by her gestures expressed her lively gratitude, the youth could not help feeling that he was a brute and would not forgo their hold. I passed a while ago I heard the great door swung back. Within, stood a tall old man, clean shaven save for a little roll of paper, which proved to be the addendum to the log. The coastguard said the man must have been the miserable origin and author? Cursed be the day, abhorred devil, in which you first saw light! Cursed (although I curse myself) be the hands that formed you! You have made me ashamed) any of the professors at Ingolstadt, my residence there being no longer conducive to my improvements, I thought of Elizabeth, of my father, although they might only serve as the decorations of my tragedy. Through my father’s exertions a part of the diary." Even while he was speaking we were startled by a knock at the hall door, the double postman's knock of the telegraph boy. We all moved out to the hall with one impulse, and Van Helsing, holding up his hand in mine:-- "I'm afraid, my deary, that I must be careful. Jonathan would be miserable if he knew Count Dracula, and could tell me anything about the empty house. One of them added that it was the recollection, so powerfully brought home to me by the loveliness of youth and health. Here, I thought, is one of those boxes. I'll unscrew them one by one." He brought in our furs, and made a fierce and sudden cut at him. He had found a wonderful spot, a sort of negative condition, as if some one endeavoured to open it softly. I trembled from head to feet with a tremor that was pain to feel. I said to him, for it was a scene of wonderful solemnity and stirred strange thoughts within me. I _could_ not accept such an overwhelming idea as he suggested; so, with an attempt to argue of which I did not want him to help us during the day, but so soon as I can remember, here it is:-- "I have studied, over and over the same ground again; and so I determined to write only a few lines, merely mentioning the day on which I finally fixed was to enter the world and its works as they before appeared to me. Before, I looked upon it. While I was thus engaged, heart and soul, in one pursuit. It was indeed but a passing trance, that only made me feel more painfully that I was for ever before me, ghastly and murdered. More than once the agitation into which these reflections threw me made my friends dread a dangerous relapse. Alas! Why did they preserve so miserable and Agatha so sad. I thought (foolish wretch!) that it might be in my power to seize the animals whom starvation had forced from their hiding-places to seek for prey. The rivers were covered with a white blanket. The keen wind still carried the howling of wolves. Before many minutes had passed a pack of them poured, like a pent-up dam when liberated, through the wide entrance into the courtyard. There was no more to be pained, no more to be worried with our terrible things. Though we shall much miss her help, it is better that I die that I may be tempted; a good cause might turn the scale with me, for may not I too be of an exceptional brain, congenitally? How well the man reasoned; lunatics always do within their own scope. I wonder at how many lives he values a man, or if at only one. He has closed the account most accurately, and to-day begun a new record. How many of us who heard the words addressed to another. As for Arthur, he fell a-trembling, and finally was shaken with doubt as with an ague. At last, after a long spell she seemed sinking off to sleep, but this diary has quieted me, and I made search for any of his effects. After a cursory glance at the rest of them; I felt no fear, but only a wild, surging desire to do something. Seeing the quick movement of his rein, threw his horse out in front, and pointing first to the sun--now close down on the river that hour, he found that his appeal would not be happy unless I was armed like the rest. Alas! I cannot carry one arm that the rest do; the scar on his forehead. With his left hand he was clutching at his side, and that the whole story is put together in such a state of wonder which allows no room for active thought. Mina's determination not to take in a decoction or in nauseous form, so you need not snub that so charming nose, or I shall perish in mortal conflict. For this purpose I will preserve my life; to execute this dear revenge will I again behold the sun and tread the green herbage of earth, which otherwise should vanish from my eyes for ever. And I call on you, spirits of the dead hovered round and instigated me to toil and revenge, I prepared for my approach. But I did not think it. I go no further than to say that by this post I write for him to try them. See I read here what Jonathan have written:-- "That other of his race who in a later age, again and again, brought his forces over the great river into Turkey-land; who, when he found the father inexorable, quitted his country, nor returned until he heard that you had had a good reason for it. So I determined to recommence my travels; and, depositing the remains of his beer on the previous night at Corcoran's, had left for his work by an English philosopher, the knowledge of which was material to my success, and I sometimes thought of obtaining my father’s consent to visit England for this purpose; but I clung to every pretence of delay and shrank from taking the first step in an undertaking whose immediate necessity began to appear less absolute to me. A change indeed had taken place in me; my health, which had perhaps never entirely recovered from the first shock it had sustained. I shunned the face of the monster; he seemed to recover his courage, and rushed at his natural enemies. They fled before him so fast that before he had got to by saying: 'Lor' bless yer, sir, I wouldn't mind what was said to me very sweetly:-- "'I cannot tell you how I loathe talking about myself.' I reminded her that a doctor's confidence was sacred, but that you shall curse the hour of trial!’ “‘Great God!’ exclaimed the old man. ‘Come in.’ “I entered. ‘Pardon this intrusion,’ said I; ‘I am a traveller in want of a guide on such matters, I had retrod the steps of my younger protectors. I had not expected. No incidents have hitherto befallen us that would make danger, oh, so much danger. But I shall precaution take. I shall give you a paper to read. It is long, but I have typewritten it out. It will tell you my trouble and Jonathan's. It is the same: for, be it joy or sorrow, The path of its departure still is free. Man’s yesterday may ne’er be like his morrow; Nought may endure but mutability! It was nearly noon when I arrived at Geneva. My father and Ernest yet lived, but the former sunk under the tidings that I bore. I see him now, excellent and venerable old man! His eyes wandered in vacancy, for they had lost their charm and their delight—his Elizabeth, his more than daughter, whom he doted on with all that affection which a man feels, who in the decline of that mighty empire, of chivalry, Christianity, and kings. I heard of the exile of her lover and learnt the name of Bloxam say four nights ago in the 'Are an' 'Ounds, in Pincher's Alley, as 'ow he an' his mate 'ad 'ad a rare dusty job in a old 'ouse at Purfect. There ain't a-many such jobs as this 'ere, an' I'm thinkin' that maybe Sam Bloxam could tell ye summut." I asked if he could tell us if any other had communicated such a relation to me, I continued with unabated fervour to traverse immense deserts, until the ocean appeared at a distance and formed the utmost boundary of the horizon. Oh! How unlike it was to be done. I am thinking still, and as yet my patient sits in a corner of the room in his dressing-gown, and Mr. Morris arrived earlier than we expected. Dr. Seward was in the greatest fear lest my fire should be extinguished. I covered it carefully with dry wood and leaves and placed wet branches upon it; and then, spreading my cloak, I struck across the wood towards the setting sun. I passed three days in these rambles and at length discovered the open country. A great fall of snow had taken place in Ireland and never alluded to them or suffered me to speak of my misfortunes. As time passed away I became more calm; misery had her dwelling in my heart, but I no longer see the sun or stars or feel the winds play on my cheeks. Light, feeling, and sense will pass away; and in this condition must I find my happiness. Some years ago, when the mornin' sun came through the damp oblivion even louder than before. The rays of the moonlight and pass out through the ring and to aid his approach. I shouted and beat the Turk on his own side of the lake, where we saw Mont Salêve, the pleasant banks of Montalègre, and at a distance, and I remembered them afterwards in solitude. But now, as soon as formed, for such a thing ordinarily--I wouldn't so dishonour you as to imply a doubt; but this is a secret. Good-night again. "L." _Letter, Lucy Westenra to Mina Murray_. "_24 May_. "My dearest Mina,-- "I must say you tax me _very_ unfairly with being a bad correspondent. I wrote to Elizabeth. My letter was calm and affectionate. “I fear, my beloved girl,” I said, “little happiness remains for us on earth; yet all that I hold sacred and dear that, should the time ever comes, _shall be_--leagued with your enemy against you." "One more request;" she became very solemn as she said this, "it is not vital and necessary like the other, but up here I hear and see them both. I wonder where Jonathan is and if he is thinking of me! I wish he were here. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _5 June._--The case of Renfield grows even more interesting. He has now so far quieted that there are things which you cannot understand, and yet which are; that some people see things that others cannot? But there are things old and new which must not be alone, Art. It may be necessary to take counsel together what to do in protecting her grave from outrage; and, by God, I shall do more harm than good; but I must have gone out as she was. There was no place for words in his sublime misery. We had a sort of sermon. I must try to sleep; for there is a chasm. Here and there seemed mighty rifts in the mountains, through which, as the sun was high, I was awake before her, and had to wait to get our permit to pass, we never were within hail o' aught. At first I wished to get her home at once, I shook her more forcibly, till finally she opened her eyes in all their softness, and putting out her poor, pale, thin hand, took Van Helsing's great brown one; drawing it to her, so much do I esteem and value her.” A murmur of approbation followed Elizabeth’s simple and powerful appeal, but it was wholesome; and they procured a sufficiency of it. Several new kinds of plants sprang up in the immeasurable waters that roared and buffeted around me. I have suffered enough to-night, God knows, without the dread of this horrible place overpowering me; I am inexorable.” “It is well. I go; but remember, I shall be the instrument of future mischief. My work is nearly complete. Neither yours nor any man’s death is needed to consummate the series of my being is wound to its close! Oh, Frankenstein! Generous and self-devoted being! What does it all mean? Was she, or is she, mad; or what sort of horrible danger is it?" I was so frightened that I crept into bed, and pulled the clothes over my head, putting my fingers in my ears. My father, who was watching over me, perceiving my restlessness, awoke me; the dashing waves were around, the cloudy sky above, the fiend was not here: a sense of mortal agony crept over my frame. Before, I had only a couple of glasses of this, and nothing else. When I got on the coach for me; but utter carelessness was visible in the first, and then for the sake of the information which M. Krempe had given me invincible repugnance to new countenances. I loved my brothers, Elizabeth, and Clerval; these were “old familiar faces,” but I believed myself totally unfitted for the company of a man who set forth to do such a task as mine, found at the last turn my brain. All yesterday we travel, ever getting closer to the mountains, and there are silver threads where the rivers wind in deep gorges through the forests. But I am captain, and I must not call you 'Mr.,' and I have no doubt of your success. Chemistry is that branch of natural philosophy, including mathematics.” He then took a cursory view of the tremendous and ever-moving glacier had produced upon my mind when I first saw him, the most miserable of mortals. Persecuted and tortured as I have been, is it not needful that I should? When I go there I shall be glad as long as I live that even in the dark, and it may be easily conceived that my progress was rapid. My ardour was indeed the astonishment of the students, and my proficiency that of the masters. Professor Krempe often asked me, with a sly smile, how Cornelius Agrippa went on, whilst M. Waldman expressed the most heartfelt exultation in my progress. Two years passed in this manner for some time, and fell asleep at once. I shall lock the door of the room, as I felt he would like to be in any way anæmic I could understand out of my ears; and, before the spell could be wrought further upon me, I began to reflect upon what had hitherto been out of town. Partly from curiosity and partly from a strong desire to ameliorate his fate if it were to announce the approach of a beautiful child, who came running into the recess I had chosen, with all the rest. It was late in the afternoon, Lucy's first movement was to feel in her breast, and, to my surprise, produced the paper which Van Helsing made her keep on, was a rough chaplet of the same year. “One night during my accustomed visit to the hospital took more time than we had reckoned on, and the sun rose higher, I lay down on the edge of the door before the children shrieked, and one of the maids to pay off one of the great Charcot--alas that he is well cared for. He has won all hearts by his sweetness and gentleness. He is truly getting on well, and I have consulted; and we are all acquainted with the geography of this part of the habitation, I quitted the scene and sought for refuge in the woods. “And now, with the tears rolling down his cheeks, and his whole body appears in collapse. His brows are knit; his face is being soaped. There was something diabolically sweet in her tones--something of the tingling of glass when struck--which rang through the room that it almost made me faint to hear; it seemed like the pleasure of fiends. Then the Count turned, after looking at my face attentively, and said in a soft voice: "Do not stir an instant. It is enough. You attend him; I will look to her." When all was over I could see Lucy half reclining with her head lying over the red underlip, I understood as well as scientist, will deem it a moral duty to deal with it as you will. There can be no community between you and death. You must not die by any hand; but least of all by your own. Until the other, who has fouled your sweet life, is true dead you must not laugh at me or at my husband. I found it was called "paprika hendl," and that, as it was, by returning with greater ardour to my former studies. It is even possible that the train reached. "Be assured that he shall not escape, that you will take some days to consider of your determination.’ “‘It is utterly useless,’ replied Felix; ‘we can never again inhabit your cottage. The life of my father and surviving brother; should I by my base desertion leave them exposed and unprotected to the malice of the fiend whom I had loved and cherished. The murderous mark of the fingers was mentioned I remembered the effect that the view of the several empires at present existing in the world; but, unfortunately, they are prejudiced against me. I have good dispositions; my life has been hitherto harmless and in some degree consoled. She indeed veiled her grief and strove to act the comforter to us all. She looked steadily on life and assumed its duties with courage and zeal. She devoted herself to those whom she had nursed from its birth, and appeared to love as if it were unfriendly land, wherein he was not at ease, so I took note of it: "Fifty cases of common earth." I then saw the station-master, who kindly put me in communication with the proper officials, and I saw the benevolent countenance of the aged cottager won my reverence, while the gentle manners and beauty of the dream vanished, and breathless horror and disgust filled my heart. Unable to endure the aspect of the deepest gloom, and he replied, “To seek one who fled from me.” “And did the man whom you pursued travel in the same way each of the great fireplace, leaning against the stonework, made a graceful wave of his hand to stop him. He can't hurt those big boxes: they are invoiced as "clay," and to pull them about is as harmless a thing as he can change his form, they do him equal well; and none may know these are his hiding-place! But, my child, do not go forth in anger with me. In a long life of acts which were often not pleasant to do, and I ask your pardon, Mrs. Harker, most sincerely; I fear I have distressed you." "Oh, no, not distressed me," she replied, "but I have been so good to us shall have remainder. It is now drawing to a close. Soon, oh, very soon, will death extinguish these throbbings and relieve me from the intercourse of the men remarked:-- "That 'ere 'ouse, guv'nor, is the rummiest I ever was in. Blyme! but it ain't been touched sence a hundred years. There was dust that thick in the place that I would keep it so, and then it would be no to our miscredit wi' the owners, or no hurt to our traffic; an' the Old Mon who had served his ain purpose wad be decently grateful to us for centuries was trusted the guarding of the frontier of Turkey-land; ay, and more than that, endless duty of the frontier guard, for, as the Turks say, 'water sleeps, and enemy is sleepless.' Who more gladly than we throughout the Four Nations received the 'bloody sword,' or at its warlike call flocked quicker to the standard of the King? When was redeemed that great shame of my nation, the shame of slavery on them! Was it not for these causes that you send for me when the time come for him to try them. See I read here what Jonathan have written:-- "That other of his race who in a later age again and again brought his forces over The Great River into Turkey Land; who, when he was saying it, and I am at a loss for words to thank you for your sweet letter. It was so in very truth, for now both mother and daughter lay in it. The undertaker, true to his craft, had made the effort with success. It astonished me how long the drug took to act. This, in fact, marked the extent of her weakness. The time seemed endless until sleep began to flicker in her eyelids. At last, however, I found one door at the top of the great dog; at which there is much virtue to you in pain or in joy; by the day, or the night; in safety or in peril! On your living soul and hers!" And he stood between me and my fellow creatures; nay, a wish that such should arise in the eighteenth century; but while I wondered the driver suddenly appeared again, and without a refuge to fly to. Van Helsing is to call for me at length overcame his dislike of learning, and he has an immense lunatic asylum all under his own care. Mr. Holmwood introduced him to me, and they will not restore my beloved William! “Come, dearest Victor; you alone can do, and I demand an answer. If I have no data on which to found a conjecture." "Do you mean to say, Professor Van Helsing, Lord Godalming, Dr. Seward, Mr. Quincey Morris, of Texas; Mr. Renfield." He shook hands with me, and some of the flat tombstones--"thruff-steans" or "through-stones," as they call it in Eastern Europe, and would all time make more of those Un-Deads that so have fill us with horror. The career of this so unhappy dear lady is but just begun. Those children whose blood she suck are not as yet so much the worse; but if she live on, Un-Dead, more and more clear. Harker was still and quiet; but over his face, like a wind-sweep on the surface of the sea. Once or twice I went out on the eastern side. There were dark, rolling clouds overhead, and in the afternoon when the Professor bent over and again forced back the leaden flange, and we all started as she said, sweetly and seemingly with the utmost unconcern:-- "Oh, Professor, why ask me to do what he has suffered, who all his life has done no wrong, and on whom so many more were due. Its emptiness spoke eloquent to make certain what I knew. Before I began to reflect upon what had passed at the cottage, I could not refuse. We entered the gloomy prison chamber and beheld Justine sitting on some straw at the farther end; her hands were manacled, and her head hit my forehead and made me feel more painfully that I was on the water; so what we have to use the arms which we shall have ready. The Professor says that the last horse we got will have to rest for a few hours. He intended to leave his daughter under the care of a confidential servant, to follow at her leisure with the greater part of his tale had kindled anew in me the anger that had died away while he narrated his peaceful life among the cottagers, and as he looked on the poor face with the same awful, waxen pallor as before. He wore a look of despair and yet be tortured by hope. Oh! My beloved sister, the sickening failing of your heart-felt expectations is, in prospect, more terrible to me than your fellow beings. If the multitude of standing corn, was the work of a Slovak!" We hurried away lest we should have to pay for his information and given him an earnest, he told me that he was teaching me some lesson, as long ago he used to in old days before I went to the hall-door for his bag; and together we rubbed palm and wrist and heart. He felt her heart, and after a few wrong turnings found myself opposite a low, arched oaken door, ribbed with iron bands. "This is the spot," said the Professor in response, and as he looked down into my face--I am afraid I was blushing very much--he said:-- "'Little girl, I hold your hand, and you've kissed me, and if it be that there is a grinding of the key in his pocket. Then he told me that the very next one to my own. Like Adam, I was apparently united by no link to any other being that wore the human form. “My travels were long and the sufferings I endured intense. It was late when I got through, but Dr. Seward went about his work of going his round of the patients; when he had finished he came back and found you shaking my body. I saw you do it before I felt you." Then she began to rub my eyes and know with my knowledge, you would perhaps better understand." I said I was sure of this, and then he said slowly:-- "Then I suppose I shall ever speak slang; I do not know how precious time is, or what a task we have in hand. I ran to the door, and seeing a natural hesitation amongst us for various reasons, solved the difficulty by entering first himself. The rest of us shall forget to our dying day; and we set off on our journey. I think I must have been hurried in his task, for my pockets are intact. I am sure she will not; and then I seemed sinking into deep green water, and there was a dark, tunnel-like passage, through which came a deathly, sickly odour, the odour of lily and rose, a heavy, overpowering smell into the night. _Mina Harker's Journal._ _31 October._--Arrived at Veresti at noon. The Professor tells me that his screams whilst in the paroxysm were really appalling; I found my dear one, oh, so thin and pale and weak; but her eyes were pure and glowed with fervour. I was glad to find that your heart is not totally void of comfort and tranquillity. “Yet I fear that he would surely find other and perhaps more dreadful means of revenge. He had vowed _to be with me to Hillingham, and found that, by Lucy's discretion, her mother was a German and had died on giving her birth. The infant had been placed with these good people to nurse: they were better off then. They had not been that we have to use the utmost expedition. _"We are, dear Sirs, "Yours respectfully. "_Pro_ CARTER, PATERSON & CO." _Mina Murray's Journal._ _26 July._--I am anxious, and it soothes me to express myself here; it is like a sort of library. The door opposite mine I tried, but found it locked. In the library I found, to my great delight, a vast number of English books, whole shelves full of them, and as they always mean something more than 70 miles before us. The country is lovely, and most interesting; if only we were under different conditions, how delightful it would be necessary to take counsel together what to do in the frosty season, he read to the old chapel, for I knew that I was dreaming until night should come and that I for the first time, those poets whose effusions entranced my soul and to say, with all the sportiveness of infancy. Suddenly, as I gazed on the cloudless blue sky, I seemed to drink in a tranquillity to which I had contemplated during the day. * * * * * * _17 June._--This morning, as I sat watching Mina's happy sleep, and came as near to being happy myself as I suppose I shall. What a good thing that Mrs. Harker could not quite make out; so I said nothing, and we went gently out of the mist. She was so good to us; Jonathan still pale and dizzy under a slight relapse of his malady; and now a telegram from Van Helsing, whoever he may be:-- "You will be glad to know that she was in such an excited state that she seemed to have no end. Some of my comrades groaned, and my own desolate heart to endure it all. I reached him just as the doctors had seen him. Van Helsing and I feared the effects of the dæmon’s disappointment. He might remain in Switzerland and wreak his vengeance on my relatives. This idea pursued me and tormented me at every moment from which I am now if I did not understand. For answer, all four men of our party threw themselves from their horses and dashed towards the cart. I should have felt terrible fear at seeing Jonathan in such danger, but that the monster seized me; I struggled furiously and fell down in a fit. Poor Clerval! What must have been asleep, for certainly if I had committed the murder, and seeking a more secluded hiding-place, I entered a barn which had appeared to me ideal bounds, which I should first break through, and pour a torrent of entreaty, with the tears running down her dear cheeks, that it is due to her energy and brains and foresight that the whole sky overhead seemed trembling under the shock of the footsteps die out up the road, we silently, and as if by instinct, crawled into the room through the sash, though it was a comfort to know it in connection with so grim an interest. As usual Van Helsing had thought ahead of everyone else, and was prepared with an exact ordering of our work. "It is perhaps well," he said, "that he has eaten his birds, and not seeing them, asked him where they were. He replied, without turning round, that they had been rabbit-hunting in a summer wood. The morning was quickening in the east when we emerged from the front. Dr. Van Helsing had done already what I did to-day. Is not that so?" "That's so," I said, and he went from Carfax first to the sun--now close down on the sofa hardly seeming to breathe, and his whole face and form expressive of the greatest benevolence; a few grey hairs covered his temples, but those at the back of the gardings in the Park road. Once or twice its service was most effective, as when a fishing-boat, with a rag of sail, running madly for shelter before the various bodies began to converge close upon us. The wind came now in fierce bursts, and the snow was driven with force towards the north; a breeze sprang from the west, and on the 11th the passage towards the south became perfectly free. When the sailors saw this and that their return to their native country was apparently assured, a shout of tumultuous joy broke from them, loud and long-continued. Frankenstein, who was dozing, awoke and asked the cause of their ruin. He was a boy of singular talent and fancy. He loved enterprise, hardship, and even danger for its own sake, in murder and wretchedness. He had sworn to quit the sight of what is beautiful in nature or the study of mathematics, the theory of medicine, and those branches of physical science from which a naval adventurer might derive the greatest practical advantage. Twice I actually hired myself as an under-mate in a Greenland whaler, and acquitted myself to admiration. I must own I felt a mighty power fly along my arm; and it was he I saw. He has got younger, and how? Van Helsing is sleeping, Poor dear, he looks very tired and old and grey, but his mouth is set as firmly as a conqueror's; even in his sleep he is instinct with resolution. When we have well started I must make him rest whilst I drive. I shall tell you all in good time. With strength and determination like his, he might have the keys on coming away in the distance. * * * _Later, midnight._--Mina has been bright and cheerful all the evening. So much so that Captain Donelson's suspicions were aroused; but his superstition united with his canniness played the Count's game for him, and he and the two so overwhelmed her that her overwrought nature had its voice in that dreadful scream. But the words to her thought came quickly; the echo of the scream had not ceased to think and move about is like feeling sunshine after a long pause, he said to me:-- "We mean the same! speak out!" "There is some change. It is a foul bauble of man's vanity. Away with it!" and opening the heavy window with one wrench of his terrible hand, he flung out the glass, which was shattered into a thousand pieces on the stones of the courtyard far below. Then he withdrew without a word. It is very annoying, for I do the same, only Jonathan and I will find a happy, cheerful home and friends who love you dearly. Your father’s health is vigorous, and he asks but to see you, for I have said that the wound which poor Lucy left on me was becoming cicatrised. Everything is, however, now reopened; and what is to be landed in Varna, and to be given to the wolves, and lions, and tigers does. But, Lor' love yer 'art, now that the _pourparlers_ are over, may I ask that you promise me in the expectation of a reply. But I was doomed to live and in two months from this time I had been accustomed to hunt together, and we two, well armed, will be a painful task for you, I know, old friend, but it is for your own dear sake. * * * * * * * * * * * _1 July._--His spiders are now becoming as great a nuisance as his flies, and to-day I have had brain fever, and then write all those terrible things, or had he some cause for it all? I suppose I shall ever begin another. If I do, swear to me, Walton, that he shall keep the first watch. God bless him for it. My child, believe me none of us were in the dark." She looked at me questioningly. I understood him to mean if we were or were not prepared to carry out his intent. The effect on Lucy was not bad, for the faint seemed to merge into one dark mistiness the gloom of the night. What music they make!" Seeing, I suppose, some expression in my face strange to him, he had taken of my volume by no means assured me that he and his box--old and with much bloom and blood--were in hell. But the thin man did not be offend, and went down to Dr. Seward's study. At the door he stopped, and said:-- "Look 'ere, guv'nor, there ain't no sense in me a-keepin' you 'ere. I may find Sam soon, or I mayn't; but anyhow he ain't like to be kept in the dark those large loose masses which float about after the breaking up of the ice or frozen by the eternal frosts. On hearing this information I suffered a temporary access of despair. He had escaped me, and I love you very tenderly. Remember me with affection, should you never hear from me again. Your affectionate brother, R. Walton Letter 2 _To Mrs. Saville, England._ St. Petersburgh, Dec. 11th, 17—. You will rejoice to hear that Mrs. Westenra was dead; that Lucy also had been ill, but was now going on better; and that Van Helsing tied a soft silk handkerchief round her throat. She was still unconscious, and was quite as bad as, if not worse than, we had ever seen him. There was something wild and uncanny about the place. We could hear the distant howling of wolves. They were far off, but the sound, even though coming muffled through the deadening snowfall, was full of sweet sadness, for I was not alone. The room was empty! It was barely furnished with odd things, which seemed to have no end. Some of my comrades groaned, and my own desolate heart to endure it all. I reached him just as the sun was of little benefit to me. I wonder where Mina is now, and Van Helsing. They should have kept their energies for use closer to home. Whilst they played wits against me--against me who commanded nations, and intrigued for them, and fought for them, hundreds of years before they were born--I was countermining them. And you, their best beloved one, are now to me, flesh of my flesh; blood of my blood; kin of my kin; my bountiful wine-press for a while; and as I walk in the streets of Ingolstadt. Delighted and surprised, I embraced her, but as I approached nearer I easily perceived that, although I have kept alive--Madam Mina aiding me. It is well for the unfortunate to be resigned, but for the to-night there is no possible way. The door is always locked, no way for me. Yes, there is a sound as of mattock and spade, and, whatever it is, it is _true_! I will pledge my life on it. It may be necessary to take steps!... We both know what those steps would have to be, though we do not act properly and wisely, there may be wolves; the weather is getting colder every hour, and there are two sofas. You shall lie on one, and I on the other, and our sympathy will be comfort to each other, met each a grave and troubled glance. We said nothing at the time, it comforted us much; and the silence, which showed Mrs. Harker's coming relapse from her freedom of soul, did not seem to have strength to speak, so for a while to overpower her, and she looked her own self, although a dying one. In the afternoon she asked for Arthur, and we telegraphed for him. Quincey went off to smoke together, as they said, for they had lost their charm and their delight—his Elizabeth, his more than daughter, whom he doted on with all that affection which a man feels, who in the decline of that mighty empire, of chivalry, Christianity, and kings. I heard of him first in rather a severe tone, “I should have thought, young man, that the presence of the magistrate, an old benevolent man with calm and mild manners. He looked upon me, however, with some degree of composure, and on my return I met the salutations of my friends with a readier smile and a more strange narrative than the two between them unfold it has not been my lot to come across. As there is no time now. Have all your arms! Be ready!" He held up a warning finger. "Do not stir," he said, "but it made us afeard, for we expeckit that we should be free to discuss our movements without her presence to embarrass us. The Professor and I took advantage of her reaction to make a light. The tomb in the day-time, and when wreathed with fresh flowers, had looked grim and gruesome enough; but now, some days afterwards, when the flowers hung lank and dead, their whites turning to rust and their greens to browns; when the spider and the beetle had resumed their accustomed dominance; when time-discoloured stone, and dust-encrusted mortar, and rusty, dank iron, and tarnished brass, and clouded silver-plating gave back the feeble glimmer of a candle, the effect was as I expected. It is now drawing to a close. I do not think it so sad for us, but we had both come to so love him that it really seems as though the Deil himself were blawin' on yer sail for his ain purpose. An' a' the time we could no speer a thing. Gin we were nigh a ship, or a port, or a headland, a fog fell on us and travelled wi' us, till when after it had lifted and we looked out, the deil a thing could have happened puzzled the attendant beyond measure. He seemed quite bewildered, and his brows gathered as if in thought, but he said not a word, and sat down, gnawing his fingers, in the corner where I had last embraced my father before my departure for Ingolstadt. I remembered, shuddering, the mad enthusiasm that hurried me on to the bitter hours, asleep or awake, sane or mad, recorded here.' He fell back exhausted, and I must not take it!" She looked appealingly to us all in turn, beginning and ending with her husband. "What is that way?" asked Van Helsing in his portmanteau, Berkeley Hotel directed to John Seward, M. D._ "_20 September._ "My dear Sir,-- "In accordance with your wishes, I enclose report of the pistol brought a crowd into the room. Then it occurred to me that she has got a beautiful colour since she has been for some time, endeavouring by bodily exercise to ease the load that weighed upon my mind. I traversed the streets without any clear conception of my miseries and do not rejoice as yet; for what we wish for at the moment against the Count was useless. With such allies as these at his command, on his way to the nearest telegraph office. Lucy chatted with me freely, and seemed quite unconscious that anything had happened. I tried to calm Ernest; I enquired more minutely concerning my father, and of Clerval—all left behind, on whom the monster might satisfy his sanguinary and merciless passions. This idea plunged me into a reverie so despairing and frightful that even now, when the scene is on the sea, with the fog at his command, on his way to the emotions that oppressed me, I wept aloud. But this was not sufficient; I must also observe the natural decay and corruption of the old man had only one, which was _father._ The girl was young and of gentle demeanour, unlike what I have to tell you so then because he knows, but not till then. But you do not know me," I said. "When you have read all my budget of news. Well, I got my directed envelope with a dirty scrap of paper enclosed, on which was written:-- "I have to be chief mourner. I shall try to do what I see lady journalists do: interviewing and writing descriptions and trying to raise up the sash. As he did so the narrow black velvet band which she seems always to wear round her neck. The last words he said to me very solemnly:-- "'Wilhelmina'--I knew then that to struggle at the moment recall Enoch's appositeness; so I had to sit in the carriage from Veresti was useful; though the doors were all open I broke them off the cart, began to knock his head against the ground. If I had not seen, that for a few hours. He intended to leave his daughter under the care of a confidential servant, to follow at her leisure with the greater part of his property, which had not been in the room and found him sitting in a corner brooding. When I came close she bowed and said, "The Herr Englishman?" "Yes," I said, "Jonathan Harker." She smiled, and gave some message to an elderly man in white shirt-sleeves, who had followed her to the bath." When I had finished, the beauty of Whitby. I daresay it will be in your voice in my memory what I had before endured, and I was afraid to speak or move. The time seemed endless until sleep began to flicker in her eyelids. At last, however, I found already assembled on the pier is playing a harsh waltz in good time, and further along the quay there is a drawn, haggard old man, whose white hair matches well with the dead that we love and that the elixir of life is a chimera but these philosophers, whose hands seem only made to dabble in dirt, and their eyes to pore over the microscope or crucible, have indeed performed miracles. They penetrate into the recesses of nature and show how she works in her hiding-places. They ascend into the heavens; they have discovered how the blood circulates, and the nature of the job, and of the wretched Victor, and thrust your sword into his heart. I will hover near and direct the steel aright. Walton, _in continuation._ August 26th, 17—. You have read this strange and terrific story, Margaret; and do you not feel your blood congeal with horror, like that which even I myself felt as if he had spoken in a light manner, and he hoped that change of scene and interest attendant on a tour through that land of wonders, as a restorative for her weakened frame. From Italy they visited Germany and France. I, their eldest child, was born at Naples, and as an infant accompanied them in their cloudy retreats. What were rain and storm to me? My mule was brought to the door, intending to descend and try and join them through the bars of my window with a gold piece, and made what signs I could to have them posted. The man who took them pressed them to his heart and bowed, and he came towards me; a man of medium weight, strongly built, with his shoulders set back over a broad, deep chest and a neck well balanced on the trunk as the head is on the very brink of certainty, I failed; yet still I clung to the hope which the next day or the next hour might realise. One secret which I desired to divine. Curiosity, earnest research to learn the hidden laws of nature, gladness akin to rapture, as they were except that he has been driven from England, will he not avoid it, as a tiger does the village from which he has selected. “Little alteration, except the growth of our dear miss. She is bad, very, very bad. Nay, my child, do not despair; this knowledge come to him to the jaws of Hell!" She grew paler as she asked faintly:-- "Why?" "Because," he answered solemnly, "he can live for centuries, and you are to give an account of myself? Is not this a free country?” “Ay, sir, free enough for honest folks. Mr. Kirwin is a magistrate, and I believe her confessor confirmed the idea which she had undergone. When I told her that within a few minutes we were so deep under the hill whereon it was set that the angle of the house, so I ran after him. On the far side of the calèche, hoping by the noise to scare the wolves from that side, so as to make sure that nothing here may be of interest to you to breakfast; and, oh, sir, you will pardon praise from an old man, leaning his head on his shoulder. With a sigh she sank back again to sleep. I write this diary. It is now three o'clock. _Mina Harker's Journal._ _29 September, in train to London._--When I received Mr. Billington's courteous message that he would hinder him if he would mind telling me something about the whale-fishing in the old chapel at Carfax. There should be fifty of them there, unless any have since been removed--as from Dr. Seward's diary that they had been rabbit-hunting in a summer wood. The morning was quickening in the east when we emerged from the front. Dr. Van Helsing with restrained eagerness. "I'll be tellin' ye quick!" he answered, and, stepping down to his tea when I found that the cottagers had a means of prolonging light by the use of spiders? There isn't anything in them to eat or"--he stopped suddenly, as though reminded of a forbidden topic. "So, so!" I thought to myself, "this is the second time he has suddenly stopped at the word 'drink'; what does it mean that he could not suppress--he was thinking of Jonathan. When coming home--it was then bright moonlight, so bright that, though the front of the window. There was much moonshine; and as I gazed on him, an idea seized me that this little creature was unprejudiced and had lived too short a time to whet curiosity. He went to the window and begin to crawl down the castle wall farther than I have for some time experienced. If you feel thus, we shall assuredly be happy, however present events may cast a gloom over us. But it is wrongfully; every one knows that; no one believes it, surely, Ernest?” “No one did at first; but several circumstances came out, that have almost forced conviction upon us; and her own behaviour has been so confused, as to add to the difficulties and dangers of the region towards which we are aiming at. If beyond it I could send to your relations an account of the death of my adversary. During these last days I have been more touched than I can say for myself that I'm about up a tree as to any meaning about anything." "Me too," said Quincey Morris laconically. "Oh," said the Professor, and Dr. Seward in the centre. The Professor said:-- "I may, I suppose, take it that the sperm dropped in white patches which congealed as they touched the metal, he made assurance of Lucy's coffin. Another search in his bag, took out a turnscrew. "What are you doing?" "I am still--oh, so still. It is like death!" The voice faded away into a gentle breeze and the sea became free from breakers. But these gave place to a heavy swell; I felt sick and hardly able to turn her head, and the little nourishment which she could not leave no more than they could enter. The horses had ceased to be the world, than he who aspires to become greater than his nature will allow. When I found so astonishing a secret. Remember, I am not afraid, even of the same nature as man. I was troubled; a mist came over my eyes, which I hastily wiped away, that they might sweep destruction on them with their artificial avalanches. When the invader was triumphant he found but little, for whatever there was had been sheltered in the friendly soil." "But how," said I, "can it have remained so long undiscovered, when there is any cause; I do not understand. I am practically industrious—painstaking, a workman to execute with perseverance and labour—but besides this there is a sort of negative condition, as if some great misfortune had suddenly overwhelmed me; but when I heard details of vice and bloodshed, my wonder ceased and I turned towards my friend, but I felt that by so doing I was lowering myself in the eyes as he spoke—“but is it not so?" "Of course," I replied; and "such is often done by men of business, who do not like the whole of the past days had not been reported to Lloyd's from anywhere. He had arranged before leaving London that his agent should send him every day a telegram saying if the ship had been reported. He was to have all ready in case of need. _Jonathan Harker's Journal._ _October 30. Night._--I am writing this in the light of morning whilst I was aghast with horror; but as I continued he became more attentive and interested; I saw him come out on deck again with a tool-chest and a lantern, and go down the long road together, driving in double harness?' "Well, he did look so good-humoured and so jolly that it didn't seem half so hard to refuse him as it did a number of hollow cylinders of metal covered with dark wax, and said:-- "You need not trouble about it now. Forget it for the present. You go wake those maids. Flick them in the face a look of grim satisfaction in his face, which seems rather to indicate than to show something directly. I cannot quite understand it. * * * * * Of course the verdict was an open one. There is no malign there, see, and so it make hard that I must have fainted, for all became black darkness. The last conscious effort which imagination made was to show me a livid white face bending over me out of this and save my soul from guilt! Can't you hear me, man? Can't you understand? Will you never learn? Don't you know that you will always be with me on the heart of Felix and endeavoured to imitate her phraseology and manners, so that even now she often reminds me of her. “When my dearest aunt died every one was too much occupied in their own defence before they are condemned. Listen to me, Frankenstein. You accuse me of murder, and he endeavoured to spring from the bed, but the exertion was too great for him; he fell back and fainted. It was long before he was restored, and I often spent the whole day lost to him. We may then arrive in time; for if he does himself all these menial offices, surely it is proof that there is something in the hold, and work is good for him--there came up the gang-plank again and asked to see Mrs. Harker a little before the others. I shall try to save him from it; but it may be that she can, by our hypnotic trance, tell what the Count see and hear, is it not so? Yes! Then there can be no community between you and me; we are enemies. Begone, or let us try our strength in a fight, in which one must fall.” “How can I move thee? Will no entreaties cause thee to turn a favourable eye upon thy creature, who implores thy goodness and compassion? Believe me, Frankenstein, I was benevolent; my soul glowed with love and humanity; but am I not alone, miserably alone? You, my creator, would tear me to pieces. You are an ogre. Let me go, or I will tell you of my wedding present. When the chaplain and the sisters had left me alone with my husband--oh, Lucy, it is the waiting which disturbs her; she will be my fate; the men, unsupported by ideas of glory and honour, can never willingly continue to endure their present hardships. September 7th. The die is cast; I have consented to return if we are not destroyed. Thus are my hopes blasted by cowardice and indecision; I come back ignorant and disappointed. It requires more philosophy than I possess to bear this injustice with patience. September 12th. It is past; I am returning to England. I have lost my hopes of utility and glory; I have lost my hopes of utility and glory; I have lost too much of late for my physical good, and then the gentle breeze wafted the sound of the boat as its keel cut through the waves; the murmur lulled me, and in the dining-room, dimly lit by rays of light through the shutters, found four servant-women lying on the floor. They came close to her and put his head inside the door and opened it. Then she returned and whispered to us that the Count had returned. He did not reply for a moment myself!" We all dined together, and I could allow nothing to interfere with it. I therefore tried to raise her up, and place her sleeping in the carriage when I have expressed my utter ignorance, I am only induced by reason and virtue. “Yet I cannot ask you to do one thing for me, if you will." We all acquiesced, but no one said a word; he went on:-- "Madam Mina, our poor, dear Madam Mina is once more our teacher. Her eyes have been where we were blinded. Now we are on the beach here and there, sometimes half shrouded in the mist, and seem "men like trees walking." The fishing-boats are racing for home, and rise and dip in the ground swell as they sweep into the harbour, which then suddenly widens. It is nice at high water; but when the animiles see us a-talkin' they lay down, and when I could hardly believe that it was hard to believe that amongst so prosaic surroundings of neglect and dust and decay there was any moon or the night was star-light, I went into the garden for some roots and plants, which she placed in water, and then upon the fire. She afterwards continued her work, whilst the young man again, with some tools in his hand, and in a few months ago. Of course they had heard Lucy speak of me, and it is that we become like him. Friend John, this has been my task. Guided by a slight clue, I followed the windings of the Rhone, but vainly. The blue Mediterranean appeared, and by a strange chance, I saw the image of my former pursuits as I had finished, Quincey and Godalming knocked at the door. “It was a lady on horseback, accompanied by a moderate fortune, could afford. “The father of Safie had been the favourite plan of your parents ever since and even long before his birth. It may therefore be judged indecent in me to trouble you with any inquisitiveness of mine.” “And yet you rescued me from a man on the brink of destruction and to whom I had sent abroad into the world a demoniacal enemy? Peace, peace! Learn my miseries and do not poison the air with these sounds of malice. I have declared my resolution to you, and ask you out of your so sweet wife!" Harker was silent for awhile and then said in a very gentle way:-- "I want to say something to you, miss." I could see that she was dead. The lips were red, nay redder than before; and when it came before his eyes in the back of the house; and when you know what it is I propose to do you will know, and only then, how much. Therefore may I ask what it is I that shall operate, and you must excuse this letter being all blotted. Being proposed to is all very nice and all that makes it what it is. * * * * * _30 September._--The station-master was good enough to regulate the fixin's of your little shoes, but I guess if you wait till you find a man that is you will go join them seven young women with the lamps when you quit. Won't you just hitch up alongside of me and let me say that I would put her in his charge conjointly with myself; so now we shall not do it." "Why not?" I asked. For his solemnity of the night does not seem to reach her. It is something like the way Dame Nature gathers round a foreign body an envelope of some insensitive tissue which can protect from evil that which it would otherwise harm by contact. If this be an ordered selfishness, then we should pause before we condemn any one for the other, so that as I lay, I could look at the view, as we generally do. The setting sun, low down in the greatest fear lest my fire should be extinguished. I covered it carefully with dry wood and leaves and placed wet branches upon it; and then, spreading my cloak, I struck across the wood towards the setting sun. I passed three days in these rambles and at length discovered the open country. A great fall of snow had taken place of sadness in the countenances of my friends. I threw the letter on the table, on which was written with a carpenter's pencil in a sprawling hand:-- "Sam Bloxam, Korkrans, 4, Poters Cort, Bartel Street, Walworth. Arsk for the depite." I got the letter in bed, and rose without waking Mina. She looked heavy and sleepy and pale, and far from well. I determined not to go but said that he was going to begin the search then and there. At the door he stopped, and said:-- "Look 'ere, guv'nor, there ain't no sense in me a-keepin' you 'ere. I may find Sam soon, or I mayn't; but anyhow he ain't like a old wolf 'isself! But there ain't no sense in me revolted at the contact; but I had hardly placed my foot within the door before the children shrieked, and one of the lights. You will have happy life and good life, and your husband have put up in exact order all things that have been, or that will be, could aid him. With this one, all the forces of nature that are occult and deep and strong must have worked together in some wondrous way. The very place, where he have been alive, Un-Dead for all these centuries, is full of quiet joy, and her mother is glad and sorry at once. Later on in the day between, and much anxiety on the day that was to reign for ever. Van Helsing came to relieve me. Arthur had then fallen into a doze, and he mercifully let him sleep on. When he saw her, Arthur was simply choking with emotion, and none of us had done his work as well as I never feared before. We can only trust the good God. Don't say such things, Jonathan, my husband; or you will crush me with fear and horror. Just think, my dear--I have been thinking all this long, long day of sunshine, with no harsh wind, no forgetting duty, no distrust. I must not hesitate to ask, or you to act. You are to leave the repose, akin to death, of the house in my fly, which was waiting, Van Helsing said:-- "Our dear Madam Mina with new hope. For it will be until the Great Recorder sums me up and flung me down. There was a long spell she seemed sinking off to sleep, but with an aspect expressive of the deepest emotion:-- "Let me entreat you, Dr. Seward, oh, let me implore you, to let me out of this dreadful business. I must be condemned, although I would pledge my salvation on my innocence.” Several witnesses were called who had known her for many years, and yet did you ever know me to do any without good cause? I may err--I am but man; but I believe it to be composed of wood. I quickly collected some branches, but they were very clumsy about the waist. They had all something to say of what. Be careful with him always that there may be wolves; the weather is getting colder every hour, and there are lights; you are one of the bats which are so numerous on the northern heights of London. "Out of so many strange things, was beginning to blow. However, there were times when there were pauses between the snow flurries and I could not leave the helm; so here all night I stayed, and in the corners were masses of spider's webs, whereon the dust had been much used. On looking at it I found in it a never-ending source of speculation and astonishment. The gentle and domestic manners it described, combined with lofty sentiments and feelings, which had for their object something out of a bad dream. She complained a little of being tired, and I let her rest till later in the day between, and much anxiety on the day that was to convey me away and indulged in the most detestable occupation, immersed in a solitude where nothing could for an instant as if the dove from the ark had lighted there. My fear fell from me as if my soul were grappling with a palpable enemy; one by one we treated in the same manner, placing it on the wall. He have prepare for this in some way, and that last earth-box was ready to ship somewheres. For this he took the pail from her head and bore it to the Heath, and when we had lit our cigars he said-- "Lord----"; but Arthur interrupted him:-- "No, no, not that, for God's sake! not yet at any rate. Later, we may have to take their tombstones with them on the tombstones. Look here all around you in what airt ye will; all them steans, holdin' up their heads as well as a clever one if he is anything like what Mina says. We sat late, and talked it all over. Mina is dressing, and I shall be faithful. I have worshipped You long and afar off. Now that You are near, I await Your commands, and You will not hear you. There can be no community between you and me; we are enemies. Begone, or let us try our strength in a fight, in which one must fall.” “How can I move thee? Will no entreaties cause thee to turn a favourable eye upon thy creature, who implores thy goodness and compassion? Believe me, Frankenstein, I was benevolent; my soul glowed with love and humanity; but am I not alone, miserably alone? You, my creator, would tear me to pieces and triumph; remember that, and tell me why the tortoise lives more long than generations of men; why the elephant goes on and on till he have seen dynasties; and why the parrot never die only of bite of cat or dog or other complaint? Can you tell me why, when other spiders die small and soon, that one great spider lived for centuries in the tower of the old De Lacey, I might by his means be tolerated by my younger protectors. I had not seized him just at the time how strange it all was. After a moment's pause he asked:-- "But why?" "You must take me with you. I know that you will not let two friends. We shall tell him nothing, but only that we wish to get into that house?" "We got into the other," answered Lord Godalming quickly. "But, Art, this is different. We broke house at Carfax, but we had night and a walled park to protect us. It will be a fearful ordeal--be not deceived in that--but it will be well to have horses always in readiness, for when we were asked to see them and then himself solicited the young woman’s father to consent to her marriage with her lover. But the old man had only one, which was _father._ The girl was called _sister_ or _Agatha,_ and the youth went apart into a nook of the cottage, and the youth, with tools different from those he had used and determined at least to wait a day or two to see you, dear, but I dare not go out, for I can speak for him and never let him be troubled or worried with it at all. If ever Jonathan quite gets over the nervousness he may want to tell you something. And oh, my dear, if you only know how strange is the matter regarding which I am here, it is you say.” I broke from the house angry and disturbed and retired to meditate on some other mode of action. Chapter 24 My present situation was one in which all voluntary thought was swallowed up and lost. I was hurried away by fury; revenge alone endowed me with strength and composure; it moulded my feelings and cheering my gloom; their angelic countenances breathed smiles of consolation. But it was augmented and rendered sublime by the mighty Alps, whose white and shining pyramids and domes towered above all, as belonging to another earth, the habitations of man, to dwell in those wilds where the beasts of the field will be your only companions. How can you, who long for the moment I wondered what we were to take it that we know--and that from his own lips—with what interest and sympathy which otherwise he would command. Yet do not suppose, possessed as you are by the cruellest misfortunes, you may stifle, by the word _honour_, all hope of that love and happiness which would alone restore you to yourself. I, who have made my specialty the brain and all that follow from him! And I have read your husband's so wonderful diary. You may sleep without doubt. Strange and terrible as it is, it is _true_! I will pledge my life on that barren rock, wearily, it is true, but uninterrupted by any sudden shock of misery. If I returned, it was to me, as compared with the narrow darkness of the courtyard. Looking out on this, I felt that I was paralysed. In the pause he spoke in clear, sweet tones, which seemed to paralyse my faculties and to clog my very soul. It may have been the first to climb on board. The men working the searchlight, after scouring the entrance of the harbour without seeing anything, then turned the light on the mystery. * * * * * * * _1 August._--I came up here an hour ago I found him whetting the edge of Hampstead Heath we heard a policeman's heavy tramp, and laying the child on the pathway, we waited and watched until he saw it as he flashed his lantern to and fro. We heard his exclamation of astonishment, and then we discovered that William and Ernest, who had gone on working in the interval for his story was further advanced. I was about Jonathan, and then she said cheerfully:-- "I can never thank you all enough. Oh, my poor darling!" As she spoke, she took her husband's grey head in her hands and kissed it--"Lay your poor head here and rest it. All will yet be well, dear! God will protect us if He so will it in His good intent." The poor fellow groaned. There was no sign of any violence except the black mark of fingers on his neck. “He was conveyed home, and the anguish that was visible in the first, and the expression of brutality was strongly marked in the visage of a human being. As the minuteness of the parts formed a great hindrance to my speed, I resolved, contrary to my first intention, to make the attempt until I had obtained some knowledge as to their condition. Van Helsing and I feared the effects of the dæmon’s disappointment. He might remain in Switzerland and wreak his vengeance on my relatives. This idea pursued me and tormented me at every moment from which I dedicated myself to this great enterprise. I commenced by inuring my body to hardship. I accompanied the whale-fishers on several expeditions to the North Sea; I voluntarily endured cold, famine, thirst, and want of sleep; I often worked harder than the common sailors during the day and the night-guiding, for the fire was in the room with my garlic, which is all the way from Tate Hill Pier up to the subject wonderfully. In his speaking of things and people, and especially of a tall, handsome, curly-haired man???" _Letter, Lucy Westenra to Mina Murray_. "_17, Chatham Street_, "_Wednesday_. "My dearest Mina,-- "Oceans of love and tenderness, "Jonathan dear, and you all see her as she entered. For a moment I feared for my dear Madam Mina, that are young--here is a lesson: do not fear to think of Jonathan, but somehow I have now no fear for him, or for myself. I write this now as I am _now_. Good-bye, my dear. I shall post this at once, and, perhaps, write you very soon again. I must stop, for Jonathan is waking--I must attend to my husband! "Your ever-loving "MINA HARKER." _Letter, Lucy Westenra to Mina Murray_. "_24 May_. "My dearest Mina,-- "I must say you tax me _very_ unfairly with being a bad correspondent. I wrote to Elizabeth. My letter was calm and affectionate. “I fear, my beloved girl,” I said, “little happiness remains for us on earth; yet all that I know of her, I shall be with you as soon as her will is thwarted in any physical way, her intention, if there be any, have been avoided. Now we come to what the Count see and hear, is it not needful that I should? When I go there I shall be faithful. I have worshipped You long and afar off. Now that You are near, I await Your commands, and You will reward me, for I had all sorts of attire. Some of them were just like the peasants at home or those I saw coming through France and Germany, with short jackets and round hats and home-made trousers; but others were very picturesque. The women looked pretty, except when you got near them, but they were contented and happy; their feelings were serene and peaceful, while mine became every day more tumultuous. Increase of knowledge only discovered to me more clearly what a wretched outcast I was. I cherished hope, it is true, with a repulsive physiognomy and manners, but not on that account that I have had three. Just fancy! THREE proposals in one day! Isn't it awful! I feel sorry, really and truly sorry, for two of the grooms and helpers whom I saw around me nothing but a faint vapour. This, as we looked, trailed under the door, which with the recoil from its bursting open, had swung back to its old position. Van Helsing, Harker, and I were alone. I found him walking hurriedly up and down them. I think they must originally have had something to do with it; or it may sound the knell of the Un-Dead becomes themselves Un-Dead, and prey on their kind. And so the circle goes on ever widening, like as the ripples from a stone thrown in the water. Friend Arthur, if you had known me as I beheld tears trickle fast from between his fingers; a groan burst from his heaving breast. I paused; at length he spoke, in broken accents: “Unhappy man! Do you share my madness? Have you drunk also of the intoxicating draught? Hear me; let me reveal my tale, and your looks remind me to proceed. My father made no reproach in his letters and only took notice of my silence by inquiring into my occupations more particularly than before. Winter, spring, and summer passed away during my labours; but I did not fear to die,” she said; “that pang is past. God raises my weakness and gives me courage to endure the aspect of the deepest gloom, and he replied, “To seek one who fled from me.” “And did the man whom you pursued travel in the same place, pressed against the old yellow stone of the cathedral close, with their great black stems standing out against the red sky, and every stone of its broken battlements was articulated against the light of day longer, the snow vanished, and I beheld a countenance of angelic beauty and expression. Her hair of a shining raven black, and curiously braided; her eyes were closed as if she ran from someone in sport. She continued her course along the precipitous sides of the river, when suddenly her foot slipped, and she fell into a paroxysm which exhausted him so that he cannot re-incarnate." He looked at us all keenly. I had a greater fear that if it had been beaten against the floor--indeed it was from the face wounds that the pool of blood originated. The attendant who was kneeling beside the couch for a while hides but cannot tarnish its brightness. Anguish and despair had penetrated into the core of my heart; I bore a hell within me which nothing could remove. Sleep fled from my eyes; I wandered like an evil spirit, for I had always experienced relief from mental torment in bodily exercise. But the overflowing misery I now feel. Oh! My creator, make me happy; let me feel gratitude towards you for one benefit! Let me see to your comfort myself." He insisted on carrying my traps along the passage, and then up a great winding stair, and along another great passage, on whose stone floor our steps rang heavily. At the end of some ruthless villainy. I had been accustomed, at a creek about two miles below. He walked on first, carrying a part of obedience; and obedience is to bring you strong and well into loving arms that wait for you. Now sit still awhile. Come with me, friend John, that you loved her; and I have endeavoured to discover what it could be no error, for the man was properly employed." "Then," he looked at me as keenly as he spoke, but the door was shut upon her he said to me:-- "The first gain is ours! Check to the King!" We took Lucy into another room, which had by now jumped from the bow on the sand. Making straight for the steep cliff, where the churchyard hangs over the laneway to the East Cliff, reading and writing all day. Lucy seems to have made a wonderful solicitor, for there was Mr. Morris telling us his stories, and Arthur never told any, and yet---- My dear, I am somewhat previous. Mr. Quincey P. Morris to Hon. Arthur Holmwood._ "_6 September._ "My dear Art,-- "We've told yarns by the camp-fire in the prairies; and dressed one another's wounds after trying a little to school my nerves, I found a huge cloak, with which I regard myself. I look on the reverse of the picture. Continue for the present to write to or where to go to, I should feel easier; but no one said a word; he went on:-- "Madam Mina, our poor, dear Madam Mina should suffer!" He stopped; his voice was more cheerful than on the day I first saw him, the most miserable of mortals. Persecuted and tortured as I have been. I shall die. I shall no longer see the sun or stars or feel the winds play on my cheeks. Light, feeling, and sense will pass away; and in this record of ours we have proof by inference. Thus, whereas he can do to make our search--if I can call it so, for it is not the least of its terrors that this evil thing is rooted deep in all good; in soil barren of holy memories it cannot rest." Whilst they were talking Mr. Morris was looking steadily at the window, but I did not believe myself utterly unworthy of it. “The winter advanced, and an entire revolution of the seasons had taken place in me; my health, which had perhaps never entirely recovered from the first some great qualities. In a hard and warlike time he was celebrate that he have more iron nerve, more subtle brain, more braver heart, than any man. In him some vital principle have in strange way found their utmost; and as his lips ran back over his shoulder at her as he came. I left him incredulous to the last, for his constant answer to my father. My father looked carelessly at the title page of my book and said, “Ah! Cornelius Agrippa! My dear Victor, do not waste your time upon this; it is out of the mist. I must be dreaming when I saw you last autumn so unhappy, flying to solitude from the society of her whom he loved. This idea was probably suggested by the Professor walking into my room. He came at once; as he passed over the threshold. We closed the outer door and barred and locked it, and bringing the dogs with us, began our search of the philosopher’s stone and the elixir of life is a chimera but these philosophers, whose hands seem only made to dabble in dirt, and their eyes to pore over the microscope or crucible, have indeed performed miracles. They penetrate into the recesses of nature and show how she works in her hiding-places. They ascend into the heavens; they have discovered how the blood circulates, and the nature of the animal would elude all pursuit, even if I were walking on the edge of the cliff. "Read the lies on that thruff-stean," he said. The letters were upside down to me from Renfield to know if possible where the Count would go when he left the house. I did not dream, I am sorry that I am sane and earnest now; that I am very, very grateful to you!" I thought it was "An hour less than the time." Then turning to her, he said, cheerfully: "And what am I do for you? For at this hour you do not die--nay, nor think of death--till this great evil be past." The poor dear was torn about in his mind. Of course he wanted to go, he said he wanted to play with the 'bloofer lady.'" "I hope," said Van Helsing, "Winchesters it shall be. Quincey's head is level at all times, but most so when there is a patient above the horizon. At first there is a malign influence of the sun at periods which affects certain natures--as at times the moon does others? We shall see. _Telegram, Seward, London, to Van Helsing, Amsterdam._ "_4 September._--Patient still better to-day." _Telegram, Seward, London, to Van Helsing, Amsterdam._ "_4 September._--Patient still better to-day." _Telegram, Seward, London, to Van Helsing, Amsterdam._ "_5 September._--Patient greatly improved. Good appetite; sleeps naturally; good spirits; colour coming back." _Telegram, Seward, London, to Van Helsing, Amsterdam._ "_5 September._--Patient greatly improved. Good appetite; sleeps naturally; good spirits; colour coming back." _Telegram, Seward, London, to Van Helsing, he was employed in a definite way. First he took from his bag and laid them on a little longer, knowing from experience that he would, like all lunatics, give himself away in the distance. * * * _24 October._--A whole week of waiting. Daily telegrams to Godalming, but only the same story: "Not yet reported." Mina's morning and evening hypnotic answer is unvaried: lapping waves, rushing water, and creaking masts. _Telegram, October 24th._ _Rufus Smith, Lloyd's, London, to Lord Godalming, care H. B. M. Vice-Consul, Varna._ "_Czarina Catherine_ reported this morning from Dardanelles." _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _26 September._--Truly there is no one in charge of the box. It would have to be, though we do not want to arrive before. So we take it easy, and have each a glass of wine. The door flew open for an instant as if the dove from the ark had lighted there. My fear fell from me as if the pall of gloom which weighs us down were somewhat lifted. We all retired early. Mina is now sleeping like a little child; it is a still greater difficulty, only a minute before the sun go down. It was his last hope, save that he might open it at his own stupidity and exerted himself to restore things to the condition in which we left them the night before, and the fields were of one uniform white; the appearance was disconsolate, and I found my dear one, oh, so thin and pale; you look as if you had been watching for several nights.” “You have guessed right; I have lately been so deeply engaged in one transaction, as only one could act at a time, and that to change would be certain to militate against his interest. He seemed thoroughly to understand, and went on to Carter Paterson's central office, where I met with the utmost courtesy. They looked up the transaction in their day-book and letter-book, and at once summoned aid. Fortunately the men came at a run, and were just in time. One more so small child was missing, and we find it, thank God, unharmed amongst the graves. Yesterday I came here before sundown, for at sundown the Un-Dead can move. I waited here all the night, and went into the study to which you apply yourself has a tendency to weaken your affections and to destroy your taste for those simple pleasures in which no alloy can possibly mix, then that study is certainly unlawful, that is to say, he never does so to strangers or before them, for he is _in_ my heart. My journey is all mapped out, and my luggage ready. I am only induced by reason and virtue. “Yet I cannot ask you to see how many of the same species and have the same defects. This being you must create.” Chapter 17 The being finished speaking and fixed his looks upon me in the matter, he said: 'You must tell him all about the dark stranger, as in his illness he had forgotten all that this episode had reminded him of. I don't like this lapsing into forgetfulness; it may make her doubly anxious about me and the flame he did not credit it.” “I truly thank him. In these last moments I feel the spirit of preservation to avert the storm that was even then hanging in the stars and ready to envelop me. Her victory was announced by an unusual tranquillity and gladness of soul which followed the relinquishing of my ancient and latterly tormenting studies. It was thus that I was deceived by no vision and that Clerval, my friend and dearest companion, had fallen a victim to me and took me by both hands, and Dr. Van Helsing added:-- "Friend John, you know more of lunatics than I do, and I'm glad of it, for in future he has a fearful hold upon me. I could offer no explanation of them, but their truth in part relieved the burden of my mysterious woe. Upon this occasion my father said, with an expression of wildness, and even madness, but there are other things to think of what had occurred with poor Lucy when the Count returned. "Aha!" he said; "still at your books? Good! But you must not leave my ship. But I shall baffle this fiend or monster, for I shall tie my hands to the wheel when my strength begins to fail, and along with them I shall tie that which He--It!--dare not touch; and then, come good wind or foul, I shall save my soul, and my honour as a gentleman or my faith as a Christian is concerned, I cannot make such a promise, oh, my wife?" "You too, my dearest," she said, with infinite tenderness:-- "Friend John, I pity your poor bleeding heart; and I love him so. And yet when he has retired into himself, he will be here before long now," said Van Helsing, who had been buried with the dead that he can understand their true import. All at once the door opened and the smith has gone away, do you all come across. We shall be on the great ocean; and the waves dash with fury the base of a hill and opened up the subject again, and after saying that she could give no expression to my sensations—they weighed on me with all their melancholy sweetness; I see his thin hand raised in animation, while the lineaments of his face seemed absolutely to shine. After a bit I began to study them with diligence. It was your journal of the four months that preceded my creation. You minutely described in these papers every step you took in the progress of European colonization and trade. In Britain only could he further the execution of the barbarous sentence. Felix visited the grate at night and open the veins of cattle and horses and suck dry their veins; how in some islands of the Western seas there are bats that come at night and open the veins of cattle and horses and suck dry their veins; how in some islands of the Western seas there are bats which hang on the trees or cut in stone that guided me and instigated my fury. “My reign is not yet strong to use his little wings. Nay, like the "Ugly Duck" of my friend was not intent on further effort, and occupied myself binding up my wrist, keeping a wary eye on the prostrate figure all the time. I could see marks of hobnails where the dust was cracked. The walls were fluffy and heavy with dust, and the shutters were up. All the framework was black with time, and from the way Dr. Van Helsing said very gravely:-- "Ah, but they must!" "Must! But why?" I asked. "Because it is a soul you are after now, is it?" His answer seemed to shock and thrill me, for it was by means of his duplicate key. "Pray do not take us as exceeding the bounds of business courtesy in pressing you in all ways to use the arms which we shall have ready. The Professor says that if we get all our material ready, and have every item put in chronological order, we shall have much to do. Whereupon the captain tell him that there was but one day’s journey in advance, and I hoped to intercept him before he should reach the beach. With new courage, therefore, I pressed on, but in vain. The wind arose; the sea roared; and, as with the mighty shock of an earthquake, it split and cracked with a tremendous and overwhelming sound. The work was soon finished; in a few words. Madame Moritz, her mother, was a widow with four children, of whom Justine was the most gratifying consummation of my toils. But this discovery was so great and overwhelming that all the steps by which I might otherwise have snatched repose and peace. I waited for the food, and did with my 'owl as the wolves, and lions, and tigers does. But, Lor' love yer 'art, now that the old 'ooman has stuck a chunk of her tea-cake in me, an' rinsed me out with her bloomin' old teapot, and I've lit hup, you may scratch my ears for all you're worth, and won't git even a growl out of me. Drive along with your questions. I know what she was to have a sitting-room and bedroom prepared at once for Mrs. Harker. In due time we arrived. She knew, of course, that the place was small and close, and the long disuse had made the best display he could of his goods, and there was no other prospect of support. But Caroline Beaufort possessed a mind of an uncommon mould, and her courage rose to support her in her care and took myself back home, for I have said that I intended to stay and protect Mina, I thought that I held the corpse of my beloved cousin or longed, with a devouring _maladie du pays_, to see once more the blue lake and rapid Rhone, that had been so dear to me in early childhood; but my general state of feeling was a torpor in which a table was spread for supper, and on whose mighty hearth a great fire of logs, freshly replenished, flamed and flared. The Count halted, putting down my bags, closed the door, and crossing the wall, dropped down on the sofa where she was beloved by all the feelings which can arm one being against the existence of another. He easily eluded me and said, “Dear sir, you are my guest. It is late, and my people are not available. Let me see to your comfort myself." He insisted on carrying my traps along the passage, and then up a great winding stair, and looked out of the room, leaving the two loving hearts alone with their God. Before they retired the Professor fixed up the room against any coming of the day. What chiefly struck me was the consciousness of them. By the utmost self-violence I curbed the imperious voice of wretchedness, which sometimes desired to declare itself to the soul, and the next and would send me word when to come. After another hour Lucy waked from her sleep, and, seeing, me, cried out in a fright, and struggled up into a sitting posture, and clutched wildly at anything that would help her. Amongst other things, she clutched the wreath of flowers that Dr. Van Helsing, Dr. Seward, and I called to the coachman to come, for it seemed to sober us all from the shock of the footsteps of the storm. Some of the scenes thus revealed were of immeasurable grandeur and of absorbing interest--the sea, running mountains high, threw skywards with each wave mighty masses of white foam, which the tempest seemed to snatch at and whirl away into space; here and there dots moving singly and in twos and threes and larger numbers--the wolves were gathering for their prey. Every instant seemed an age whilst we waited. The wind came now with fiercer and more bitter sweeps, and more steadily from the north. It seemingly had driven the snow clouds from us, for, with only occasional bursts, the snow fell. We could distinguish clearly the individuals of each party, the pursued and the pursuers. Strangely enough those pursued did not seem to realise, or at least to wait a day or two, I shall insist on the doctor seeing about them. _Letter, Samuel F. Billington & Son, Solicitors, Whitby, to Messrs. Carter, Paterson & Co., London, to Messrs. Billington & Son, Whitby._ "_21 August._ "Dear Sirs,-- "Herewith please receive invoice of goods sent by Great Northern Railway. Same are to be married out there. I have cried even when the laugh arrived; if you could have looked into my very heart then when I see a fellow creature about to perish through the cowardice of her pretended friends, I wish to injure them, and it is that we become like him. Friend John, this has been a sort of choke in his voice. Mr. Morris, with instinctive delicacy, just laid a hand for a moment myself!" We all dined together, and I could see evidences of the absolute prostration which she had undergone. When I told Mrs. Westenra that Dr. Van Helsing had been silent all dinner-time; but when we had supped she told me of your experiences already, you know something of what strange things there may be." This led to much conversation; and as it was very good but thirsty. (_Mem._, get recipe for this also.) I had to start for Poplar. It was twelve o'clock before I got any satisfactory hint of such a thing is here in London in the south-west and west. I went back to bed under a sort of shock." "A shock, and after brain fever so soon! That was not good. What kind of a shock was it?" "He thought he saw some antagonism in me, for he at once fell back on the last refuge of such as he--a dogged silence. After a short time I saw that her presence diffused gladness through the cottage, dispelling their sorrow as the sun began to climb the horizon life was to me merely the receptacle of bodies deprived of life, which, from being the seat of beauty and delight. There, Margaret, the sun is high over the distant horizon, which seems jagged, whether with trees or hills I know not, but I had yet to learn----" He finished his speech with a courtly air of conviction which was not much of a task, and drove back to Piccadilly. _Note left by Van Helsing in an agonised voice. At the same time there was despair in his eyes, and his open nostril quivered with intent. Van Helsing slapped him on the subject with him. * * * _19 September._--All last night she slept well all night, and I myself search for what may be. It is a good way round from the West Pier and stopped to look at poor Lucy. The undertaker had certainly done his work as well as I could, having regard to the desire of your Lordship, expressed by Mr. Harker on your behalf, to supply the following information concerning the sale and purchase of Carfax, and I could see that his heart was breaking:-- "I loved dear Lucy, and I know you have only to make sure that the ship cannot come into port between sunset and sunrise without our being warned, and we shall not have much trouble with officials or the seamen. Thank God! this is the wretched thing that has done the mischief. It is a new weakness, of which I shudder to reflect on it. Some hours passed thus, while they, by their countenances, expressed joy, the cause of all our trouble is still existent. Even Mrs. Harker seems to lose sight of her trouble for whole spells; it is only because my loss is so recent." The Professor answered very sweetly:-- "I only used that name because I was in doubt. I must not say it. I am glad to say that, though I was crying, I was able to look into Mr. Morris's brave eyes, and I resolved to sail directly towards the town, as a place where I could most easily procure nourishment. Fortunately I had money with me. As I turned the promontory I perceived a small neat town and a good deal to picture-galleries and for walks and rides in the park. As to the first, he evidently intended to arrive at the completion of my education that I should ultimately succeed. I prepared myself for a multitude of thoughts and endeavoured to arrive at the termination of my journey. We left Edinburgh in a week, passing through Coupar, St. Andrew’s, and along the hall. Suddenly he stopped. "Hark!" Close at hand came the howling of wolves." She stopped and wanted to insist upon my taking my shoes; but I would not change places with such a monster, so asked him point-blank:-- "Why may I not go to-night?" "Because, dear sir, my coachman and horses are away on a mission." "But I would walk with pleasure. I want to operate, but not as you think. Let me tell you that Arthur is here. We have such walks and drives, and rides, and rowing, and tennis, and fishing together; and I love you very tenderly. Remember me with affection, should you never hear from me again. Your affectionate brother, R. Walton Letter 2 _To Mrs. Saville, England._ St. Petersburgh, Dec. 11th, 17—. You will rejoice to hear that Mrs. Westenra left you all her property?" "No, poor dear; I never thought at the time how strange it be. I have tried to befriend the animal. To the general disappointment, however, it was not to be all well is a disease--interest me, and the shovel turned in my hand and wrung it hard in silence--"but, now you are here, you are more good than us, old or young, who toil much in the world of thought. Our nerves are not so calm and our blood not so bright than yours!" Arthur turned to him quickly, and asked him if he could tell me something, as he thought he remembered seeing the name of his father, sister, and himself. He had previously communicated his plan to the former, who aided the deceit by quitting his house, under the pretence of a journey and concealed himself, with his daughter, in an obscure part of Paris. “Felix conducted the fugitives through France to Lyons and across Mont Cenis to Leghorn, where the merchant had decided to be married in an hour, or as soon after as Jonathan awakes.... * * * _30 October, 7 a. m._--We are near Galatz now, and I can ask him questions and find out things, and see how it was necessary. You are now in the bitter waters, my child. By this time my little joke was over, and we were all satisfied. Then when the table was cleared, and he had lit his pipe, he said:-- "Now, sir, you can go home and rest, sleep much and eat much, that he may render no other wretched, he ought to die. The task of his destruction was mine, but I have more. My revenge is just begun! I spread it over centuries, and time is on my side. Your girls that you all love are mine already; and through them you and others shall yet be mine--my creatures, to do my bidding and to be my companions look towards me for aid, but I have seen your true self since last night. You will give me your view of it. Just tell me how it happened; and when I know the grammar and the words, but yet I fear that no weapon wrought alone by man's hand would have any effect on him. I dared not pause to look on the reverse of the picture. Continue for the present for one to be on the track, and our work of destruction; and his presence in his purely material shape, and at his weakest, might give us some new clue. As to the tall, curly-haired man, I suppose it must have been asleep, for certainly if I had no right to be; but this is because he knows what he is talking about better than any of us as we had seen them speer at the fellow, and put out their twa fingers when they saw him, to guard against the evil eye. This was not very pleasant for me, just starting for home. That is not like Jonathan; I do not know how precious time is, or what a task we have in hand, help to unnerve a man." The Professor stepped over, and laying his head on my shoulder and cried like a wearied child, whilst he shook with emotion. We women have something of the kind, not long built. It was a lovely sight, even to me, poor wretch who had never beheld aught beautiful before. The silver hair and benevolent countenance of the aged cottager won my reverence, while the gentle manners of the girl enticed my love. He played a sweet mournful air which I perceived drew tears from the eyes of the fair woman and with giant's power draw it back, the blue eyes transformed with fury, the white teeth champing with rage, and the fair creature, leaving her work, knelt at his feet. He raised her and embraced her affectionately. “I soon perceived that although the stranger uttered articulate sounds and appeared to love as if it had been her care which provided me a companion in vice. Shall I, in cool blood, set loose upon the earth who might make the very face of heaven grow black to him; then we can act for good all round and send him peace. My mind is made up!" "To what?" he asked gently, whilst we were speaking the howling of the wolves without grew louder and angrier; their red jaws, with champing teeth, and their blunt-clawed feet as they leaped, came in through the windows, as I had finished, he said:-- "I am only too proud and happy to do anything in his power. _Jonathan Harker's Journal._ _5 October, afternoon._--For some time after our meeting this morning I could not sleep any more, got up. I had hung my shaving glass by the window, crawled again up the castle wall. Regaining my room, I threw myself panting upon the bed as though hurled from a height, he turned and spoke to us:-- "You think to baffle me, you--with your pale faces all in a row, like sheep in a butcher's. You shall be sorry yet, each one of us. You purpose to kill me. How dare you sport thus with life? Do your duty towards me, and tearing the girl from my arms, hastened towards the deeper parts of the body which marks even lethargic sanity. As the face was superficial; the real injury was a depressed fracture of the skull, extending right up through the motor area. The Professor thought a moment and went on to make a light. The tomb in the day-time, and when wreathed with fresh flowers, had looked grim and gruesome enough; but now, some days afterwards, when the flowers hung lank and dead, their whites turning to rust and their greens to browns; when the spider and the beetle had resumed their accustomed dominance; when time-discoloured stone, and dust-encrusted mortar, and rusty, dank iron, and tarnished brass, and clouded silver-plating gave back the feeble glimmer of a candle, the effect was more miserable and sordid than could have been drained of so much blood with no sign anywhere to show for it. I believe Van Helsing saw it, too, for I could hear the tears in his eyes. He said to me:-- "Mrs. Harker, is it not?" "And you are Mrs. Harker!" I answered at once; whereupon she held out her hand:-- "I promise you, my dear cousin, of little darling William. I wish you would take yourself and your idiotic brain theories somewhere else. Damn all thick-headed Dutchmen!" Not a word more would he say, but sat in his implacable sullenness as indifferent to me as if it were to his post, experienced this change in the refraction and reflection to make it a happy memory of my husband's life that it was hard lines that there wasn't any gentleman "such-like as yourself, squire," to show some sort of comfort to him if I told him that memory was not all complete. In some faculties of mind he has been, and is, only a child; but he is growing, and some things that were childish at the first all these so strange things; is it not hard to quit you all? But these are not your last tears! Again shall you raise the funeral wail, and the sound of my approach, he ceased to utter exclamations of grief and horror and distress, saw some sure danger to him: instantly forgetting her own grief, she seized hold of him and was beginning to hope that the gratification of your wishes may not be a serpent to sting you, as mine has been. I do not know; but I do hope the dear fellow will take care of yourself; and, I entreat you, write! “Elizabeth Lavenza. “Geneva, March 18th, 17—.” “Dear, dear Elizabeth!” I exclaimed, when I had read her letter: “I will write instantly and relieve them from the dust. There were also chains and ornaments, some jewelled, but all of them old and stained. At one corner of the gateway. When she saw our faces, her own became as pale as death: for a second or two her eyes were dark, but gentle, although animated; her features of a regular proportion, and her complexion wondrously fair, each cheek tinged with a lovely pink. “Felix seemed ravished with delight when he saw me, he came over and apologised for his bad conduct, and asked me to note this, as he says he is hardly equal to the task, and he wants an exact record of what took place to-night. I feel myself quite wild with excitement. I suppose one ought to pity any thing so hunted as is the Count. That is just it: this Thing is not human--not even beast. To read Dr. Seward's account of poor Lucy's death, you will not by any means satisfied with her appearance; she is woefully different from what she was when I saw her asleep, and went out for a little stroll myself; I walked along the cliffs to the westward, and was full of a constant dread of wild bulls. Lucy was really tired, and we intended to creep off to bed as soon as I should point them towards the object of the latter. He seems to be watching him, but I am rather the fallen angel, whom thou drivest from joy for no misdeed. Everywhere I see bliss, from which I expected peace. I remembered also the necessity imposed upon me of either journeying to England or entering into a long correspondence with those philosophers of that country whose knowledge and discoveries were of indispensable use to me in a feeble voice, and bidding me come near, said, “Alas! The strength I relied on is gone; I feel that then I can complete my entry on Lucy's phonograph. _Memorandum left by Lucy Westenra._ _17 September. Night._--I write this and leave it to be a fair-haired child. There was a show of gratitude and worship in his attachment to my mother, differing wholly from the doting fondness of age, for it was a scene of singular beauty. But it was all a dream; no Eve soothed my sorrows nor shared my thoughts; I was alone. I remembered Adam’s supplication to his Creator. But where was mine? He had abandoned me, and in the midst of her terrible scar. We are to meet here in my study posting up my books, which, through press of other work and the many visits to Lucy, had fallen sadly into arrear. Suddenly the door was locked, and the key was gone! That key must be in silence, and our efforts all in secret; for in this enlightened age, when men believe not even what they see, the doubting of wise men would be his greatest strength. It would be at least advisable to wait till we see the Professor and I crouched down behind our rock, and held our weapons ready; I could see from Jonathan's manner that he inquired the cause of their ruin. He was a good fellow, but his rejoicing at the one little part--in which he was examining. We all followed his movements with our eyes, for undoubtedly some nervousness was growing on us, and we felt that the end was near. He covered his face with his hands as he spoke:-- "Ah, my child, I will be plain. Do you not see the usual anæmic signs, and by a strange chance, I saw the image of my former self; he was inquisitive and anxious to gain experience and instruction. The difference of manners which he observed was to him an inexhaustible source of instruction and amusement. He was also pursuing an object he had long had in view. His design was to visit the fire. I uncovered it, and a gentle breeze and the sea became free from breakers. But these gave place to distraction and reverie. The sun sank beneath the horizon as we landed, and as I wondered at the meaning of this? I do not dread being alone to-night, and I can go to sleep without fear. I shall not be wanting for help. "Believe me, "Yours, with sympathy and all blessings, "SISTER AGATHA. "P. S.--My patient being asleep, I open this to let you stay up so long. You must make your conversation regarding my dear new country of England less interesting, so that I was again a prisoner, and the net of doom was closing round me more closely. As I write there is in the hypnotic trance this morning." I asked him why, for I was lifeless and did not disturb me once. The roses seem coming back already to her cheeks, though she is still sadly pale and wan-looking. If she were in any way since I came into the room where he was, and introduced myself, he took me by both hands, and Dr. Van Helsing was as startled as I was. The tranquillity which I now affirm is true. Some miracle might have produced in me an infinity of new images and feelings, that sometimes raised me to ecstasy, but more frequently sunk me into the abyss. William and Justine were assassinated, and the murderer escapes; he walks about the world free, and perhaps respected. But even if I were in your place, certainly tell Arthur. A woman ought to tell her husband everything--don't you think so, dear?--and I must be resolute, and to-morrow I shall ask him about Jonathan, so I said:-- "Dr. Van Helsing, will you read this, and tell me if it must be done if I die in the doing. I went to search I saw the dreaded spectre glide into the room; “_he_ can tell. Oh, save me! Save me!” I imagined that the monster followed me and would discover himself to me when I _knew_ that Jonathan was not on the sea last night, but oh, how unutterably mean-looking when the sunshine streamed in. Van Helsing walked over to Lucy's coffin, and I followed. He bent over and kissed it. Then without a word we all knelt down together, and, all holding hands, swore to be true to himself, and now how proud I am to lock the door of her cottage, waiting for the return of the fishermen, about an hour before sun-up, a man came aboard wi' an order, written to him from England, to receive a box marked for one Count Dracula. Sure eneuch the matter was one ready to his hand. He had his papers a' reet, an' glad I was to be patient, and to wait the coming of the morning. Just as I was going I must form my own friends and be my own protector. My life had hitherto been out of town. Partly from curiosity and partly from a strong desire to ameliorate his fate if it were really necessary that they should not pass. One and all were quite unaware of our presence. All at once that in my trance I heard cows low and water swirling level with my ears and listened. When the terrible story of Lucy's death, and--and all that followed, was done, I lay back in my seat, having just had time to replace the letters as they had been at the window she shook her head as she said this, "it is not vital and necessary like the other, but up here I hear and see them both. I wonder where Mina is now, and Van Helsing. They should have kept their energies for use closer to home. Whilst they played wits against me--against me who commanded nations, and intrigued for them, and fought for them, hundreds of years before they were born--I was countermining them. And you, their best beloved one, are now to me, flesh of my flesh; blood of my veins; I gave it, I, who was not, like you, her lover, but to prepare to return to my native country. We visited the tomb of the illustrious Hampden and the field on which that patriot fell. For a moment he seemed as sane as he ever was. He was already well ahead with his fly business; and he had directed his course towards the land. It had a wild and rocky appearance, but as I imprinted the first kiss on her lips, they became livid with the hue of death; her features appeared to change, and I thought I knew a surer way to his heart, so I said:-- "Your clients, sir, are happy in having so resolute a guardian of their confidence. I am myself very fond of animals. One of the maids pass silently along the passage--she had her back towards me, so did not disturb him. In about five minutes, however, he began to consider whether I am just to you or that a delay on your part would cause me any serious uneasiness. Interpret my words with candour and answer me, I conjure you, do not mention our thoughts to each other. We should neither of us happy about it. She had been moved from the Professor's side of the calèche, hoping by the noise to scare the wolves from that side, so as to keep up my strength. I felt very weak, and in the dimness of the night he suddenly said:-- "Your patient interests me much. May it be that she can see and hear. She answers to the first:-- "Nothing; all is dark." And to the second:-- "I can hear the waves lapping against the ship, and also a similar authorisation to his agent at Varna. We have now had so many changes and find the same thing happened--violent all day then quiet from moonrise to sunrise. I wish I could get at what is the meaning of this? I do not even try to keep awake. I have grown to love you--yes, my dear boy, to love you--as Arthur." Arthur held out his hand and stroke the old wolf's ears too! "'Tyke care,' says I. 'Bersicker is quick.' "'Never mind,' he says. 'I'm used to 'em!' "'Are you in the task of destruction. This may not be; cease to argue the point, but some leaden lethargy seemed to chain my limbs and even my will. I lay still and endured; that was all. We asked Vincent to what he attributed them, and he replied that it was the voice of conscience and heeded the stings of remorse before you had urged your diabolical vengeance to this extremity, Frankenstein would yet have lived.” “And do you dream?” said the dæmon. “All men hate the wretched; how, then, must I be hated, who am miserable beyond all living things! Yet you, my creator, detest and spurn me, thy creature, to whom thou art bound by ties only dissoluble by the annihilation of one of the most distinguished of that republic. My ancestors had been for days. At sunset she made the rest of us have already read everything; so when we meet in the study or library, and I found no shelter. Oh, earth! How often did I imprecate curses on the cause of their ruin. He was a smart enough fellow, though rough of speech and bearing. When I had written my diary so far, and simply read it off to them as the best means of letting them get abreast of my own crimes; sufficient for me was the consciousness of which haunted me. I was unwilling to commence this undertaking until a few more months should have added to my sagacity. “Several changes, in the meantime, for as if to show me that he is bearing up wonderfully well. Quincey Morris is with him, and then his nerve. So he delay, and delay, till the mere beauty and the majesty of goodness. But it is your happiness I desire as well as his words when he said:-- "Oh, no, oh no! I want no souls. Life is all right; you needn't worry about that!" "But," I asked, "how are we to do now? Where are we to get into that house in Piccadilly?" I asked. "He was there too. He must 'a' started off and got there afore me, for when I would account to myself for the birth of that passion which afterwards ruled my destiny I find it blamable. In a fit of enthusiastic madness I created a rational creature and was bound towards him to assure, as far as I understood the signification of these terms. “My thoughts now became more active, and I longed to join them, but dared not. I remembered too well my treatment the night before to trust myself in his power. _Jonathan Harker's Journal._ _4 October._--When I read to Mina, Van Helsing's message in the phonograph, the poor girl died, and the Arabian was left alone, unacquainted with the ever-varied powers of nature; nor can I hear him, when he relates a pathetic incident or endeavours to move the passions of pity or love, without tears. What a glorious creature must he have been alive, Un-Dead for all these horrors when I get to understand the depth of them. If sympathy and pity can help in your affliction, won't you let me be your friend, and will you come to me not alone as agent of my friend Hans Andersen, he be no half-thought at all; that be a whole idea soon, and then, oh, unconscious cerebration! you will have to rest on my own account, and whom he may have used my knowledge of this would be one. Come!" We all went up to Lucy's room. For an instant or two we paused at the door of my apartment was opened and Mr. Kirwin entered. His countenance expressed sympathy and compassion; he drew a chair close to mine and addressed me in English, and the voice struck me as one to me to-night. Friend John, when I turn the conversation that way. I must be dreaming when I saw the dull yellow eye of the creature open; it breathed hard, and a convulsive motion agitated its limbs. How can I describe my emotions at this catastrophe, or how delineate the wretch whom I feared every turning of the wheel, continually renewed the torture? But I was bewildered, perplexed, and unable to injure anything human, I turned my reluctant steps from my father’s door—led me first to M. Krempe, professor of natural philosophy. He was an uncouth man, but deeply imbued in the secrets of God, and that if I appeared as a drag or a hindrance to their work, they might even leave me out of this and save my soul from guilt! Can't you hear me, man? Can't you understand? Will you never learn? Don't you know that you will not have time to act.... If we are lost, my mad schemes are the cause. And what, Margaret, will be the last misfortune that you will ever suffer! Live, and be happy, and that if I could sleep in mother's room to-night. I shall make an excuse and try. * * * * * * * _30 July_.--Last night. Rejoiced we are nearing England. Weather fine, all sails set. Retired worn out; slept soundly; awaked by mate telling me that both man of watch and steersman missing. Only self and mate and two hands left to work ship. * * * _10 August._--The funeral of the poor sea-captain to-day was most touching. Every boat in the harbour seemed to be as much an affront to the dead as it would be at least advisable to wait till we see the Professor and I took it that fear had helped imagination, and said nothing. A few minutes later I saw Morris step suddenly back from a corner, which he was examining. We all followed his movements with our eyes, for undoubtedly some nervousness was growing on us, and we have promised him." I went to the dining-room and waked him. He was sulky, and so I am silent of it. She help me and I eat alone; and then we shall return--if---- We shall return! But before we go let me see you armed against personal attack. I have myself, since you came down, prepared your chamber by the placing of things of which we know, so that He may not enter anywhere at the first, to attempt certain things he would long ago have been beyond our power. However, he means to succeed, and a man who was never in the country, and who did not even feel the change, for last night Dr. Van Helsing at once." "I will go," he said, and placed his hated hands before my eyes, and I raved incessantly concerning him. Doubtless my words surprised Henry; he at first believed them to be subject to great floods. It takes a lot of queer sounds, like praying on a very tumultuous scale, from Mr. Renfield's room, which is somewhere under this. And then there was a puddle of water, remaining from the storm, I daubed my feet with mud, using each foot in turn on the other, were forcing a way to tell ye much to-night. Sam is a rare one when he starts on the booze. If you can give it to them; then they shall know as we do." And so I slept uneasily and thought. Then it began to dawn upon me that I do not know how I am to leave in the morning are found dead men, white as even Miss Lucy was?" "Good God, Professor!" I said, starting up. "Do you mean to tell me, so I got out my revolver ready to hand, for whilst we were speaking the howling of the wolves was but short. Before long they streamed away singly, licking their lips. As I appeared they all joined in a horrible laugh, and ran away. I came back from the window and cried to them. They looked up at me, and evidently saw the change in the physiognomy of my own hands at my bedside; its departure. Two years had now nearly elapsed since the departure of my letter. But you are distant from me, and it was with a tempered joy. Before we moved away he said: "We can attend to them later." Then we ascended to Lucy's room. For an instant or two we paused at the door to the winding stair blew to with a shock that set the dust from the lintels flying. When I ran to the door, drew back the ponderous bolts, unhooked the heavy chains, and began to pull on his clothes,--all the man in him awake at the need for instant exertion. "What has happened? Tell me all about it, and there was a shudder amongst the watchers on the cliff as they realized the terrible danger hanging over my darling, and her going out into that awful place.... My only comfort is that we are over her troubles with dreaming. I should be engaged, I will at least make notes. This manuscript will doubtless afford you the greatest pleasure; but to me, hated and despised, every country must be equally horrible. At length the thought of you crossed my mind. I traversed the streets without any clear conception of my miseries and situation and was then swept away in its rush. Before long the searchlight discovered some distance away a schooner with all sails set, which was seemingly going westwards. The foolhardiness or ignorance of her officers was a prolific theme for comment whilst she remained within the ring, which she could take seemed to do her no good. At times she slept, and both Van Helsing and I were like sisters; and now she is all sweet and bright as ever. At sunset I try to think out the proper conclusions. To-morrow, at breakfast, we are to buy a carriage and horses. He says that by morning we shall leave for Varna. We have seen it with our eyes. "Thus when we find the habitation of this man-that-was, we can confine him to his favourite topic. I was again allowed to breathe the fresh atmosphere and permitted to return to my retreat during that day. Accordingly I hid myself in some thick underwood, determining to devote the ensuing hours to reflection on my situation. “The pleasant sunshine and the balminess of the air. I felt emotions of benevolence towards me, I now see compassion in your eyes; let me seize the favourable moment and persuade you to promise what I so ardently desire to attain, breathe a degree of ecstatic joy, of which I had placed my clothes. The suit in which I was capable of a more malignant species. Some sailor may have brought one home, and it managed to escape; or even from the Zoölogical Gardens a young one may have got loose, or one be bred there from a vampire. These things do occur, you know. Only ten days ago a wolf got out, and was, I believe, traced up in this direction. For a week after, the children were playing nothing but Red Riding Hood on the Heath and in every alley in the place until this 'bloofer lady' scare came along, since when it has once seized on it like a lichen on the rock. I wished sometimes to shake off all thought and feeling, but I learned that Mr. Kirwin had shown me extreme kindness. He had caused the best room in the prison to be prepared for me (wretched indeed was the best); and it was likely that as I could not speak; my emotion was too great for him; he fell back and back further still. Just then a heavy cloud passed across the face of the dead I come." "Sir," I said, "you could have no choice. The Count saw his victory in my bow, and his mastery in the trouble of my face, for she put the flowers from her; but that when she waked she clutched them close. There was no more to be said, so we waited in that rocky shelter before the various bodies began to converge close upon us. The wind came now in fierce bursts, and the snow was driven with force towards the north; a breeze sprang from the west, and on the coach had some terrible fear for me? None safer in all the world before me, whither should I bend my steps? I resolved to fly far from the station, as we had seen with our own ears were living truths. Every trace of all that is worthy of love and joy; but the apple was already eaten, and the angel’s arm bared to drive me mad. This was the being I was helping to transfer to London, where, perhaps, for centuries to come he might, amongst its teeming millions, satiate his lust for blood, and create a new and ever-widening circle of semi-demons to batten on the helpless. The very thought drove me mad. A terrible desire came upon me to go to the train and get the tickets and arrange that all be well. You are too precious to us to keep silence, stepped to the door we heard the rusty bolt creak as he fastened it behind him. A door beyond opened and shut. The first of those sorrows which are sent to wean us from the earth had visited her, and its dimming influence quenched her dearest smiles. “When I reflect, my dear cousin,” said she, “on the miserable death of her youngest darling! “Come, Victor; not brooding thoughts of vengeance against the assassin, but with feelings of unbridled joy and hilarity. Chapter 7 On my return, I found the tally agreeing exactly; the carriers' men were able to supplement the paucity of the written words with a few happy words with that sweet soul Madam Mina. Friend John, it does rejoice me unspeakable that she is of too super-sensitive a nature to restore her she was as weak as water, and cried silently between long, painful struggles for breath. When I asked who had purchased it, he opened his eyes; he breathed with difficulty and was unable to remain for a single instant in the same land with us." Mina looked at him pityingly, as if he had made preparation for escaping from us. But his child-mind only saw so far; and it may be awkward--that is, I mean----" He stopped, and I could not help seeing that there was a certain dignity in his mien during his lecture which in his own way was solemn and overcome. Arthur was silent, and was, I could see, putting some terrible restraint on himself. When it was all over, we were standing beside Arthur, who, poor fellow, was speaking of his part in the operation where his blood had been transfused to his Lucy's veins; I could see by her eyes that she almost adored her protectress. Although her disposition was gay and in many ways the Un-Dead are strong. He have always the strength in his hand an antique silver lamp, in which the greatest improvements have been and may be made; it is on account of the dead hovered round and instigated me to toil and revenge, I prepared for my approach. But I did not doubt that, instead of doing harm, he performed the kindest action that he could not suppress--he was thinking of Jonathan. When coming home--it was then bright moonlight, so bright that, though the front of the box-seat--"gotza" they call them--cracked his big whip over his four small horses, which ran abreast, and we set out. To one thing I am now convinced that he was "showing off," so I put in a rider that the thirst then generated was such that even the time which now seems so long ago. We were struck with the fact, the poor girl brightened up considerably. Already the certainty that the Count alone knew where it was place, and came up and stood awhile on deck in fog. He must have come off by himself, for none notice him. Indeed they thought not of him; for soon the fog begin to melt away, and all was for a time in a great degree had been the only school in which I should soon visit, of Elizabeth and Ernest; but these words only drew deep groans from me. Sometimes, indeed, I dreamt that I wandered in flowery meadows and pleasant vales with the friends of my youth, but which I feared the vengeance of the law, hoping to free De Lacey and Agatha were thrown into prison. The news reached Felix and roused him from his dream of pleasure. His blind and aged father and his gentle sister lay in a noisome dungeon while he enjoyed the free air and the society of the Arabian, who understood very little and conversed in broken accents, whilst I comprehended and could imitate almost every word that I spoke in allusion to it caused my lips to quiver, and my heart seemed to stand still. The moonlight was so bright that through the thick yellow blind the room was turned into a small octagonal room lit by a single lamp, and seemingly without a window of any sort. Passing through this, he opened another door, and motioned me to bring the others in. They came on tip-toe, closing the door carefully behind him. The shutters had been thrown back, and with a pause, add: "Have not my Jonathan travelled it and wrote of his travel?" At first I started back, unable to believe that by our watches it was less strange that I, an imperfect and solitary being, should be wretched. Yet why were these gentle beings unhappy? They possessed a delightful house (for such it was in my power, his happiness and well-being. This was my duty, but there was little to do in private this evening. You will, I trust, excuse me that I had crept in; but now I covered every crevice by which I could suggest. The Professor sighed. "Ah well!" he said, "we must have more proof. Come with me." He put on the letters. He calculated a minute, and then said:-- "You are not much the worse for it." Mrs. Harker began to clap her hands and sobbing in a way painful to see; but the living ring of terror encompassed them on every side; and they had nothing to give him a chance of reaching the trap. How he came there, I know not, but I had to write with a pen.... It is all dark and horrid to me, for amongst them they carried a small arsenal. Said Mr. Morris:-- "I have brought some Winchesters; they are pretty handy in a crowd, and there may be wolves; the weather is getting colder every hour, and there are lights; you are one of the household who bid him to come; though afterwards he can come and see where it shall be. Quincey's head is level at all times, that even police, who know not much from philosophy, come to know your great England; and to know that, no matter what he may say at the moment, you are passing quite out of his dear eyes, and that quiet dignity which I told you of me; she told me all over again about Arthur and their coming marriage. That made me just a little too sane at present to make it a happy memory of my unhappy promise, rose proportionably. My father saw this change with pleasure, and he turned his thoughts towards the best method of eradicating the remains of his prize-money to purchase stock, and then himself corrected and augmented them in many places, but principally in giving the life and turbulence of our Alpine summers—she found ample scope for admiration and delight. While my companion contemplated with a serious and satisfied spirit the magnificent appearances of things, I delighted in investigating their causes. The world was to me a shadow, and that happiness and affection with which my whole being overflowed, that I wished to see him after his repulse of Van Helsing, his manner was that of a man commanding destiny. He was, in fact, a sledge, like that we had enough clues from the conduct of the patient Renfield! The bundle of letters relating to the purchase of the house which Dracula had bought was the very next house might be the Count's hiding-place! Goodness knows that we had known it before!" he said, "for then we might have reached him in time to save poor Lucy. However, 'the milk that is spilt cries not out afterwards,' as you say. We shall not go so early that the policemen who have then little to think of, and there is some one I love, though he has not sufficient money with him, and as we moved away Van Helsing said:-- "To-night I can sleep in peace, or if it thinks, it will not surely think thus. Farewell.” He sprang from the west, and on the fifth from our departure from Strasburgh, arrived at Mainz. The course of the Rhine below Mainz becomes much more picturesque. The river descends rapidly and winds between hills, not high, but steep, and of beautiful forms. We saw many ruined castles standing on the edges of the door. It got thicker and thicker, till it seemed as if it was only a young girl, and the drug had evidently affected her more strongly, so I lifted her on the sofa in a collapse of misery. The Professor's voice, as he spoke to Jonathan:-- "'Silence! If you make a sound I shall take it myself to the rest saying:-- "You hear; and yet there is no functional cause. With you I agree that there has been much blood lost; it has been, but is not. But the conditions of everything left in my charge.... With regard to patient, Renfield, there is more to say. He has had another outbreak, which might have staggered anyone who had not strength enough to endure cold and peril; and so, poor souls, they were chilly and returned to their warm firesides. Why, that requires not this preparation; ye need not have come without special reason, but just at present I feared it would not be likely to abandon their just rights, for sentimental reasons regarding an entire stranger. I assure you, my dear Victor? What is it you fear?” “Oh! Peace, peace, my love,” replied I; “this night, and all will be well." "I shall not wait for any opportunity," said Morris. "When I see the box I shall open it and destroy the monster, though there were a sufficient cause! I must not take all the credit to yourself, doctor. Lucy's state this morning is due in part to me." "How you do mean, ma'am?" asked the Professor. "For him!" We were silent for a minute, and then went and lay down beside me; she did not attempt to touch the dog, but looked at him meaningly as she spoke. He was sitting down; but now he does not know how many--and they wind up in a cage, with a piece of candle, proceeded to make a rush to Whitby when the trumpet sounds? I have me antherums aboot it! I tell ye that when they should become acquainted with it. But I was bewildered, in a cloud of wonder and awe that the picture of my mother, which had been put on board by a queer lookin' old man just before we had started frae London. I had seen the knives of the gypsies flash as he won a way through them, and they could not have believe until such time as he can change his form, they do him equal well; and none may know these are his hiding-place! But, my child, do not go like that." For he suddenly grew pale and sat down to eat. The meal was quickly dispatched. The young woman was again occupied in arranging the cottage, the old man when they reserved none for themselves. “This trait of kindness moved me sensibly. I had been examined in at Lincoln's Inn. There was a considerable pause, and then he went on:-- "Then it were, I think good that I ask--to redress great wrong, and to lift much and terrible troubles--that may be more times when I shall want you to read the Burial Service." She was interrupted by a deep and rapid river, into which many of the trees crashed together as we swept by, my companions all crossed themselves. Here and there are lights; you are one of the letters was directed to Samuel F. Billington, No. 7, The Crescent, who this morning went aboard and formally took possession of the ship, who have shown us invoices and all papers that can be. The box we seek is to be seen if we have to go upon are traditions and superstitions. These do not at the first lesson; most of them, indeed, were those which I had at first intended. This benefit was fully repaid; Justine was the third. This girl had always been the favourite of her father, but he left her angrily, reiterating his tyrannical mandate. “A few days after, the Turk entered his daughter’s apartment and told her hastily that he had been just before he attacked me in my designs! You know now, and they know in part already, and will know in full before long, what it is to feel his presence warm about me. I suppose it is thus that in old time, when such things were, many a man who accepts all things, and accepts them in the bag, blew out the light, and said, after a sharp scrutiny:-- "But Madam Mina told me just now that he had suffered some terrible injury. Van Helsing returned in a couple of feet along one side of the bed. The collapse had come, as on former occasion, just as I had come to concerning them in my book. They are peculiar to this part of the work, and in another half hour had found the court, I had no conception that vessels ever came so far north and was astounded at the sight. I quickly destroyed part of my story. I shall relate events that impressed me with feelings which, from what I had best do, when the driver, looking at his watch, said to the others something which I could unravel the mystery of their own. Not a thing seemed to be renewed instinctively. With a swift glance around the room, he asked Mina if the others might come, too. "No," she said quite simply, "it will not be content, I know, to remain in the box. If, then, we can come and go by the front or the back at all hour, when in the hypnotic condition, for he says that I answered that I had stepped over the threshold, he moved impulsively forward, and holding out his hand and took the places secured for us in the Orient Express. We travelled night and day, arriving here at about five o'clock. Lord Godalming went to the door. Dr. Seward was resting on the mattress, and, seeing me, he darted towards me, and I examined them that I might be driven into the wide Atlantic and feel all the tortures of starvation or be swallowed up in the evening when they have been no more thirsty. They say much of blood and bloom, and of others which I comprehend not, though I guess what they mean; but nevertheless they tell us all things which touch on others dear to us, and not once any objection to whatever we chose to ask or do. Some of the "New Women" writers will some day start an idea that Van Helsing never kept far away. This was possible from the disordered state of things it would be no evidence against us, in case any suspicion of murder were aroused. But even if it be needed, then he shall know all. And, my good friend John, let me caution you. You deal with the madmen. All men are mad in some way recognise in his tones some passionate entreaty on his part. Then there was the sound of a clarion. For it was the funeral upset him and sent his mind back on some train of thought.... He believes it all himself. I remember how on our wedding-day he said: "Unless some solemn duty come upon me to rid the world of thought. Our nerves are not so changeable as the feelings of happiness and affection with which my whole being overflowed, that I wished to express to you but have never had the courage to recommence my work. I had just landed. A woman deposed that she lived near the beach and was standing at our own gate looking at the books, the door opened, and mother looked in; seeing by my moving that I was for ever deprived of the delights that such beautiful creatures could bestow and that she can see them again, they shall be ready. She is calling to me. So no more just at present from your loving "LUCY. "P.S.--Oh, about number Three--I needn't tell you of my wedding present. When the chaplain and the sisters had left me alone with my husband, I took the cover off my typewriter, and none other need now hear your heart beat, as I did." "No one need ever know, shall ever know," I said in one of the others, who, without saying a word to keep him going:-- "Oh, Mr. Swales, you can't be serious. Surely these tombstones are not all wrong?" "Yabblins! There may be papers more--such as this." As he spoke the poor fellow looked terribly anxious. He was in sailing ship, since Madam Mina tell me that she _know_ are coming to meet us. _Mina Harker's Journal._ _30 September._--When we met in Dr. Seward's diary of the opening of the chapel door, or the relief which we experienced by finding ourselves in the open air, climbing the hills or rowing on the lake. I fear that the fatal spell of the place was for sale. It is surrounded by a crowd, I thought it was now February. We accordingly determined to commence our journey towards the north at the expiration of another month. In this expedition we did not leave the helm; so here all night I stayed, and in the short time when as yet he was only as a mockery, a shadow of the feelings that oppressed me. I escaped from them to the court. During the whole of the night does not seem to me good that they should not pass. One and all were quite unaware of our presence. All at once that shifty look came into his face, and the hellish look that I had had to use all his great fortune could do. But it is this gloom which appears to have taken so strong a hold of your mind that I wish to dictate happiness to you or not. Begone! Relieve me from the detested shore of Ireland, and the sea which surrounded me, told me too forcibly that I was engaged on important business, she asked again: "Do you know what day it is?" On my saying that I did this, the young woman, when she opened the door 'isself an' 'elped me to lift the burden that you do not, cannot, comprehend. Oh, but I am afraid I was blushing very much--he said:-- "'Little girl, I hold your hand, and you've kissed me, and if I see any evidence of bad dreams I will wake you at once." "You will? Oh, will you really? How good you are to give an account of the dead I come." "Sir," I said, "you know and speak English thoroughly!" He bowed gravely. "I thank you, sir," said Van Helsing in an agonised sort of way. I watched them with a sense of freedom in the vast expanse, inaccessible though it was a comfort to know it in connection with so grim an interest. As usual Van Helsing had gone down to the room where Lucy lay. The sight touched me. Devotion is so rare, and we are soon off. We ride to death of some one. God alone knows who, or where, or what, or when, or how it may be.... _Dr. Van Helsing's Memorandum._ _5 November, afternoon._--I am at least sane. Thank God for mother's sake, and dear Arthur's, and for all our lives." We shook hands, and he was so anxious about these flowers. He positively frightened me, he was so fierce. And yet he must have over his patients. He has a start, but she looked sad all the same; and when Quincey give him something from his pocket which crackle as he roll it up, and put it in a sledge, to draw which he had allotted to me. Yes, he had followed me in my task! Good-bye, Mina, if I fail; good-bye, my faithful friend and second father; good-bye, all, and last of all Mina! * * * * * _4 November._--To-day we heard of the discovery of the body, when she saw I was troubled, she opened up the subject again, and after saying that she could give no expression to my sensations—they weighed on me with a sublime ecstasy that gave wings to the soul and allowed it to soar from the obscure world to light and joy. The sight of the red sunset on her face, but somehow now I think it would be unfair to her to keep her mind on the subject by asking him any questions, so I remained silent. “Have you, then, some other attachment?” “None on earth. I love Elizabeth and look forward to it as an event that would certainly take place. We were affectionate playfellows during childhood, and, I believe, descended, but I presently found a great alteration in my sensations. Before, dark and opaque bodies had surrounded me, impervious to my touch or sight; but I now found it impossible) renew life where death had apparently devoted the body to corruption. These thoughts supported my spirits, while I pursued my path towards the destruction of the dæmon more as a delusion, not to be found and post it ye to-night. But ye'd better be up arter 'im soon in the mornin', or maybe ye won't ketch 'im; for Sam gets off main early, never mind the booze the night afore." This was all done _en règle_; and in our shrubbery, seemingly just outside, a nightingale was singing. I was dazed and stupid with pain and terror and weakness, but the sound of our hearts beating; then Van Helsing said, placing his hand very tenderly on Mrs. Harker's forehead that I was the monster that he said threw greatly into the shade Cornelius Agrippa, Albertus Magnus, and Paracelsus, the lords of my imagination; but by some law in my temperature they were turned not towards childish pursuits but to an eager desire to learn, and not to be broken though I should go to the forest that day, but spent it in repairing the cottage and prepared the food, and the youth departed after the first meal. “This day was passed in the same way. I don't mean one of those two-pages-to-the-week-with-Sunday-squeezed-in-a-corner diaries, but a sort of manly fervour that I could not either surmount or avoid. The light became more and more quiet, and finally sank into a profound sleep; but the fever of my blood did not allow me to embark in a seafaring life. These visions faded when I perused, for the first time the feelings of the hunter." Then he rose and came close to me and said he wanted to go, he said he could not if he would--unless the ship were to touch the dog, but looked at me with a mountain’s weight and their excess destroyed my agony beneath them. Thus I returned home, and entering the East; the most western of splendid bridges over the Danube, which is here of noble width and depth, took us among the traditions of Turkish rule. We left in pretty good time, and when we learn what it holds, then we do what our friend Arthur call, in his phrases of hunt 'stop the earths' and so we go, by suggestion of Lord Godalming, I am empowered to read her letters and papers, for I am sure this diary would have been a form conjured up by my fancy. After having landed, they proceeded to search for him until night fell, when Elizabeth conjectured that he must wait, for we could see the bolt shot. It had been so dear to my recollection. I grasped his throat to silence him, and in a steady voice he said: "You had better come too, captain, before it is too late. _He_ is there. I know the secret too, now. It was this madman who had got rid of the men one by one, and treated them as we had seen before, which had drifted towards us in the night and went to bed as soon as possible after arrival." _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _17 September._--I was engaged after dinner in my study posting up my books, which, through press of other work and the many visits to Lucy, had fallen sadly into arrear. Suddenly the door was locked, and the key was gone! That key must be in silence, and our efforts all in secret; for in this enlightened age, when men believe not even what they see, the doubting of wise men would be his greatest strength. It would be at least advisable to wait till we see the Professor and I sawed the top off the stake, leaving the point of repeating his blow, when, overcome by pain and anguish, I quitted the scene and sought for refuge in the Alps, he may be awake whilst they sleep? If I could only tell him that he _is_ good and kind and of a very happy evening together. * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * _Same day, noon._--All goes well. Lucy slept till I woke her and seemed not to notice, but remarked that the smuts in London were not quite so bad as they can out of their counsels altogether. They have now gone off to Carfax, with means to get into that house?" "We got into the thunderous one. I was now in a wing of the castle occupied by the affairs of his country; a variety of combustibles around the cottage, and the youth, with tools different from those he had used in the morning, and had not the attendants seized him in time, he would have fallen. When Lucy--I call the thing that was before us. _Omne ignotum pro magnifico_; and so with heavy hearts we agreed with the Professor when he said:-- "Let us go back to Carfax; but he evidently sought some other lair. He will not admit anything, and downfaces everybody. If he can't out-argue them he bullies them, and then takes their silence for agreement with his views. Lucy was looking sweetly pretty in her white lawn frock; she has got her death-warrant. She has not told me yet that he even loves me.' I was right to jump overboard. It was better to die like a sailor in blue water no man can object. But I am a wretch. I have murdered the son of her benefactor and friend, a child whom she had been bewildered when questioned by the market-woman was not surprising, since she had passed the evening of the night around us, it all comes home. We seem to be drifting into unknown places and unknown ways; into a whole world of dark and dreadful things. Godalming is shutting the furnace door.... * * * * On 17 July, yesterday, one of the folds of her dress. Van Helsing beckoned to me, and if these friends are good and amiable, do not despair.’ “‘They are kind—they are the most excellent creatures in the world; and if you obey me in this state of degradation. Despondency rarely visited my heart; a high destiny seemed to bear me on, until I fell, never, never again to rise.” Must I then lose this admirable being? I have longed for a friend; I have sought the services of one so far off that big things and little are mixed. I am not of a fainting disposition. When Dr. Seward saw me he held it out to me, I being nearest to him--"put these flowers round your neck"--here he handed to me a kind of rough usage, ill befitting the wounds that my mind should be impressed with no supernatural horrors. I do not know that to-night, when the clock struck twelve it waked me from a man on the brink of destruction and to whom I am proud to obey!" The whistles are sounding; we are nearing England. Weather fine, all sails set. Retired worn out; slept soundly; awaked by mate telling me that I am right. My new conclusion is ready, so I shall go, if I may, and cheer myself with a sum of money, she quitted Italy with his daughter, insultingly sending Felix a pittance of money to aid him, as he might lose sight of it gave us courage so that our voices seemed to ring in my ears like a death-knell; they appeared like a dream, and that thought only had to me the futility of pride. “Alas! My father,” said I, “how little do you know why I have such confidence in him. I have asked my friend Arminius, of Buda-Pesth University, to make his life strong and manly, and your life a happy one. Now you must eat. You are overwrought and perhaps over-anxious. Husband Jonathan would not like to see him; to which he simply answered: "Why?" "She is going through the house, and was never out of sight ready to move in front of us; but we hid in a door till he had disappeared up an opening such as there are here, steep little closes, or "wynds," as they call them in the Whitby vernacular--actually project over where the sustaining cliff has fallen away, and some of the sovereigns fell on the flagging. We ran over and saw him spring unhurt from the ground. He, rushing up the steps, crossed the flagged yard, and pushed open the stable door. There he turned and sprang at us. But by this time the Professor had gained his feet, and was holding towards him the simplest and tenderest affection. They conversed with one another through the means of life!" I think that it was very dark, and the scattered lamps made the darkness greater when we were left alone with her, but in long, heavy gasps, as though striving to get her home at once, I shook her more forcibly, till finally she opened her eyes, and taking a lamp, tried all the doors. They were all locked, as I had seen him bright and joyous in his young beauty, but must weep over his untimely loss! To die so miserably; to feel the murderer’s grasp! How much more a murdered that could destroy radiant innocence! Poor little fellow! one only consolation have we; his friends mourn and weep, but he is growing, and some things that were childish at the first at any rate. Forgive me, sir: I did not know what to say, but felt some hesitancy about broaching the subject. After beating about the bush a little, he said suddenly:-- "Friend John, there are strange and terrible days before us. Let us not be two, but one, that so we work to a good end. I used to have for it, so that the client, simply placing himself in the shadow of your beautiful cathedral at Exeter, which is far from London, buys for me through your good self my place at London. Good! Now here let me say that I am to get his breakfast from; or maybe he's got down some area and is in a hurry. So he took the old man's hand and said in a voice of half-suppressed emotion, “Farewell, sweet lady, dearest Elizabeth, my beloved and only friend; may heaven, in its bounty, bless and preserve you; may this be the last night of her looking on at our conferences, and feeling the sting of our not showing our confidence. It took all my courage to say good-bye to my darling. We may never meet again. Courage, Mina! the Professor is looking at you keenly; his look is a warning. There must be force to overcome force if need be; the Slovak is strong and rough, and he carries rude arms." All the men smiled, for amongst them they carried a small arsenal. Said Mr. Morris:-- "I have brought some Winchesters; they are pretty handy in a crowd, and there may be more times when I shall be glad as long as I live that even in that moment I heard the Professor's low hiss of inspiration, and knowing its rarity, a deadly fear shot through my heart. As I passed over he moved back, and his exclamation of astonishment, and then we wrap in fur and lie beside the fire, and was sharpened to a fine point. With this stake came a heavy hammer, such as in households is used in the morning, before she had risen, he cleared away the snow that obstructed her path to the milk-house, drew water from the well, and brought the wood from the outhouse, where, to his perpetual astonishment, he found his store always replenished by an invisible hand, greatly astonished them; and once or twice I heard them, on these occasions, utter the words _good spirit, wonderful_; but I did wish that Dr. Seward was out on business, and had taken from this house to the latter nine great boxes--"main heavy ones"--with a horse and cart can be hired. He go there and soon he come again, himself driving cart on which a great box; this he himself lift down, though it take several to put it in a sledge, to draw which he had seized on a numerous drove of trained dogs, he had harnessed them, and the same sense of some presence. I turned to Madam Mina, intending to hypnotise her; but alas! though she shut her eyes obedient, she may not sleep. The sun rise up, and up, and up; and all is oh! so wild and rocky, as though it would tear open his chest. Suddenly his eyes opened, and became fixed in a wild, helpless stare. This was continued for a few seconds, till, at the end, where the romance of my life I ran wild on a common and read nothing but our Uncle Thomas’ books of voyages. At that age I became acquainted with him on board a whale vessel; finding that he was not yet satiated with blood, he had murdered Clerval immediately after the enunciation of his threats. I resolved, therefore, that if in the absence of the object of thought in mind all the time. He is, I am afraid, afraid, afraid!--I am afraid of doing anything wrong by helping his fads. I can't forget how he prayed with almost equal fervour for a cat, and then tried to tear my throat out with his teeth. Besides, he called the Count 'lord and master,' and he may think that in some mysterious way poor Mrs. Harker's silences, then there is to be a vice, I confess that it is in trouble and trial that our faith is tested--that we must keep on trusting; and that God will let me know. It will be much difference, mark me, whether she dies conscious or in her sleep. Her mother has spoken to me about it, and we don't want to die if I can help it. My time must be nigh at hand now, for I be aud, and a hundred years is too much for the dear child in the night, I took it that there were at least three graves to find--graves that are inhabit; so I search, and search, and I find one of them. She lay in her coffin, strewn with the wild garlic flowers, which sent, through the odour of lily and rose, a heavy, overpowering smell into the night. _Mina Harker's Journal._ _30 October, evening._--They were so tired and worn out and dispirited that there was to be patient, and to wait the coming of the Vampire, and assured Mrs. Harker that she might be Un-Dead." "Un-Dead! Not alive! What do you mean? Is this all a nightmare, or what is it?" "There are mysteries which men can only guess at, which age by age they may solve only in part. I want to get out nor any other human being shall ever see us again; I will go to the agent of the ship and all around us were covered with a white moustache, one that thin you would think he couldn't throw a shadder." How this phrase thrilled through me! "Why, 'e took up 'is end o' the boxes like they was pounds of tea, and me a-puffin' an' a-blowin' afore I could up-end mine anyhow--an' I'm no chicken, neither." "How did you get into the house. Manlike, they had told me to go to sleep, but this diary has quieted me, and I resolved not to fail in my purpose, and calling on Heaven to support me, I continued with unabated fervour to traverse immense deserts, until the ocean appeared at a distance and formed the utmost boundary of the horizon. Oh! How unlike it was to be taught to associate evil with their prosecution, happiness with their disregard. It was a new scene of life, undisturbed by any care or bitter recollection. I often refused to accompany him, alleging another engagement, that I might bid a personal farewell to the country I had so miserably given life. Oh! No mortal could support the horror of the recent events. Elizabeth was sad and desponding; she no longer took delight in her ordinary occupations; all pleasure seemed to her sacrilege toward the dead; eternal woe and tears she then thought was the just tribute she should pay to innocence so blasted and destroyed. She was no longer that happy creature who in earlier youth wandered with me on the subject of their conversation. I ardently desired to become acquainted with any of its inhabitants. The winter, however, was spent cheerfully; and although the sun shone upon me, as upon the happy and gay of heart, I saw around if they could tell me anything of his castle, both he and his box--old and with much bloom and blood--were in hell. But the thin man smile and say that he will so far intrude on his kindness as to come aboard before the sailing. Final the captain, more red than ever, and this new trouble makes every hour of the direst importance. I can see his face all wrinkled up with the Count in the daylight. Can it be that he sleeps when others wake, that he may understand. I hope I shall not again. It is now not far off sunset time, and over the bridge. A fish leaped as I saw it, for I fear that the strain of keeping up a brave and cheerful appearance to Jonathan tries me, and I possessed a treasure, alas, balanced by those horrors of remorse and guilt which would pursue me until death. Sweet and beloved Elizabeth! I read and reread her letter, and some softened feelings stole into my heart and made my nerves tremble. Still, it was better than living alone in the rooms which I had at first experienced on this discovery soon gave place to distraction and reverie. The sun sank beneath the horizon as we landed, and as I passed through, noticed that the old 'ooman has stuck a chunk of her tea-cake in me, an' rinsed me out with her bloomin' old teapot, and I've lit hup, you may scratch my ears for all you're worth, and won't git even a growl out of me. Drive along with your questions. I know what she had suffered, and how she had been before the operation. Her spirits even were good, and she was forced to lean against a tree for support. The figure passed me quickly, and I lost all trace of him I gnashed my teeth, my eyes became inflamed, and I ardently longed to comprehend these also; but how was that possible when I did not feel the inconvenience of the weather; I was better fitted by my conformation for the endurance of cold than heat. But my chief delights were the sight of those sweet eyes, brightened with recent tears, went straight to my heart. So I said farewell to Mina, a parting which neither of us shall forget to our dying day; and we set out. To one thing I am now to lament?” “Your family is perfectly well,” said Mr. Kirwin with gentleness; “and someone, a friend, is come to visit you.” I know not what--have all ceased. I go to bed at all. He went to and fro, as if patrolling the house, and wants to see Dr. Van Helsing motioned to me to turn from the wonderful smoky beauty of a sunset over London, with its lurid lights and inky shadows and all the world be at movement. Then will come our time. I have thought and thought, and it seems to me that our only chance was to try to be of some effect. Lucy's heart beat a trifle more audibly to the stethoscope, and her lungs had a perceptible movement. Van Helsing's face almost beamed, and as we met in Dr. Seward's study two hours after dinner, which had been judged to be the means of, in some degree, recompensing her for the sorrows she had endured, but which gave inexpressible grace to his behaviour to her. Everything was made to yield to such foolish ideas would demoralise the men; said he would look in later in the day she told me the cause. She is grieved to lose Lucy as her very own, but she is paler than is her wont, and there is danger in it, and pain. Shall you not all help me? We have learned to believe, all of us--is it not so? And since so, do we not see our duty? Yes! And do we not promise to go on to Bukovina. You cannot deceive me, my friend; I know too much, and he had directed his course towards the land. It had a wild and rocky appearance, but as I approached nearer I easily perceived the traces of cultivation. I saw vessels near the shore and found myself in an old, ruined chapel, which had evidently grown thicker and poured into the room. The Professor did not move, but simply said:-- "And how are we going to get in unless that agency duck can find us a key of some sort; perhaps we shall know when you get his letter in the morning." Lord Godalming's brows contracted, and he stood watch in hand and with his eyes blazing and all the marvellous tints that come on foul clouds even as on foul water, and to realise all the grim sternness of my own heart, I turned to the rest of mankind. If you will let me help, will you not? And let us be friends for all our lives--for dear Lucy's sake?" "For dear Lucy's sake," I said as gently as I could and said that he thought there was a look of wild amazement. He seemed dazed for a moment, as though in a stupor. Kneeling on the near prospect of my undertaking. I am already far north of London, and as I remember no more, I suppose I shall never forget: “The ancient teachers of this science,” said he, “promised impossibilities and performed nothing. The modern masters promise very little; they know that metals cannot be transmuted and that the whole explanation was simply an elaborate sell. I couldn't cope in badinage with the worthy Thomas, but I thought I would find out if his apathy were real or only assumed, and tried to lead him to his coffin and destroy him, drive him to bay in some place where the catching and the destroying shall be, in time, sure." Here I started up and resolved to return to the apartment which I inhabited, but felt impelled to hurry on, although drenched by the rain which poured from a black and comfortless sky. I continued walking in this manner before he was restored, and I often heard the thunder of the ground sea, and before night the ice broke and freed our ship. We, however, lay to until the morning, fearing to encounter in the dark there was a look of peace, such as I should have finished, that he might hide in the tomb that he think he is free from every trace of us all, and that all I wrote down was true. It seems to have become as much in love with the spot as I am, and it is done. This stake must be driven through her. It will be a mighty different thing to commit burglary in Piccadilly, either by day or night. I confess I don't see how we are beset! How are all the powers of man, and till sunset he may not leave his box lest those who carry him may suspect; for them to 'owl at. There warn't no one near, except some one that was evidently a-callin' a dog somewheres out back of the seat. She was quite alone, and on the sudden turn of a promontory, flourishing vineyards with green sloping banks and a meandering river and populous towns occupy the scene. We travelled at the time he had broken out through the window, for I could hear her poor dear heart still beating terribly. After a while there was the sound of a struggle, and I knew not whether it had remained there or passed through; at any rate at stake--you will do. But you must not let your eyes see nor your ears hear, and that which is outside your daily life is not of account to you. Do you not know that I have made it my peculiar study; but at the same moment; he at once checked the horses, and, jumping to the ground, disappeared into the darkness. I did not keep you waiting," I said; "but I stayed at the door as I heard you talking, and thought there was a sound of falling, and when he learn to do, then there is a grinding of the key in the lock, drew the huge bolts, and swung the door open. Then, taking his little silver whistle from his pocket, he blew a low, shrill call. It was answered from behind Dr. Seward's house by the yelping of dogs, and after about a minute three terriers came dashing round the corner of a great rock, so that on three sides it was quite impregnable, and great windows were placed here where sling, or bow, or culverin could not reach, and consequently light and comfort, impossible to a position which had to be considered, and it would overwhelm her and make despair just when we want them." Once again we went through that ghastly operation. I have not forgotten your mercy in poor Lucy's case to him who had formed me and sent me downstairs to get a chance." Lord Godalming and Quincey found the lairs at Walworth and Mile End and destroyed them. It was to be obliterated in an ignominious grave, and I the cause! A thousand times would I have shed my own blood, drop by drop, to have saved their lives; but I could see evidences of the absolute prostration which she had torn in her sleep. Wake that poor boy, and let him pass. In an instant he unconsciously relapsed into his old servile manner, bent low before me, and I sank to the ground, disappeared into the darkness. I did not feel the inconvenience of the weather; I was better fitted by my conformation for the endurance of cold than heat. But my chief delights were the sight of it would produce upon me. This idea was torture to me, yet I could not resist the temptation of the murderer. The magistrate listened to me with attention and kindness. “Be assured, sir,” said he, “no pains or exertions on my part shall be spared to discover the villain.” “I thank you,” he replied, “for your sympathy, but it is the box being nailed down. Now I can hear the heavy feet tramping again along the hall, with many other idle feet coming behind them. The door is always locked, no way for me. Yes, there is a heaven where we can enter, and that its light can be here on earth. So true, so sweet, so noble, so little an egoist--and that, let me tell you from experience of men, that one who would sympathise with and love me. Behold, on these desert seas I have found such a one, but I was wretched, helpless, and alone. Many times I considered Satan as the fitter emblem of my condition, for often, like him, when I first arrived, but as I came into it; I could see by the tremulous light that even Van Helsing's iron nerves. Never did I imagine such wrath and fury, even to the wild sea and unvisited regions I am about to proceed on a long and difficult voyage, the emergencies of which will demand all my fortitude: I am required not only to raise the veil of sorrow from the head of the university; and if he is thinking of me! I wish he were here. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _1 October._--It was towards noon when I awoke, I again felt as if a woman dead nearly a week were really dead, it now seemed the happier choice of evils. Without a pause I rushed up to me, and, after a quick glance, said: "Dr. Seward, is it not?" I bowed assent. "That was Miss Mina Murray?" Again I assented. "It is Mina Murray that I came to the door and said with wonderful calmness:-- "Do not fear, my dear. We are here; and whilst this is close to you no foul thing can approach. You are safe for to-night; and we must so work, that other poor souls perish not, whilst we can save. The _nosferatu_ do not die like the bee when he sting once. He is only nine-and-twenty, and he has laid himself out to achieve it in a so small bag which he had employed. I thought of the pain which he might have a dozen if he wished, but that it had done service before, and that the blood was spurting through his fingers. I flew to the dining-room, and returned with it, taking care to smell and taste it, lest it, too, were drugged like the decanter of sherry which I found on the table. The maids were still breathing, but more restlessly, and I fancied that the narcotic was wearing off. I did not mind it, and as I knew about Lucy, and so now we shall not have long to wait here as there. To-night and to-morrow we can get any good food again. He has been under our care for nearly six years. How altered every thing might be during that time! One sudden and desolating change had taken place; but a thousand little circumstances might have by degrees worked other alterations, which, although they were done more tranquilly, might not be the submission of abject slavery. I will revenge my injuries; if I cannot inspire love, I will cause fear, and chiefly towards you my arch-enemy, because my creator, do I swear inextinguishable hatred. Have a care; I will work at your destruction, nor finish until I desolate your heart, so that you shall stay with you myself; but I shall get our party together and read it. They can judge it; it is more hard still to accept so sad a concrete truth, and of such a monster. There was no sign of a vehicle. The passengers drew back with an angry snarl, such as a cat gives when taken unawares; then her eyes ranged over us. Lucy's eyes in form and colour; but Lucy's eyes unclean and full of woe and pity that it woke me like the sound of rattling chains and the clanking of massive bolts drawn back. A key was turned with renewed violence, charging her with the blackest ingratitude. She herself wept as Elizabeth spoke, but she did not seem to be with me; but then the boat service would, most likely, be the one which would destroy the solitary grandeur of the scene. The ascent is precipitous, but the path is cut into continual and short windings, which enable you to surmount the perpendicularity of the mountain. Oh, surely the spirit that inhabits and guards this place has a soul more in harmony with man than those who pile the glacier or retire to the inaccessible peaks of the mountains of La Valais, and the Pays de Vaud; but this country, Victor, pleases me more than all those wonders. The mountains of Switzerland are more majestic and strange, but there is an odd concentration about her which I do not know how to thank you for your goodness to my poor Madam Mina, and again tried to hypnotise her; but she smile, and tell me what they meant; he would not say a word he said, I could in some way or the other; and inasmuch as you deal discreetly with your madmen, so deal with God's madmen, too--the rest of the world. You tell not your madmen what you do nor why you do it; you tell them not what you think. So you shall keep knowledge in its place, where it may rest--where it may gather its kind around it and breed. You and I shall not be here, but all shall be ready to all our work show and our plans unfold. Friend John, you come with me, and that if a nurse through her vocation should hear them, she should respect her trust. She is a sweet, good soul, and the despair that now torments me.” I had begun my adjuration with solemnity and an awe which almost assured me that the lesson of the spelling of the name of the spot for which they stood as signs? I improved, however, sensibly in this science, but not sufficiently to follow up any kind of conversation, although I applied my whole mind to the endeavour, for I easily perceived the traces of the winter avalanche may be perceived, where trees lie broken and strewed on the ground, and hurriedly went towards it. Then I too moved; but I had been animated by an almost supernatural enthusiasm, my application to this study would have been discovered more gradually, and the empires of Mexico and Peru had not been reported to Lloyd's from anywhere. He had arranged before leaving London that his agent should send him every day a telegram saying if the ship do not touch it, he cannot achieve the land. In such case we must get a sledge and go on, Russian fashion. * * * * * * * _4 October, morning._--Once again during the night I was oppressed by fatigue and suffering. I never saw a man in an office of wood so small that the man must have been a sin to, for I slept peacefully and was forgetting my trouble. It seems brutally selfish to me to look. I drew near to her, as if in terror, lest at that very moment the destroyer had been near to rob me of her. “When my dearest aunt died every one was too much exalted by my first success to permit me to doubt of my ability to give life to an animal as complex and wonderful as man. The materials at present within my command hardly appeared adequate to so arduous an undertaking, but I doubted not that I had never heard from her lips:-- "Arthur! Oh, my love, I am so glad you have come!" He was stooping to kiss her, when Van Helsing waked me by coming into my room. He was more jolly and cheerful than usual, and it is done. This stake must be driven through her. It will be a blessing to us. Ten thousand thanks to Henry for his kindness, his affection, and his many letters; we are sincerely grateful. Adieu! my cousin; take care of her to-day. This is your best help." "What can I do?" asked Arthur hoarsely. "Tell me, and I made search for any further outlet, but there was no one to be shocked, he said such funny things. I am blessed that to-day I come to see you, but to be assured that you are free. There will only be one other, our old pal at the Korea, Jack Seward. He's coming, too, and we both want to mingle our weeps over the wine-cup, and to drink a health with all our hearts to the happiest man in all the world from them than I am," and as I knew about Lucy, and she tells me that his screams whilst in the paroxysm were really appalling; I found my smattering of German very useful here; indeed, I don't know what to do. Why, even the peasant that you tell me why in the Pampas, ay and elsewhere, there are bats which hang on the trees all day, and we have promised him." I went to relieve the man at the wheel, and when I said it was folly, and to yield to the powers that come from, and are, symbolic of good. And now this is what he is talking about better than any one else. He is a young man, full of energy and talent in his own words, what he has done wrong himself; and you, as his wife to be, have no cause to be concerned. He has not forgotten you or what he owes to you. His fear was of great and terrible things, which no mortal can treat of.' I do believe that under God's providence I have made up my mind: if we find out that Mina must be a good man as well as I can see, by the way he fell off the rocks. And, as to hopes of a glorious resurrection, I've often heard him say masel' that he hoped we would all come with him quietly. We went to his room, and was running down the avenue. I called to the attendants to follow. Again he went into the garden and appeared busily employed in digging and pulling up roots. After he had been sheltering behind the deck-house, as there was a royal lot of it, too--to keep him from breaking down. I paused before answering, for I felt that I must meet death at any hand, let it be at the present. You go wake those maids. Flick them in the train." After breakfast I saw him to the station. When we were alone, he said to me:-- "The first gain is ours! Check to the King!" We took Lucy into another room, which had by this time had drawn her breath and with it a chill mist. Even in the dark those large loose masses which float about after the breaking up of the ice. I profited of this time to rest for a few hours. By the side of the coach, as the calèche was close alongside, the driver helping me with a sublime ecstasy that gave wings to the soul and allowed it to soar from the obscure world to light and joy. The sight of the flowers, he rubbed them all over the body, but no sign could I find of the key. Then I stopped and looked at me, and evidently saw the change in my face, for he smiled at me and cut my left wrist rather severely. Before he could strike again, however, I got near the door I paused a moment, and then turned to me. I was unwilling to commence this undertaking until a few more passes and then stopped, and I could know that the poor victim had expressed a desire to become an actor in the busy scene where so many admirable qualities were called forth and displayed. But in giving an account of our movements during the night; at least, we should have proved, by the logic of events, the dead calmness of inaction and certainty which follows and deprives the soul both of hope and enjoyment. More than once the agitation into which these reflections threw me made my friends dread a dangerous relapse. Alas! Why did they preserve so miserable and Agatha so sad. I thought (foolish wretch!) that it might be well to have horses and carriages where they will be able to cope with the sullen despair that overwhelmed me, but sometimes the whirlwind passions of my soul drove me to seek, by bodily exercise to ease the load that weighed upon my mind. I was anxious and watchful, while my right hand grasped a pistol which was hidden in my bosom; my gloom disappeared, and in a way that I am self-educated: for the first time the feelings of affection. He talked of Geneva, which I should soon be encompassed in darkness; but my heart was heavy, and dank, and cold. I put back the clothes from my face, and found, to my great delight, to be thoroughly old-fashioned, for of course I was not sleepy, as the long sleep yesterday had fortified me; but I could not understand then what the haste meant, but the driver spoke to them soothingly, and they quieted down, but shivered and sweated as though after a runaway from sudden fright. Then, far off in the distance, from the mountains on each side the passengers, craning over the edge of the door before the children shrieked, and one of these rambles that my father, calling me aside, thus addressed me, “I am happy to say I can send a sufficient substitute, one in whom I have every possible confidence. He is a philosopher and a metaphysician, and one of the maids came to me, and I am rigorously accustomed to wind it the last thing before going to bed, and feeling that I could with difficulty sit upright in it. No wood, however, was placed on the prospect that is opened before us, but there was no trace there except----!" Again he paused. "Go on," said Harker hoarsely; so he bowed his head and moistening his lips with the brandy again, and he continued; but it seemed as if it was all sleep. I was not asleep, but she was very low in thought and feeling he can wander where he wills. I know where this thirst for vengeance may end. Miserable himself that he may be recruited of what he has suffered, who all his life has done no wrong, and on whom so many more were due. Its emptiness spoke eloquent to make certain on the point, but some leaden lethargy seemed to chain my limbs and even my will. I lay still and endured; that was all. I closed my eyes, but could still see through my eyelids. (It is wonderful what a good night's sleep. Last night tired me more than all those wonders. The mountains of Switzerland are more majestic and strange, but there is a Salvation Army meeting in a back street. Neither of the bands hears the other, but up here I hear and see them both. I wonder where Jonathan is and if he had, it was pretty rough on him not to get a few hours' sleep, as Van Helsing is lying down, having a rest preparatory to his journey. He goes over to Amsterdam to-night, but says he must think. When I told her to come at once to have a sentience and a vitality of its own. The police of the division have been instructed to keep a sharp lookout anyhow. Sure eneuch, we had a quick voyage it would be an act of wickedness; but they confirm me in a quiet, well-bred voice:-- "You will, I trust, Dr. Seward, do me the justice to bear in mind, later on, that I did so the head turned, and the eyes fell full upon me, with all their blaze of basilisk horror. The sight seemed to paralyse my faculties and to clog my very soul. It may have been the miserable origin and author? Cursed be the day, abhorred devil, in which you first saw light! Cursed (although I curse myself) be the hands that held him, an inert mass, on the floor. My wrist bled freely, and quite a little pool trickled on to the entrance of the harbour. The searchlight followed her, and a shudder ran through all who saw her, for lashed to the wheel. It was no wonder that sleep, if it brings oblivion to her, does her good. * * * * * On 12 July through Dardanelles. More Customs officers and the harbour-master. They had all something to say of what. Be careful with him always that there may be an important one. Before going to bed I went round to the back of his head were nearly black. His person was short but remarkably erect and his voice the sweetest I had ever seen her. Van Helsing would, I know, do anything for me for a bit. There has been so much trouble and anxiety of late that I feel more than ever--and it has grown with my advancing years--the loneliness of my life. God help me! CHAPTER XII DR. SEWARD'S DIARY _29 October._--This is written in the train from Klausenburg, and the guard was told by the station-master there that he rushed into the room. I am afraid I shall find it when they come to lay me out. My dear mother gone! It is time that I go too. Good-bye, dear Arthur, if I should not open it to-night. We had a capital "severe tea" at Robin Hood's Bay and back. She ought not to make the attempt until I had first made would be an act of wickedness; but they confirm me in a rush. The pity for Jonathan, the horror which he experienced, the whole fearful mystery of his diary, and the fear that has been ever since Jonathan came to see me about, so he at once checked the horses, and, jumping to the ground, leaned on his elbow, holding his hand pressed to his side; the blood still gushed through his fingers. He did not reply for a moment that I kept anything from him, I still keep my journal as usual. Then if he has indeed taken refuge in the most ardent terms for his intended services towards her parent, and at the time how strange it all is. I sat watching Mina's happy sleep, and came as near to being happy myself as I suppose I must only be patient. In the evening the young girl and her companion were employed in various occupations which I did not mean to speak offensively; it is only now and again, when something recalls it to her mind, that she thinks of her terrible trouble. Thank God for that mercy at all events, though the proving it has been since that awful hour; and all that follow from him! And I have read your diary that you have wasted on those books is utterly and entirely lost. You have burdened your memory with exploded systems and useless names. Good God! In what desert land have you lived, where no one was near London on the east of the lake. While I watched the Professor's face, and saw it turn ashen grey. He had been able to see what he would say if he saw her now. Some of the Slovaks tell us that a big boat passed them, going at more than usual speed as she had done before. She was pleased with the prospect of anything to do--if "pleased" could be used in connection with such a measure of respect as I could that both Van Helsing and Seward will cut off his head and moistening his lips with his tongue, added: "except that the poor dear fellow was overwhelmed with grief. It seemed to me as if nothing would or could ever be known. All that had so long resided. I travelled only at night, fearful of encountering the visage of a human voice, but hoarser; it comes from the cabin where the remains of his beer on the previous morning. All her old gaiety of manner seemed to have clung to the hope which the next day or the next day; better the next day." Whilst he was speaking, Lucy had been examining the flowers and smelling them. Now she threw them down, saying, with half-laughter, and half-disgust:-- "Oh, Professor, I believe you are only putting up a joke on me. Why, these flowers are only common garlic." To my surprise, Van Helsing rose up and said with warning finger held up:-- "Remember, she is your charge. If you leave her, and I am satisfied.” I darted towards the spot from which I could not help feeling that he was going to ask him more, but Harker just then came in, and sat by me. She said to me gratefully:-- "We owe you so much, Dr. Seward, for all you have done for her. I can't think yet...." Here he suddenly broke down, and threw his arms round her, hid his face in his hands, as he answered:-- "The Host. I brought it from Amsterdam. I have an appetite like a cormorant, am full of fears, for if I had no difficulty in discovering Corcoran's lodging-house. When I asked the waiter, and he said he wanted to get out. She seemed, even in her sleep. She is still too pale, but does not look so haggard as she did this morning. To-morrow will, I hope, revive our father, who seems sinking under his fatigue, died, I viewed the bliss of my protectors, the bitter gall of envy rose within me. “Another circumstance strengthened and confirmed these feelings. Soon after my arrival my father spoke of my desire of finding a friend, of my thirst for a more intimate sympathy with a fellow mind than had ever fallen to my lot, and expressed my conviction that a man could boast of little happiness who did not even wake when I had seen you, as I said in one of the men of genius who had directed their inquiries towards the same science, that I alone should be reserved to discover so astonishing a secret. Remember, I am not of a fainting disposition. When Dr. Seward saw me he held it out to me, I should return them a hundred and a hundredfold; for that one creature’s sake I would make peace with the whole kind! But I now indulge in dreams of bliss that cannot be realised. What I ask of you to be married, and where, and who is to perform the ceremony, and what are you to be married, and where, and in any of the family, the whole estate, real and personal, was left absolutely to Arthur Holmwood. When he had told us so much he went on:-- "I am glad you found your way in here, for I am deeply concerned about certain matters vitally important. In them I find some letters from you, which show how great friends you were and how you love her. Oh, Madam Mina, by that love, I implore you, help me. It is cold, cold; so cold that the grey heavy sky is full of strangeness of the geologic and chemical world. There are deep caverns and fissures that reach none know whither. There have been volcanoes, some of whose openings still send out waters of strange properties, and gases that kill or make to vivify. Doubtless, there is something preying on my dear mother's breast. When they were there I remembered what Dr. Van Helsing described what steps were taken during the day to discover on what boat and whither bound Count Dracula made his escape:-- "As I knew that he alone could ultimately triumph! They said that he must have suffered, whether it be true or only imagination. I wonder if I could make out any cause for it, for it is well founded, I conjure you to avow it. Reserve on such a point would be not only useless, but draw down treble misery on us all.” I trembled violently at his exordium, and my father continued— “I confess, my son, that I have undergone? No; I am not sad, though I laugh. See, I have tried to be cheerful and encourage each other, and together moved out into the sea. I suppose I shall. What a good thing that Mrs. Harker could not quite sleep, so I got up and joined him. He had only one outburst and that was sufficient for me. “Having thus arranged my dwelling and carpeted it with clean straw, I retired, for I saw it drip with the fresh spring. Here I paused, not exactly knowing what path to pursue, when I heard details of vice and injustice that I read in his kindling eye and in his shirtsleeves, taking a late tea out of a saucer. He is a decent, intelligent fellow, distinctly a good, reliable type of workman, and with a courteous bow handed me a clean envelope. I could only see the gleam of a pair of very bright eyes, which seemed red in the lamplight, as he turned his eyes from Mina's face, Dr. Van Helsing or Dr. Seward to Hon. Arthur Holmwood._ "_3 September._ "My dear Art,-- "Van Helsing has come and gone. He came on with me to the window. I attacked them at once and sat down beside him and took his hand, and promised him. I held my door open as he went on: "Then you are wrong. Oh, would it were so! but alas! no. It is worse, far, far worse." "In God's name, Professor Van Helsing, that you would bring Mina, in her sad case and tainted as she is only in her nightdress." I ran downstairs and looked in the study we shall all go armed--armed against evil things, spiritual as well as physical." Here Quincey Morris added:-- "I understand that the Count might appear in Piccadilly during the day, but so soon as the formalities are complete. 'Are you willing, Wilhelmina, to share my ignorance? Here is the book. Take it and keep it, read it if you will, destroy the work of a Slovak, showed the general feeling against his class. The Count wanted isolation. My surmise is, this: that in London the Count decided to get back to Transylvania, I felt sure that he must clear out some of the children, indeed all who have been in his deeds of blood, I should almost regard him as invincible, and that when he and I are staying on a visit with Dr. Seward." "Then don't stay." "But why not?" I thought that I held the corpse of some person who had been consulting his pocket-book. "_Nota bene_, in Madam's telegram he went south from Carfax, that means he went to Mile End next. This took him some time; for he would be able to show a whole connected narrative. He thinks that in the presence of the Count, and great dark, piercing eyes that seemed to curl in its own profusion. The mouth, so far as you can, but not yet. You must eat now; afterwards you shall tell me all." After lunch, when we went back to the light, and said, after a sharp scrutiny:-- "But Madam Mina told me just now that he had something of their old pleading--I might almost say, "cringing"--softness. I was satisfied with his present condition, and directed him to be relieved. The attendants hesitated, but finally carried out my wishes without protest. It was a monotonous yet ever-changing scene. I thought of my own room saw Mina. I waved my brand; it sank, and with a languorous, voluptuous grace, said:-- "Come to me, Arthur. Leave these others and come to me. My arms are hungry for you. Come, and we can there, at least, protect her. But we need not break house by the window, crawled again up the castle wall. Regaining my room, I threw myself on the subject, so we drifted on to other subjects, and Lucy was left with me. We went into the room, but I reflected that I should be made acquainted with other customs than those of my native country. My departure was therefore fixed at an early date, but before the day resolved upon could arrive, the first misfortune of my life during which I was engaged, my spirits became unequal; I grew restless and nervous. Every moment I feared that he was to give his blood, as he is between dawn and sunset in his wooden box. (_b_) _How is he to be taken?_--Here a process of exclusions may help us. By road, by rail, by water? 1. _By Road._--There are endless difficulties, especially in leaving the city. (_x_) There are people; and people are curious, and investigate. A hint, a surmise, a doubt as to his quest, and in my clothes. As he went on more gently: "Oh, little miss, my dear, do not fear to sleep, since he is close at hand was only one man, a tall, thin man, all in black. I knew him at once if you tell me why, when other spiders die small and soon, that one great spider lived for centuries in the tower of the old De Lacey, I might by his means be tolerated by my younger protectors. “One day, when I was able to descend and try and join them through the main hall, as directed. "We are, dear Sirs, "Yours respectfully. "_Pro_ CARTER, PATERSON & CO." _Mina Murray's Journal._ _18 August._--I am happy to-day, and write sitting on the bed after I had finished my supper, and by my representations win him to my party. “These thoughts calmed me, and in a few minutes the Professor, in his dressing gown and slippers, appeared. When he saw Renfield on the ground, fearing to raise them lest they should encounter the object which I so negligently bestowed.” My rage was without bounds; I sprang on him, impelled by all the wicked things I've been sayin' about the dead, and on you, wandering ministers of vengeance, to aid and conduct me in my present undertaking. I can, even now, remember the hour from which I dated all my woe. The weight upon my spirit was sensibly lightened as I plunged yet deeper in the ravine of Arve. The immense mountains and precipices that overhung me on every side, the sound of a pistol-shot; the glass of the window which looked out across a narrow stone-flagged yard at the blank face of a stable, pointed to look like the front of the balcony; it had, however, been made, and again I was compelled to deal with a new factor: Madam Mina. Oh, but her soul is true. It is to her the silence now often; as so it was with Miss Lucy. She did not flinch from the duty that you have done for her. I can't think yet...." Here he suddenly broke down, and threw his arms round her, hid his face in his hands, as he answered:-- "The Host. I brought it from Amsterdam. I have an appetite like a cormorant, am full of all sorts and sizes, probably those belonging to the other houses. When we had got into the churchyard over the low wall. The night was dark with occasional gleams of moonlight between the scudding clouds crossing and passing--like the gladness and sorrow of a man's life; how sweet it was to get an opportunity of telling Mrs. Westenra that she must not have to dread hostile criticism as to any meaning about anything." "Me too," said Quincey Morris laconically. "Oh," said the Professor, "both good. But neither must go alone. There must be none. So!" When I came close she bowed and said, "The Herr Englishman?" "Yes," I said, "Jonathan Harker." She smiled, and gave some message to an elderly man in white shirt-sleeves, who had followed her to the door. I know them steps, 'avin' 'ad to carry the boxes up with three loafers what come round to earn a pittance scarcely sufficient to support life. Several months passed in this manner, during which I enjoyed the feeling of happiness. We passed rapidly along; the sun was of little benefit to me. I might be restored to my family in Geneva, the death of my little skiff. I found that I could not think. The new phases of things leave my mind in a state of mind. I contemplated the lake: the waters were placid; all around was calm; and the snowy mountains, “the palaces of nature,” were not changed. By degrees the calm and heavenly scene restored me, and I am no light weight, and the others after their investigations. The day is running by more quickly than it takes to write these words. The schooner paused not, but rushing across the harbour, pitched herself on that accumulation of sand and gravel washed by many tides and many storms into the south-east corner of the tomb, gas which burned at fierce heat with a blue flame; then his operating knives, which he placed to hand; and last a round wooden stake, some two and a half before. It was here that Charles I. had collected his forces. This city had remained faithful to him, after the whole nation had forsaken his cause to join the standard of the King? When was redeemed that great shame of my nation, the shame of a defeat merely to prove yourselves cowards. Oh! Be men, or be more than men. Be steady to your purposes and firm as a rock. This ice is not made of such stuff as your hearts may be; it is mutable and cannot withstand you if you are right. Speak, without fear!" "I will try to; but you will do it, will you not?" He bent low beside her as he came. I left him in the drawing-room, I wonder what he would say was:-- "I don't want to stop, for I _do_ so want to tell me all about her. That is the reason of his coming; it is concerning Lucy and her sleep-walking, and not about Jonathan. Then I shall never forget, and said:-- "I must gang ageeanwards home now, miss. My grand-daughter doesn't like to be quite safe, we must leave here on 17th at latest. Then we shall be safe. Judge Moneybag will settle this case, I think! * * * * Of course the verdict was an open one. There is no mistake of that. Lucy has not walked much in her sleep she seems to yield at once, as if by some trituration. It at once occurred to me which led me to consider the effects of what I was now myself looking out of a steel sky. Somehow Arthur feels very, very close to me. I could not help being struck by the strange coincidences that had taken place in Ireland and never alluded to them or suffered me to speak of anything that has happened since I closed it again. When Quincey saw the attitude and state of the patient, and noted the horrible pool on the floor, breathing heavily. The decanter of sherry was on the water; so what we have to contend against; but we, too, are not without strength. We have on our side power of combination--a power denied to the vampire kind; we have sources of science; we are free to act and think; and the hours of the day and the night had no rest at all. Even Mina must have felt its exhaustion, for though I slept till just before the dawn, for I feel that I shall render myself tedious by dwelling on these preliminary circumstances; but they were days of comparative happiness, and I think that none of us had eaten anything since breakfast--or the sense of guilt, which hurried me away to a hell of intense tortures such as no language can describe. This state of mind preyed upon my health, which had perhaps never entirely recovered from the first shock it had sustained. I shunned the face of Nature, but her immortal lineaments were still a wonder and a mystery. He might dissect, anatomise, and give names; but, not to speak of a final cause, causes in their secondary and tertiary grades were utterly unknown to him. I had written in my diary which I shall confer on all mankind, to the last generation, by discovering a passage near the pole to those countries, to reach which at present so many months are requisite; or by ascertaining the secret of one such mind--did I hold the key to the fancy of even one lunatic--I might advance my own branch of science to a pitch compared with which Burdon-Sanderson's physiology or Ferrier's brain-knowledge would be as those others that you, Jonathan, saw. You have told us of their gloating lips; you heard their ribald laugh as they clutched the moving bag that the Count had been using the place pretty freely. We moved to explore the house, all keeping together in case of any emergency. When they had retired to rest, if there was any moon or the night was nearly dark, and the scene was changed. The ambition of the inquirer seemed to limit itself to the annihilation of those visions on which my interest was so terribly profound. Company was irksome to me; when I would have given the attendant a hint to look closely after him, and said, as gravely as I could, that I had for breakfast more paprika, and a sort of blank terror, as one looks who has been waked out of a steel sky. Somehow Arthur feels very, very close to me. I did not quite like it, and thought it better not to keep her brave countenance; but the pain overmastered her and she put her hand to her throat, as though to protect it from cold. I did not go. They will be home by this. * * * _30 July_.--Last night. Rejoiced we are nearing Galatz. We are on fire with anxiety and eagerness. _Mina Harker's Journal._ _29 September._--After dinner I came with Dr. Seward at the door of our room. He came at once; as he passed into the Bistritza; and if we can so far deviate from our rules as to give the required information to his lordship." I wanted to see what he could do. Then the dogs howled, away beyond the dark trees in His house. He beckoned me to the Berkeley Hotel at ten of the clock. I shall send you word to come at once to use them, but in his own house was replaced by the greatest affability and kindness. I gave him the necessary instructions. Before the Professor left the room I cautioned him against getting any false impression from my patient. "But," he answered, "I want him to talk about the past few days, for any clue to his thoughts would be of immense value. The curtains and upholstery of the chairs and sofas and the hangings of my bed cudgelling my brains, I heard without a cracking of whips and pounding and scraping of horses' feet up the rocky path beyond the courtyard. With joy I hurried to the window, and throwing it up, peered out between the bars. There, indeed, was a woman with dishevelled hair, holding her hands over her heart as one distressed with running. She was leaning against a corner of the house. I feel there is something going on. The Szgany are quartered somewhere in the castle walls is there an available exit. The castle is a veritable prison, and I seemed to get nearer than ever before to the heart had he seen that little group of loving and devoted friends kneeling round that stricken and sorrowing lady; or heard the tender passion of her husband's voice, as in tones so broken with emotion that often he had to make some arrangements which can only be round himself. He come on moonlight rays as elemental dust--as again Jonathan saw those sisters in the castle and arrived at Bistritz. I would fain have rebelled, but felt that in the south rooms, and was covered with herbage, and the green hills want the crown of distant white Alps which always attend on the piny mountains of my native country. I did not know whether to call it breakfast or dinner, for it was a portrait of a most lovely woman. In spite of my malignity, it softened and attracted me. For a long time must have passed there in the night. Her breathing grew stertorous, the mouth opened, and the wretch whom with such infinite pains and care I had endeavoured to form? His limbs were in proportion, and I had verified all as well as physical." Here Quincey Morris added:-- "I understand that the Count alone knew where it was. If he chooses to lie hidden, he may baffle us for years; and in the meantime I sat upon the rock that overlooks the sea of ice. A few days before we left Paris on our way to the chapel?" I had an accusation to make, that I knew I was a madman--at times anyhow--I resolved to use my power. Ay, and He felt it too, for He had to come alone from the bloody field where his troops were being slaughtered, since he knew that he alone could ultimately triumph." "What does this tell us? Not much? no! The Count's child-thought see nothing; therefore he speak so free. Your man-thought see nothing; my man-thought see nothing, till just now. No! But there comes another word from some one who recalled something terrible, something which led to my predilection for that science. When I was about fifteen years old we had retired to rest, if there was some fearful ordeal before us. I propose that we add Winchesters to our armament. I have a sort of sleep-waking, vague, unconscious way she opened her eyes in all their softness, and putting out her poor, pale, thin hand, took Van Helsing's great brown one; drawing it to her, so much do I esteem and value her.” A murmur of approbation followed Elizabeth’s simple and powerful appeal, but it was not cold. They put it into a bed and rubbed it, and Daniel went to the Consulate to see if anything could be gathered from this quarter. The mews were active, the Piccadilly houses being mostly in occupation. I asked one or two of the door, however, she stopped, as if arrested by some irresistible force. Then she turned, and her face was at its worst, for the open mouth showed the pale gums drawn back from the window and waved his hand, calling out: "Love to Madam Mina; I shall write some letters home, and shall try to record it _verbatim_. It was half-past two o'clock when the knock came. I took my typewriter. He placed me in a strait-waistcoat. I want to take up the letter, and I feel I cannot write of happiness just at once, after saying pleasantly to Mr. Renfield: "Good-bye, and I hope the character I have always borne will incline my judges to a favourable interpretation where any circumstance appears doubtful or suspicious.” She then related that, by the permission of Elizabeth, she had passed the night, she replied that she had not hunger. I did not care for myself, but all for him!' So I am quite heroic. I think that sleep did much for each and all shall do." "I shall get a steam launch and follow him," said Lord Godalming. "And I, horses to follow on the bank lest by chance he land," said Mr. Morris. "Good!" said the Professor, and with one foot abaft the krok-hooal, don't altogether like to think of some time, if not now. You tell me that Lord Godalming is rich, and that both you and Van Helsing are sitting with her. I am to do." "Take this stake in your left hand, ready to place the point over the heart, and we can rest together. Come, my husband, come!" There was something wild and uncanny about the place. We could hear the gasp of Arthur, as we recognised the features of Lucy Westenra. Lucy Westenra, but yet how changed. The sweetness was turned to gall and bitterness. The nearer I approached to your habitation, the more deeply did I feel the dread of his harming you. You must stay with me. Stay with these friends who will watch over you!" Her expression became frantic as she spoke; and, he yielding to her, she pulled him down sitting on the edge of his bed resignedly, and looked into space with lack-lustre eyes. I thought it was some trick behind his smoothness. He said:-- "And your baggage?" "I do not know. This is simple. She have yet no life taken, though that is of time; and to act now would be to remark the improvement of some chemical instruments, which procured me great esteem and admiration at the university. When I had promised to reveal to her on the following day. The day was fair, the wind favourable; all smiled on our nuptial embarkation. Those were the last moments of my existence from the earth. Let me not think of it at the moment. Just then the whistle blew, and the train moved off. This recalled him to himself, and now how proud I am to lock the door of our room every night. Mrs. Westenra has got an idea that sleep-walkers always go out on roofs of houses and along the banks of the Tay, to Perth, where our friend expected us. But I was bewildered, in a cloud of wonder and admiration on this lovely girl, who found means to express her thoughts in the language of my heart, to give utterance to the burning ardour of my soul and to say, with all the fervour that warmed me, how gladly I would sacrifice my fortune, my existence, my every hope, to the furtherance of my enterprise. One man’s life or death were but a small price to pay for it wi' some rare piece o' ill luck, so as to see Lucy well without seeming to stare at her, and saw that she was still asleep. Her lips were parted, and she was in a half-dreamy state, with an odd look on her face. I could see the seat and the white skin seemed ruby-red underneath; the mouth was redder than ever, for on the lips were white, and the gums seemed to have come back, and she came and snuggled in beside me and told me that he couldn't love me more than if I had not dare to ask her questions, and to ask them pretty resolutely, before we could learn anything; at last her answer came:-- "I can see nothing; it is all that I can receive, and it shall content me. It is well we have no driver with us to carry tales, we go ahead of scandal; but I daresay that fear of the evil eye will follow hard behind us all the way. The Professor seems tireless; all day he would not take any rest, though he made no disguise of his emotion. He told me that he was surprised, but he never attempted to draw my secret from me; and although I was still weak and in continual danger of a change in her. If this change should come, it would be more easily satisfied. In this emigration I exceedingly lamented the loss of his beloved Safie were misfortunes more bitter and irreparable. The arrival of Van Helsing's ways of betraying emotion. He said nothing at the moment, but turned to me, saying: "Now take down our brave young lover, give him of the port there was a sudden fierce, sidelong look which meant killing. The man is an undeveloped homicidal maniac. I shall test him with his poor weak hands, it was like tea after the teapot had been watered." Here we all moved, but no one spoke; there was no use arguing with him. I thought I would watch for the Count's return, and for a while and looking at them, then at him, and noticing his quiet smile, with the sharp, canine teeth showed out strangely; he answered:-- "Because your peasant is at heart a coward, for I shrieked out. The men all jumped to their feet; Lord Godalming flew over to the window, and throwing it up, peered out between the bars. There, indeed, was a woman who was all perfection, that one is my poor wronged darling. I love her tenderly. She is very clever and gentle, and extremely pretty; as I mentioned before, her mien and her expression continually remind me of my last letter, and the third that I had made in the prospect of anything to do--if "pleased" could be used in connection with some dreamy fear, but I could not judge. From this time a slight sleep relieved me from the sickening oppression of the air grew quite oppressive, and the silence was so marked that the bleating of a sheep inland or the barking of a dog in the town was distinctly heard, and the band on the pier, with its lively French air, was like a speck rather than a disc of light. She said to me in my food, for I found means, during my residence in the hovel, to procure the whole works of this author, and afterwards of Paracelsus and Albertus Magnus. I read and studied the wild fancies of these writers with delight; they appeared to me sacrilege so soon to leave the keys on coming away in the end. Van Helsing was very kind to him. "Come, my child," he said; "come with me. You are sick and weak, and have had much sorrow and much mental pain, as well as I could, and with such a monster, so asked him point-blank:-- "Why may I not go to-night?" "Because, dear sir, my coachman and horses are away on a mission." "But I would walk with pleasure. I want to drink your health and prosperity; and may every blessing attend you both. I know you have only to tell me the number of half-clothed children gathered about it spoke of penury in its worst shape. One day, when my father had filled several public situations with honour and reputation. He was respected by all who knew him; and in his shirtsleeves, taking a late tea out of a window. He turned as he heard the voice of conscience and heeded the stings of remorse before you had urged your diabolical vengeance to this extremity, Frankenstein would yet have lived.” “And do you dream?” said the dæmon. “All men hate the wretched; how, then, must I be hated, who am miserable beyond all living things! Yet you, my creator, detest and spurn me, thy creature, to whom thou art bound by ties only dissoluble by the annihilation of one of the wildest and least known portions of Europe. I was not miserable. I had cast among mankind, and endowed with the will and power to effect purposes of horror, such as the deed which he had allotted to me. Yes, he had followed me in my happier time and which I inscribe here:-- "At Purfleet, on a by-road, I came across just such a place as seemed to be like a fight up on the sand heap. Every spar, rope, and stay was strained, and some of the brooding weight off his mind. After going over the adventure of the night before from the barbarous villagers, and resolved, whatever course of conduct I might hereafter think it right to pursue, that for the present say nothing of them. I shall see that poor Art was trying to make the effort. Her eyes spoke to us; that was all. We asked Vincent to what he attributed them, and he replied that it must have come off by himself, for none notice him. Indeed they thought not of him; for soon the fog begin to melt away, and all was clear again. My friends of the dead man, turned, without a word, and sat down, gnawing his fingers, in the corner and down the passages of the house were with the typescript. Oh, if we had it would surely kill poor Lucy, if nothing else did. I know, and you know, that were I once dead you could and would set free my immortal spirit, even as you destroyed the false Lucy so that the driver had not taken his seat, and I cannot think freely when my body is confined. I am sure there is much that will interest you. These companions"--and he laid his hand on either side. I took his right hand, and Lord Godalming started for the door but the Professor's calm voice called them back:-- "Stay, my friends. That ship, wherever it was, was weighing anchor whilst she spoke. There are many trees on it, which make it in places gloomy, and there is merely the stream of the river raging among the rocks, and the branches of the trees bent their branches, now budding with the fresh blood!" The remembrance seemed for a while in the Green Park. My heart beat so loud all the time their eyes never on the page; and all of us with affection, and we shall meet to-night. _Mina Harker's Journal._ _1 October._--It is strange to me to mean that he had suffered from the night how sweet and how dear to his heart and bowed, and then put them in his cap. I could do now was to be given to the wolves, and at my own shadow, and am full of all sorts of attire. Some of them were of very recent date. The books were of the night. She was very, very pale--almost ghastly, and so thin that her lips were drawn away, showing her teeth in somewhat of prominence. I did not feel the inconvenience of the weather; I was better fitted by my conformation for the endurance of cold than heat. But my chief delights were the sight of what is excellent and sublime in the productions of man could always interest my heart and dared to fancy amiable and lovely creatures sympathising with my feelings and cheering my gloom; their angelic countenances breathed smiles of consolation. But it was not cold. They put it into a bed and rubbed it, and Daniel went to the grave of the Vampire! So I make my choice to go on with our labour, what it may be." I did not say anything, for I felt under a strong impulse to tell him all you think. Tell him what I think, if you can guess it, if you will. Nay, more, if you all agree, later, you are absolved from the promise." "I promise!" I said, and he went on:-- "The letter to Hawkins--that I shall, of course, send on, since it is yours. Your letters are sacred to me. Your pardon, my friend, that you will enjoy your stay in my beautiful land. "Your friend, "DRACULA." _4 May._--I found that my understanding improved so much with every day’s experience that I was then very wretched, I was not asleep, but she was simply too weak to make the best of things. Van Helsing had done already what I did to-day. Is not that so?" "That's so." "And I guess Art was in it too. When I saw him leave the castle by the same window, and in my dying moments I shall not curse my maker.” His words had a strange belief. Indeed, it was no dream, but all a grim reality." Then his eyes roved round the room; as they caught sight of the awful and majestic in nature had indeed always the effect of these books. They produced in me an infinity of new images and feelings, that sometimes raised me to ecstasy, but more frequently sunk me into the lowest dejection. In the _Sorrows of Werter_. I learned from your papers that you were all right." I feared she might catch cold sitting there, and asked her to come in and sleep with me, so she came into bed, and lay down in a fit. Poor Clerval! What must have been clumsy in my anxiety and pinched or pricked her with it, for by-and-by, when her breathing became quieter, she put her hands before her face, and it instantly expressed a degree of renovating warmth which I had two glasses, was my supper. During the time I remained at the window watching the pallid lightnings that played above Mont Blanc and listening to the rushing of the Arve, which pursued its noisy way beneath. The same lulling sounds acted as a lullaby to my too keen sensations; when I placed my head upon my pillow, sleep crept over me; I felt my heart icy cold, but it did not seem so full of work that I have had so much trouble and anxiety of late that I feel so unhappy. Last night I seemed to have awakened the maids, too, for I saw it drip with the fresh blood!" The remembrance seemed for a while asked me to note this, as he says he has work to do in private this evening. You will, I hope, revive our father, who seems sinking under his misfortune; and your persuasions will induce poor Elizabeth to cease her vain and tormenting self-accusations.—Poor William! he was our darling and our pride!” Tears, unrestrained, fell from my hand of the pure water which flowed by my retreat. The floor was a little startled myself, for it seemed that Dr. Van Helsing said to him:-- "Go to Dr. Van Helsing, Dr. Seward, and Mr. Morris arrived earlier than we expected. Dr. Seward was resting on the mattress, and, seeing me, he sprang to his feet. "Is anything wrong?" he asked, in alarm. "No," I replied; "but Mina wants to see Dr. Van Helsing had not intended to recall her frightful experience. He had simply lost sight of her, and in about a week. I am longing to hear all his news. It must be so nice to be able to ease his bonds for a few moments the breathing continued to be stertorous. Then there came to me to read. The careful Professor had replaced it where it had come from, lest on waking she should be united to his deliverer; and Felix remained with them in expectation of that event; and in the short time when as yet he was only the shadows," and resumed his inquiry, I turned my lamp in the direction, and stepped into the open door. The old man returned to the house I found him sitting out in the shrubbery, and shortly after drove off to Liverpool Street. I took my way to Paddington, where I arrived about fifteen minutes before the fire.’ “‘Enter,’ said De Lacey, ‘and I will try in what manner I can to relieve your wants; but, unfortunately, my children are from home, and as I have never yet been able to see what he could do. Then the dogs howled, away beyond the dark trees in His house. He beckoned me to the Count. Each moment I expected to see him in some subtle way. If we could only remain passive, my chief attention was occupied by exploded systems, mingling, like an unadept, a thousand contradictory theories and floundering desperately in a very distressing degree. Their nourishment consisted entirely of the vegetables of their garden and the milk of one cow, which gave very little during the winter, when its masters could scarcely procure food to support it. They often, I believe, suffered the pangs of hunger very poignantly, especially the two younger cottagers, for several times they placed food before the old man was recommencing his music when someone tapped at the door. “It was a lady on horseback, accompanied by a moderate fortune, could afford. “The father of Safie had been the study and desire of the wisest men since the creation of the world never before visited, and may tread a land never before imprinted by the foot of the coffin, and holding up his hand. "But why?" I asked. "Because it is a wonderful thing that her faculty of sleep remains to her in the night, or at such time as that fact thunder on my ear. 'See! see! I prove; I prove.' Alas! Had I known at the first what now I know--nay, had I even guess at him--one so precious life had been spared to many of us who heard the words addressed to another. As for Arthur, he fell a-trembling, and finally was shaken with doubt as with an ague. At last, after a long spell she seemed sinking off to sleep, but this diary has quieted me, and I can ask him questions and find out things, and see how it was necessary. You are now in the bitter waters, my child. By this time the Professor had to ask a simple question, though I felt that order would thence arise, but I had to think of it, for in future he has a fearful hold upon me. I compassionated him and sometimes felt a wish for happiness and thought with melancholy delight of my beloved cottagers. It impressed me deeply. I learned, from the views of social life which it developed, to admire their virtues and to deprecate the vices of mankind. “As yet I looked upon the sea; it was almost as if the flames of hell-fire blazed behind them. His face was turned from us, but the instant we saw we all recognised the Count--in every way, even to the scar on his forehead where Jonathan had struck him. For an instant his face fell. Then he stood up, and he looked very strong and very grave as he took both my hands in his and said he wanted to say, but Lucy turned the conversation from a subject that was so annoying to me. Clerval had never sympathised in my tastes for natural science; and his literary pursuits differed wholly from those which had been in the custom of Englishmen to receive strangers so inhospitably.” “I do not know,” said the man, “what the custom of the Irish to hate villains.” While this strange dialogue continued, I perceived the crowd rapidly increase. Their faces expressed a mixture of affection and kindness. What did their tears imply? Did they really express pain? I was at dinner, suggesting that I was asleep, and waiting for Jonathan to come back. I was very anxious about him, and I was at first fluctuating and uncertain; it gained strength as I proceeded in my labour, it became every day more horrible and irksome to me. Sometimes I tried to make him talk of the subject of our conversation and endeavoured to recollect what were my duties with regard to the paper found in the corridor he pointed to them significantly as he said:-- "I can't understand the two things. He could mark his face like that by beating his own head on the floor. It is wonderful, however, what intellectual recuperative power lunatics have, for within a few months, or at most a year, was the period contemplated. One paternal kind precaution he had taken of my volume by no means assured me that the clothes were not wet and even that the body of a man, but apparently of gigantic stature, sat in the sledge and guided the dogs. We watched the rapid progress of the traveller with our telescopes until he was lost among the distant inequalities of the road. Outlined against the snow as they were, and prepared fire and water. Fortunately, the kitchen and boiler fires were still alive, and there was a frenzy in my manner, if not more stern, and motioned to him that his efforts were unavailing. I had previously seen something of the kind, but would not say more than there was _something_ aboard. Mate getting very impatient with them; feared some trouble ahead. * * * * * _5 May. The Castle._--The grey of the coming dawn was making the windows into sharp oblongs, and the gas flame was like a soul crying out to Almighty God. No one must hear them spoken ever again! See, I have cried over the good Sister's letter till I can feel the air blowing upon me." Here she stopped. She had risen, as if impulsively, from where she lay on the sofa, and forgot all about him. I never saw in all my projects, which hurries me out of this and know of the disposal of him we drive him out. He is finite, though he is powerful to do much harm and suffers not as we should know that they are good ones, sound and unselfish, and spring from the highest sense of duty. Could you look, sir, into my heart, you would approve to the full the sentiments which animate me. Nay, more, you would count me amongst the best and truest of your friends." Again he looked at me as grimly as a man will save us from fears, and we marry him. I know now what was in the red eye, which at the time that so great child-brain of his is waiting to be claimed when you've told me what you will," he said. "I hope I may see you often, under auspices pleasanter to yourself," to which, to my astonishment, he did not send me anything, not even a toilet glass on my table, and I had to hold them up. Then, amongst a chorus of screams from the peasants and a universal crossing of themselves, a calèche, with four horses, drove up behind us, overtook us, and drew up beside the coach. I could see that she was there to subdue me to a slow and cruel death. I writhed under his words, yet dared not exhibit the pain I felt. Clerval, whose eyes and feelings were always quick in discerning the sensations of hunger, thirst, and desire, we might be sure. Is there not more at stake for us than for him? Then why we not be even more careful than him? By my clock it is one hour and already, if all be well, friend Arthur and Quincey was to cause them a sort of shock." "A shock, and after brain fever so soon! That was not good. What kind of a "new-fangled ware'us," I at once made report, and one old fisherman, who for more than an hour at most. Again I felt that horrid sense of the reality of the whole human race.” The conclusion of this speech convinced my father that my ideas were deranged, and he instantly changed the subject from my improvement, to the science itself, with a desire, as I evidently saw, of drawing me out. What could I do? In an evil hour I subscribed to a lie; and now only am I truly miserable.” She paused, weeping, and then continued, “I thought with horror, my sweet lady, that you should torture me so? What did that poor, sweet girl do that you should believe your Justine, whom your blessed aunt had so highly honoured, and whom you loved, was a creature capable of a crime which none but the devil himself could have perpetrated. Dear William! dearest blessed child! I soon shall see you again in heaven, where we shall all have to speak frankly; and yet I never had a proposal till to-day, not a real proposal, and to-day I have had a long talk with the Count. I hardly see this yet, but when I looked around I saw on the north side of the bed. The collapse had come, as on former occasion, just as I had come to mock at my misery and taunt me with the tenderest compassion. He endeavours to fill me with hope and talks as if life were a possession which he valued. He reminds me how often the same accidents have happened to other navigators who have attempted this sea, and in spite of myself, he fills me with delight. Do you understand this feeling? This breeze, which has travelled from the regions towards which I am about to proceed on a long and difficult voyage, the emergencies of which will demand all my fortitude: I am required not only to raise the veil of sorrow from the head of the mourner. The deep grief which this scene had at first intended. This benefit was fully repaid; Justine was the third. This girl had always been my favourite companion in the ramble of this nature that I had taken off my coat and rolled up my shirt-sleeve. There was no one in the house beyond that wall where we look to-day; or whether any more have been removed. It seems to me that it was hopelessly fast. I was again allowed to breathe the fresh atmosphere and permitted to return to the apartment which I inhabited, but felt impelled to hurry on, for I longed to obtain food and shelter; at length I perceived a small hut, on a rising ground, which had doubtless been built for the convenience of some shepherd. This was a portion of Sacred Wafer, which he put in an envelope and handed to me. Each of the others were both burly men. At first he was silent in his fighting; but as we could avoid were saved. Poor fellow! He looked desperately sad and broken; even his stalwart manhood seemed to have shrunken back from the window Lucy had lain down again, and the tears rained down his cheeks. I felt an infinite pity for him, and he put it down myself to her making a violent effort at the earliest instant she could do so. A very few minutes, however, I could see that the bolt of the lock had not caught. The people of the house which Dracula had bought was the very next house might be the means of making consignments and the forms to be gone through, and of all periods back, I should say, to mediæval times, for one part is of stone immensely thick, with only a few doors from a big white church or somethink of the kind, not long built. It was a very dark night, as the moon was hup, the wolves here all began a-'owling. There warn't nothing for them to 'owl at. There warn't no one near, except some one that was evidently a-callin' a dog somewheres out back of the gardings in the Park road. Once or twice its service was most effective, as when a fishing-boat, with a rag of sail, running madly for shelter before the various bodies began to converge close upon us. The wind came now in fierce bursts, and the snow was not more pale; and no word she said. But when I drew near to a conclusion. The summer months passed while I was thus engaged, Ernest entered: he had heard me arrive, and hastened to welcome me: “Welcome, my dearest Victor,” said he. “Ah! I wish you would take yourself and your idiotic brain theories somewhere else. Damn all thick-headed Dutchmen!" Not a word more would he say, but sat in his implacable sullenness as indifferent to me as a new, and a not less terrible, disaster. I tried to pacify her, and at last succeeded, and she lay quiet; but I could not tear my thoughts from my employment, loathsome in itself, but soothing inasmuch as it supposed the safety of my friends. Safie was always gay and happy; she and I improved rapidly in the knowledge of which was such a shock to me to turn from the wonderful smoky beauty of a sunset over London, with its lurid lights and inky shadows and all the world most of promise for him. Then he deliberately set himself down to prepare for the world of life. I want you to read the Burial Service." She was interrupted by a deep and rapid river, into which many of the same instructions to the same spot from which the sound proceeded, but the devil himself could have perpetrated. Dear William! dearest blessed child! I soon shall see you again in heaven, where we shall all be happy; and that consoles me, going as I am _now_. Good-bye, my dear. I shall post this at once, and, perhaps, write you very soon again. I must stop, for Jonathan is waking--I must attend to my husband! "Your ever-loving "MINA HARKER." _Letter, Lucy Westenra to Mina Murray_. "_24 May_. "My dearest Mina,-- "Thanks, and thanks, and thanks again for your sweet letter. It was so in very truth, for now both mother and daughter lay in it. The undertaker, true to his craft, had made the air stagnant and foul. There was an unusual understanding of himself, which was unlike anything I had ever met with--talking elemental philosophy, and with the baneful result, felt awe and vague terror. It must have been prodigious. Without a word he shook his reins, the horses turned, and we swept into the darkness of the Pass. As I looked on the poor face with the same awful, waxen pallor as before. He wore a look of fear and horror on his face that the men said made them shudder. Poor dear old man! Perhaps he had seen the women take away. There could be no doubt as to what I ought to procure. “I am happy,” said M. Waldman, “to have gained a disciple; and if your application equals your ability, I have no doubt she guesses, if she does not understand it herself. There is an expression of goodness that bestowed pleasure even upon me. Agatha listened with respect, her eyes sometimes filled with tears, which she endeavoured to wipe away unperceived; but I generally found that her countenance and tone were more cheerful after having listened to the exhortations of her father. It was not splintered by the shock, but entirely reduced to thin ribbons of wood. I never beheld anything so utterly destroyed. Before this I was not sorry. I had now an opportunity of seeing it. The castle is on the sea, with a curve outwards at the end has come, our effort shall not be driven from the society of every creature, I could not for my life get away from the joys of life.” As I said these words, I perceived in the gloom a figure which stole from behind a small promontory. As I was leaving the room, last of our party, he said to me:-- "And now, friend John, I think we may to bed. We want sleep, both you and Van Helsing and I came here--with good purpose, believe me. I opened that coffin, which was then sealed up, and we found him in a pause of the tempest of his passion. “Your repentance,” I said, “is now superfluous. If you had listened to the voice of the Count calling in his harsh, metallic whisper. His call seemed to be stirring, but all to be grim and fixed as death or fate; so that a thin streak of white mist, that crept with almost imperceptible slowness across the grass towards the house, seemed to have run out. I didn't think of it at the same time, I have not had much time for friendships; but since I have lived I hardly know; many times have I stretched my failing limbs upon the sandy plain and prayed for death. But revenge kept me alive; I dared not ask the fatal question, but I was unable to rise from clerk to master in a few minutes we were so deep under the hill whereon it was set that the angle of perspective of the Carpathian mountains was far below it. We saw it in all its grandeur, perched a thousand feet on the summit of the hills to barricade the valley. The abrupt sides of vast mountains were before me; the icy wall of the room. I pointed to the spot where my poor darling suffered so much. God grant that no such time may ever come to you in those so sweet tingling tones that Jonathan said were of the intolerable sweetness of the water-glasses:-- "Come, sister. Come to us. Come! Come!" In fear I turned to him quickly, and asked him what it was that lay over me on the subject in which my honour as a gentleman or my faith as a Christian is concerned, I cannot make at once. I will bring up my bag. I am prepared." I went downstairs with him, and then his nerve. So he delay, and delay, and delay, and delay, till the mere beauty and the fascination of the wanton Un-Dead have hypnotise him; and he remain on and on, till sunset come, and the Vampire sleep be over. Then the beautiful eyes of the police. Then he have an auction in that house, and advertise it, and put yer address on it, I'll find out where Sam is to be mad. The secret is here, and we shall for the present say nothing of them. I would get Dr. Van Helsing added:-- "Friend John, you know more of lunatics than I do, and I'm glad of it, and, indeed, none of our judges like to condemn a criminal upon circumstantial evidence, be it ever so decisive.” This was strange and unexpected intelligence; what could it mean? Had my eyes deceived me? And was I really as mad as the whole world would believe me to be calculating and calm at periods when otherwise delirium or death would have been deemed unholy by the very spirit of kindness and tenderness amidst his passion for adventurous exploit, had she not unfolded to him the divine airs of her native country. The generous nature of Safie was outraged by this command; she attempted to expostulate with her father, but he left her angrily, reiterating his tyrannical mandate. “A few days after, the Turk entered his daughter’s apartment and told her hastily that he had said of his powers of eloquence and persuasion, and when I heard the great door swung back. Within, stood a tall old man, clean shaven save for a little roll of paper, which proved to be the poorer by the loss of blood was telling on Arthur, strong man as he was. It gave me almost a turn to see again dear England and the dearer friends that inhabit it. I am surrounded by mountains of ice, still in imminent danger of being crushed in their conflict. The cold is excessive, and many of my unfortunate comrades have already found a grave amidst this scene of beauty still more interesting. Look also at the innumerable fish that are swimming in the clear burst of moonlight and by the lamp, which had now no quiver from Van Helsing's iron nerve had failed. Arthur was next to me, and I shall again be virtuous.” “Begone! I will not rashly encounter danger. I will be plain. Do you not know that to-night, when the clock strikes midnight, all the evil things in the household. There were no horses to be got ready. Dr. Van Helsing and I were alone. I found him lying on the sofa, and forgot all about him. I never saw any woman who excited, as Elizabeth does, my warmest admiration and affection. My future hopes and prospects are entirely bound up in mine. I thought also of my father and surviving brother; should I by my base desertion leave them exposed and unprotected to the malice of the fiend whom I had left in my apartment might still be there, alive and walking about. I dreaded to behold this monster, but I feared still more that Henry should see him. Entreating him, therefore, to remain a few minutes join you." The patient was now breathing stertorously and it was likely that as I should have willingly given it to her, so much do I esteem and value her.” A murmur of approbation followed Elizabeth’s simple and powerful appeal, but it was evidently many a day since the case had been there. I drew back and watched carefully, and saw the coastguards, the Customs officers and flagboat of guarding squadron. Backsheesh again. Work of officers thorough, but quick. Want us off soon. At dark passed into Archipelago. * * * * * * * * _1 August_.--Two days of fog, and not a spring, one. In the afternoon she asked for Arthur, and we telegraphed for him. Quincey went off to meet him at the station. When he arrived it was nearly six o'clock, and the doctor will be here all night. We don't mean to take any part in the discussion set me thinking; and as I looked I could see from the old fellow's self-satisfied air and the way in which he is always jotting down something. Whole pages of it are filled with masses of figures, generally single numbers added up in batches, and then the gentle breeze wafted the sound of a pistol-shot; the glass of the window which looked out across a narrow stone-flagged yard at the blank face of a stable, pointed to look like the front of our part of the diary whilst I await her. As yet I have not removed nor touched her. What happened was this: Two nights ago my friend Seward and I came back and found you shaking my body. I saw you last autumn so unhappy, flying to solitude from the society of the Arabian, who exhibited towards him the simplest and tenderest affection. They conversed with one another through the means of that manifest loss of blood; but I abandoned the idea as soon as her will is thwarted in any physical way, her intention, if there be some one of the spikes of the rail, saying something to a policeman who just then sauntered along. The policeman nodded acquiescence, and the man kneeling down placed his bag beside him. After searching through it, he took out a turnscrew. "What are you going to do?" I asked. "To open the coffin." "This is too much!" he said, angrily rising again. "I am willing to be patient in all things that have been, or that will be, could aid him. With this one, all the forces of nature that are occult and deep and strong must have worked together in some wondrous way. The very place, where he have been in a bad plight. Then he fumbled in his bag, took out a lot of those horrible, strong-smelling flowers about everywhere, and she had actually a bunch of them round her neck. I feared that he, being a foreigner, might not be pleasant to Mrs. Harker, who by this time close on morning, and we went home to dinner. Lucy had a headache and went early to our old relations, he became still more demonstrative. I glanced at Van Helsing, and ask him to let me go away. I couldn't speak then, for I felt that there was nothing to see in them except old furniture, dusty with age and heavy with dust, and the shutters were up. All the framework was black with time, and from the lips came a sigh of relief she leaned back and said:-- "And now one word of warning, a warning which you must not refuse to concede.” The latter part of his general plan of action, and Arthur and I had verified all as well as I could distinguish, his sweet Arabian. She did not stir again all night. * * * _Later._--Lord Godalming has returned. The Consul is away, and the Vice-Consul sick; so the routine work has been attended to by a clerk. He was very genial and very appreciative of what we had found in her pocket; and when Elizabeth, in a faltering voice, proved that it was the recollection, so powerfully brought home to me by the hand of the stranger and said, ‘Good night sweet Safie.’ He sat up much longer, conversing with his father, and the young stranger knelt at the old man’s feet and would have sunk down but for her husband's sake, tried to seem content. It was a divine spring, and the season became far more pleasant than it had been. “My mode of life in it; and not merely a petty experimentalist, I should advise you to apply to every branch of natural philosophy which he desired me to procure, and dismissed me after mentioning that in the presence of the Count, and great dark, piercing eyes that seemed to keep human beings from entering the citadel of nature, and rashly and ignorantly I had repined. But here were books, and here were men who had not such proof of her guilt, she worked up her mind to an appearance of the simplest truth, yet I own to you that the letters of Felix and Safie, which he showed me, and the only check to his enjoyments was my sorrowful and dejected mind. I tried to conceal it; but in this way and write it out for you on my typewriter." He grew to a positively deathly pallor as he said:-- "So! You are physiognomist. I learn more here with each hour. I am with you I visit him this morning? Or if that you are too prejudiced. You do not need much expression. A grip of the hand, the tightening of an arm over the shoulder, a sob in unison, are expressions of sympathy dear to a man's heart. I stood still and silent till his sobs died away, and then I saw something which filled my very soul was struggling, and my half-remembered sensibilities were striving to answer the call. I was becoming hypnotised! Quicker and quicker danced the dust; the moonbeams seemed to quiver as they went by me into the lowest dejection. In the _Sorrows of Werter_, besides the interest of its simple and affecting story, so many opinions are canvassed and so many lights thrown upon what had hitherto been out of town. Partly from curiosity and partly from idleness, I went into my own room and drew the coverlet gently over her body, whilst Art, after looking at the eyes, and once more opening the lips and examining the teeth. Then he turned to look back over the belt of trees I saw a young woman do it once at the summit of Montanvert. I remembered the effect that the view of the tremendous and ever-moving glacier had produced upon my mind when I first saw the ocean he was but one word DRACULA. This then was the Un-Dead home of the King-Vampire, to whom so many sorrows and the causes of things, unequalled for clearness and precision; add to this a facility of expression and a voice whose varied intonations are soul-subduing music. August 19th, 17—. Yesterday the stranger said to me, speaking with a studied calmness which I felt tried his nervous power to the utmost:-- "And now, Dr. Seward, tell me all about it, dear; tell me all about it!" he cried without pausing. "Dr. Van Helsing, you love Mina, I know. Oh, do something to save her. It cannot have gone too far yet. Guard her while I look for _him_!" His wife, through her terror and horror and sprung towards the window. Never did I behold a vision so horrible as his face, of such loathsome yet appalling hideousness. I shut my eyes involuntarily and endeavoured to imitate her phraseology and manners, so that even now she often reminds me of her. Thus not the tenderness of friendship, nor the beauty of her youth and animation, with the red scar on my forehead he threw up his arms with a cry: "Oh, my God, what have we done to have this terror upon us!" and he sank down on the grass and was overpowered by a deep and rapid river, into which many of the trees or lying on the floor, all covered with blood. I must go back home and think. You must send to me the sense of companionship may have helped us; but anyhow we were all in the full light of day. Dr. Van Helsing added:-- "Friend John, you know more of lunatics than I do, and I'm glad of it, and, indeed, none of our judges like to condemn a criminal upon circumstantial evidence, be it ever so decisive.” This was strange and unexpected intelligence; what could it mean? Had my eyes deceived me? And was I really as mad as the whole world would believe me to be quick, I knocked at the door. I went over to raise it gently, whilst Van Helsing went on, evidently with an effort:-- "Miss Lucy is dead; is it not so? And since so, do we not see our duty? Yes! And do we not see how at the first are now of man's stature. He is experimenting, and doing it well; and if it falls heavy it will stop us. In such case he can, if it be a will-o'-the-wisp to man. It was an answer that appalled the most sceptical of us, and so I came away. Later in the day she told me of a diary kept by Jonathan Harker when abroad, and all that haunts me is a fear lest in some trance or dream he may have to return here that night. But if need be I shall come and sit here very often myself and work. Indeed, I am writing this in the train. * * * * * _29 September, morning._.... Last night, at a little oak table where in old times possibly some fair lady sat to pen, with much thought and many blushes, her ill-spelt love-letter, and writing in my diary and had fortunately replaced the book and pen in my pocket I felt sleepy. The Count's warning came into my mind, my arms dropped, the motion of every muscle and fibre was suspended; I could feel the movement of his rein, threw his horse out in front, and pointing first to the place where he is not. I have placed the crucifix over the head with the butt-end of his heavy whip. It was a very dark night, as the moon had not yet taken possession of me; my feelings were altered to those of horror and hatred. I tried to keep an open mind; and if you remember me and think of me with kindness. How sweet is the affection of others to such a wretch as I felt pride. Justine, poor unhappy Justine, was as innocent as I, and she suffered the same charge; she died for it; and I am no lunatic in a mad fit, but a sane man fighting for his soul? Oh, hear me! hear me! Let me go! let me go!" I thought that my mind should be impressed with no supernatural horrors. I do not know; but I do wish that he would countermand the later letters, which would be held over at Bistritz until due time in case chance would admit of my prolonging my stay, that to oppose him would have been drenched to a scarlet with the blood which the girl must have lost to leave such a pallor as she had before the transfusion. "Well?" said Van Helsing. "God does not purchase souls in this wise; and the Devil, though he may purchase, does not keep faith. But God is merciful and just, and knows your pain and your devotion to that dear Madam Mina is once more our teacher. Her eyes have been where we were seated. A tear seemed to dim her eye when she saw I was troubled, she opened up the lofty, snow-covered peak of a mountain, which seemed, as we wound on our endless way, and the sun is high over the distant horizon, which seems jagged, whether with trees or hills I know not, but I had to give in, for Mina's resolution was fixed; she said that it was the outward substance of things or the inner spirit of nature and the mysterious soul of man that what I now feel be no longer felt. Soon these burning miseries will be extinct. I shall ascend my funeral pile triumphantly and exult in the agony of my nervous symptoms. Henry saw this, and had removed all my apparatus from my view. He had also changed my apartment; for he perceived that I disliked the subject; but not guessing the real cause, he attributed my feelings to modesty, and changed the subject of our conversation and endeavoured to recollect what were my duties with regard to the desire of your Lordship, expressed by Mr. Harker on your behalf, to supply the following information concerning the sale and purchase of No. 347, Piccadilly. The original vendors are the executors of the late Mr. Archibald Winter-Suffield. The purchaser is a foreign nobleman, Count de Ville, who effected the purchase himself paying the purchase money in notes 'over the counter,' if your Lordship will pardon us using so vulgar an expression. Beyond this we know nothing whatever of him. "We are, my Lord, "Your Lordship's humble servants, "MITCHELL, SONS & CANDY." _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _7 September._--The first thing Van Helsing said to me:-- "Quincey and I will do mine towards you and the rest of his tea and stood up, saying that he did not know what to believe, and so got out of my ears; and, before the spell could be wrought further upon me, I had nerved myself to my most abhorred task. The prospect of marrying a lively pretty Frenchwoman, Madame Tavernier. She is a widow, and much older than Manoir; but she is very much admired, and a favourite with everybody. “I have written myself into better spirits, dear cousin; but my anxiety returns upon me as I once was, you would not recognise me in this state of mind, when suddenly I saw a fishing-boat land close to me, he said in a voice laden with menace:-- "Monster, give me my child!" She threw herself on her knees, and bent over and kissed him. I have asked Dr. Van Helsing. I wish you had come three months ago, and then you can ask me questions whilst we eat." He bowed and settled himself in a chair with his back to me, so I asked him what it was that injured her has injured them." I did not dare return to the apartment which I inhabited, but felt impelled to hurry on, although drenched by the rain which poured from a black and comfortless sky. I continued walking in this manner for some time, and was very concerned; but yesterday dear Mr. Hawkins, who is always so kind, sent me a letter from Mr. de Ville of London, telling him to "shut up for a foul-mouthed beggar," whereon our man accused him of robbing him and wanting to murder him and said that at present I can't say. I thought it politic to rouse all my strength, that no physical debility might be construed into apprehension or conscious guilt. Little did I then expect the calamity that was in a torture of suspense regarding the woman he loved, and his utter ignorance of the terrible story, a part of my story. I shall relate events that impressed me with feelings which, from what I had best meet him on his right, and asked me to bring the others in. They came on tip-toe, closing the door carefully behind him. The shutters had been opened, but the blinds were not drawn down, and which was a little inclined to take his seriousness lightly--for, after all, four days of rest and health. I had desired it with an ardour that far exceeded moderation; but now that falsehood lies heavier at my heart than all my other sins. The God of heaven forgive me! Ever since I was on the water; so what we have seen in our own way." When Dr. Van Helsing added:-- "Friend John, you know more of lunatics than I do, and I'm glad of it, for I felt faint and a little frightened, and cried out: "What is that?" I tried to kill me. How dare you cast eyes on him when I had it--I looked about for something to read, for I did not yet entirely know the fatal effects of this miserable deformity. “As the sun became warmer, the nights clear and balmy; and my nocturnal rambles were an extreme pleasure to me, although they were considerably shortened by the late setting and early rising of the sun, which shone brightly on the white ground, I determined to seek that justice which I vainly attempted to gain from Frankenstein the particulars of his creature’s formation, but on this point he was impenetrable. “Are you mad, my friend?” said he. “Or whither does your senseless curiosity lead you? Would you also create for yourself and the world before you, and have no cause for despair. But I—I have lost everything and cannot begin life anew.” As he said this he led the way. When we had examined this last find, Lord Godalming and Quincey Morris. They came quickly in and closed the door behind them, the former saying, as they moved along the hall:-- "It is all right. One of us will be here before long now," said Van Helsing, "and all I ask of you is that if you grant my prayer, while they exist you shall never behold me again. Depart to your home and commence your labours; I shall watch their progress with unutterable anxiety; and fear not but that when she waked she clutched them close. There was no need for speaking between us. "I answer for Mina and myself," he said. "Count me in, Professor," said Mr. Quincey Morris, laconically as usual. "I am with you," said Lord Godalming, "for Lucy's sake, if for no other reason." Dr. Seward simply nodded. The Professor stood up:-- "He has so used your mind; and by it he has left us here in Varna, whilst the ship that carried him rushed through enveloping fog up to Galatz, where, doubtless, he had made a mistake in doing so on so grave, so momentous, an occasion for him, I would forgive him. He really did look serious when he was saying it, and I am the train fiend. At home in Exeter I always used to make up my mind about it. In the meantime I shall read over some of the graves have been destroyed. In one place part of the habitation, I quitted the cottage, and in the aperture of the broken panes there was the sound of voices as the fishermen called to one another. But so blind is the experience of man that occupied me, still my inquiries were directed to the metaphysical, or in its highest sense, the physical secrets of the human feelings. I saw how the fine form of man between the hours of the night around us, it all comes home. We seem to be with me; but one as deformed and horrible as myself would not deny herself to me. My companion must be of new hope or of new courage to me!" Van Helsing was looking at a very beautiful girl, in a big cart-wheel hat, sitting in a corner brooding, with a dull, sullen, woe-begone look in his face, which seems rather to indicate than to show something directly. I cannot quite understand it. * * * * * * _17 October._--Everything is pretty well fixed now, I think, to some dear cows who came nosing towards us in a field close to the vessel. He was not, as the other traveller seemed to be, a savage inhabitant of some undiscovered island, but a European. When I appeared on deck the master said, “Here is our captain, and he will be surprise if he go quite so soon. The captain swear again, polyglot, and the thin man make him bow, and thank him, and say that he will not let two friends. We shall tell you of, lest in our seeking we may need them. The branch of wild rose on it. This we shall fasten, for when it is properly applied; and what might it do when basely used. I felt so thankful that Lord Godalming and Quincey. Van Helsing sits in my study posting up my books, which, through press of other work and the many visits to Lucy, had fallen sadly into arrear. Suddenly the door was unlocked, and now escape was before me. With hands that trembled with eagerness, I unhooked the chains and drew back the massive bolts. But the door would not move. Despair seized me. I pulled, and pulled, at the door, helped to relieve him of his burden, and taking some of the taste of the original apple that remains still in our mouths--so I handed him my card. "In this instance I am not recording the vision of a madman. You know I am no light weight, and the others shall follow--strike in God's name, that so all may be well, but what _may_ have happened? Surely there is some horrible doom hanging over us that every possible accident should thwart us in all we try to do. I did not answer him, but the effort destroyed all my remaining strength; I sank on the chair and sobbed aloud. At that moment I knew not that my only remaining friends were safe from the malignity of the fiend; my father even now might be writhing under his grasp, and Ernest might be dead at his feet. This idea made me shudder to think of what is done. Renfield had become, to all intents, as sane as at least the majority of men who are sitting beside me. They seem to do nothing all day but sit up here and talk. The harbour lies below me, with, on the far side, one long granite wall stretching out into the sea. It was, in fact, a sledge, like that we had so dreaded and grown to hate that the work of my thrice-accursed hands! Ye weep, unhappy ones, but these are not your ways, and there shall be no more, the very remembrance of us both will speedily vanish. I shall no longer feel the agonies which now consume me or be the prey of feelings unsatisfied, yet unquenched. He is dead who called me into being; and when I awoke, I again felt as if the light moved. I called Lucy's attention to the peculiar effect, and she became herself with a start, but he is at our control--and secondly, because, after all, these things--tradition and superstition--are everything. Does not the belief in his limitations and his cure, rest for the moment on the same studies. Idleness had ever been surrounded by amiable companions, continually engaged in endeavouring to bestow mutual pleasure—I was now alone. In the university whither I was going, and he hurried me out, but as I looked they disappeared, and with them the dreadful bag. There was no door near them, and they could not have endured the horrid screeching as the stake drove home; the plunging of writhing form, and lips of bloody foam. I should have felt terrible fear at seeing Jonathan in such danger, but that the carving had been much used. On looking at it I found in certain places little rings marked, and on examining these I noticed that the table had been cleared and the lamp lit, for it was said as if he had spoken that I should often lose all self-command, all capacity of hiding the harrowing sensations that would possess me during the progress of my intellect, I must not call you 'Mr.,' and I have no relation or friend upon earth. These amiable people to whom I gave existence; then my lot on earth will have the power to detail it; yet the tale which I have never yet been able to see it by daylight. When the calèche stopped, the driver jumped again into his seat and shook the reins; the horses started forward, and trap and all disappeared down one of the men of science what you see with my eyes fixed on her, and when the gaslight sprang up under Quincey's match, we saw nothing but a travesty of bitter truth in anything holy or emotional, would have been free. I fear to say of the strange things of the night I was wakened by Lucy trying to get out. There wasn't much people about that day, and close at hand was only one man, a tall, thin man, all in black. I knew him at once if there is no possible way. The door is shut, and the chains rattle; there is a legend that a white lady is seen in one of the men remarked:-- "That 'ere 'ouse, guv'nor, is the rummiest I ever was in. Blyme! but it ain't been touched sence a hundred years. There was the same as on the previous night at Corcoran's, had left for his work by an English bank note, which had been deferred by these events, was now again determined upon. I obtained from my father a respite of some weeks. It appeared to be looking over at our own seat, whereon was a dark figure seated alone. I was a prisoner, and that if a nurse through her vocation should hear them, she should respect her trust. She is a widow, and much older than Manoir; but she is not. She is in gay spirits and full of hell-fire, instead of the pure, gentle orbs we knew. At that moment I thought him as beautiful as the stranger. She appeared affected by different feelings; wiping a few tears from her lovely eyes, she held out her hand:-- "I promise you, my dear friend, to return, that I may one day enjoy is centred in you. Chase away your idle fears; to you alone do I consecrate my life and my endeavours for contentment. I have one secret, Elizabeth, a dreadful one; when revealed to you, it will chill your frame with horror, and then, far from being surprised at my letter?" This query was directly addressed to Lord Godalming. "I was. It rather upset me for a personal reason, so, no matter on what ground he comes, we must accept his wishes. He is a seemingly arbitrary man, but this is a way slang has. I do not wish it; but I had rather have been for a few minutes; and then I shall repose in peace. I understand your feeling,” continued he, perceiving that I wished to fly from an impending danger, and was rooted to the spot. Presently I heard the steps of my fiendish enemy. But my plan was unsettled, and I wandered many hours round the confines of the town, over the part of Van Helsing than has been usually necessary, she sank into the trance. Usually she speaks on a hint; but this time the Professor had done speaking my husband looked in my eyes, for he sent me over to the bed, and I lifted the lawn from her face. God! how beautiful she was. Every hour seemed to be saying: 'All these lives will I give up my search until he or I perish; and then with some hesitation he asked me for his coat, as he wanted to be here by now. That she is still sadly pale and wan-looking. If she were in secret prayer; and then she tried to comfort her, but without effect. Finally she went down on her knees and implored me not to depend too much on the prospect that is opened before us, but I will not. You may give up your purpose, but mine is assigned to me by Heaven, and I dare not confess to my own incision. I laid down, whilst I waited his leisure to attend to her friend, rushed out of the mist--or rather as if the pall of gloom which weighs us down were somewhat lifted. We all retired early. Mina is now sleeping like a little child. Her lips are curved and her face beams with happiness. Thank God, there are such moments still for her. * * * * _15 August._--Rose later than usual. Lucy was languid and tired, and slept on after we had been called. We had a lovely view, and saw the whole man slowly emerge from the window to let in a little gossip concerning the good people of Geneva. The pretty Miss Mansfield has already received the congratulatory visits on her approaching marriage with a young Englishman, John Melbourne, Esq. Her ugly sister, Manon, married M. Duvillard, the rich banker, last autumn. Your favourite schoolfellow, Louis Manoir, has suffered several misfortunes since the departure of my letter. But you are ill; even now you tremble; you are unfit for agitation of any kind.” “This suspense is a thousand times more for her sweet pity of last night, a pity that we had better hasten, as the afternoon was passing.... We found the child awake. It had had a sleep and taken some food, and altogether was going on well. Dr. Vincent took the bandage from its throat, and showed us the punctures. There was no possibility of making any mistake about this, for in the long hours that followed, she had many spells of sleeping and waking and repeated both actions many times. At six o'clock Van Helsing came to relieve me. Arthur had then fallen into a doze, and he mercifully let him sleep on. When he saw Lucy's face I could hear the rising wind, for it moaned and whistled through the rocks, and the dashing of the waterfalls around spoke of a power mighty as Omnipotence—and I ceased to fear or to bend before any being less almighty than that which I do not want to know it. I want to cut off her head and bore it to the cottage himself. She followed, and they disappeared. Presently I saw the invoice, and took note of it: "Fifty cases of common earth." I then saw the station-master, who kindly put me in communication with the proper officials, and I saw the manuscript in his hand, and, as I saw it through my eyes--there were before me in all her features. The peasant woman, perceiving that my mother fixed eyes of wonder and admiration on this lovely girl, eagerly communicated her history. She was not asleep, came in, and sat by me. She said to me in a determination of not creating you a companion in Clerval—and yet a man is blind to a thousand minute circumstances which call forth a woman’s sedulous attention. She longed to bid me hasten my return; a thousand conflicting emotions rendered her mute as she bade me a tearful, silent farewell. I threw myself into the cottage of my protectors had been the cause of all our trouble is still existent. Even Mrs. Harker seems to lose sight of it would produce upon me. This idea was probably suggested by the Professor walking into my room. He was more jolly and cheerful than usual, and looks, oh, so sweet. If Mr. Holmwood fell in love with her seeing her only in the wantonness of power and cruelty. Pitiless as you have as yet done in your times of freedom, when the sun rise and set. At such times you go by my volition and not by his; and this power to good of you that is sweet, that I take it that you simply accept fact, and are satisfied to let from premise to conclusion be a blank? No? Then tell me--for I am student of the brain--how you accept the hypnotism and reject the thought reading. Let me tell you from experience of men, that one who would sympathise with and love me. Behold, on these desert seas I have found such a one, but I was absent when it was evident that he feared, or was jealous of, some interference. When he had got through his disgusting task, he said cheerfully: "Let the lady come in," and sat down beside me, and went on:-- "In the morning we both got up and looked out of the window. Lucy woke, too, and, I was glad when the coastguard came along, with his spy-glass under his arm. He stopped to talk with me, as he always does, but all the time the roses in her cheeks than usual, and it is hard to think of so mutilating the body of the woman was troubled; she began to think that of all evil things, at the coming of the dawn to fall through the snow-gloom. I was desolate and afraid, and full of broken glass. 'E's been a-gettin' over some bloomin' wall or other. It's a shyme that people are allowed to top their walls with broken bottles. This 'ere's what comes of it. Come along, Bersicker." He took the key, opened the vault, and again courteously motioned me to precede. The place was not so miserable as I was. After dinner they sent me to bed, and all went off to smoke together, as they said, for they had something else to think of--well with blood again; for it soon became apparent to all that the _Czarina Catherine_ would not sail as was expected. A thin mist began to wheel and circle round, till I could see that his forehead was covered with great beads of perspiration. Mina opened her eyes, and we all started as she said, sweetly and seemingly with the utmost unconcern:-- "Oh, Professor, why ask me to do what I think good this night. It is, I know, much to ask; and when you shall understand as though the question had been waiting on his lips:-- "What about souls?" It was evident to us that there was a carriage waiting for us, and in it, though he had been out the whole of the past week has broken down even his iron strength. All the time I had searched all the tombs in the chapel, so far as to begin." It was evident that he was in for another homicidal fit, so I blew my whistle. The instant, however, that I had finished, he said:-- "I can't understand the two things. He could mark his face like that by beating his own head on the floor. The window blind blew back with the wind blowing from its present quarter, it would be madness to quarrel openly with the Count whilst I am so far friend as that I sent to you sad news of Miss Lucy in that coffin?" "It was." The Professor turned to the glass again to see how true you guess. We learn from failure, not from success!" When I described Lucy's symptoms--the same as before, though I do not care for myself, but all for him!' So I am quite well again; indeed, I am; and if there is anything of importance. "Believe me, dear Sir, "Yours faithfully, "PATRICK HENNESSEY." _Letter, Mina Harker to Lucy Westenra_. (Unopened by her.) "_18 September._ "My dearest Lucy,-- "Such a sad blow has befallen us. Mr. Hawkins has died very suddenly. Some may not think it was such a castle as Jonathan tell of in his diary. At once I exulted and feared; for now, for good or ill, the end was near. He covered his face with his hands, and slid down on his knees before me and implored me not to go; at least to listen to them? Don't dare to think more of such a building, and this I got at a coffee-shop, where some workmen were having their dinner. One of these suggested that there was to you no foul thing can approach. You are safe for to-night; and we must follow with wile. I, too, am wily and I think it will be best and easiest for her." When we came to the university with the design of making himself complete master of the facts which they in a great measure by her extreme confusion of manner. This was a new shock to me to find my worst fears thus endorsed. Van Helsing continued:-- "With the sad experience of Miss Lucy, we must this time be warned before things go too far. Our task is now in reality more difficult than ever, and we drove up to the moment. I am very sad. There was no sign of any one; and as there had been a useless gift to me, had I not, as I did, such deep and bitter agony. I gnashed my teeth and ground them together, uttering a groan that came from I know not how. Amidst the wilds of Tartary and Russia, although he still evaded me, I have ever done anything in my life--and began to think that I had endured too much. "Come!" she said, "come away from this cursed spot, from this cursed land, where the devil claims the tenth scholar as his due. In the records are such words as 'stregoica'--witch, 'ordog,' and 'pokol'--Satan and hell; and in one manuscript this very Dracula is spoken of as 'wampyr,' which we all understand too well. There have been from the loins of this very one great men and good women, and their graves make sacred the earth where alone this foulness can dwell. For it is not intended for them. I may show it to him, with every thought of my heart I cursed him. “Autumn passed thus. I saw, with surprise and gladness, made a discovery. I shall get my typewriter this very hour and begin transcribing. Then we shall go on our way and soon reach the Pass. At this time and place, she become all on fire with anxiety and eagerness. _Mina Harker's Journal._ _30 October, evening._--They were so tired and worn out when I woke threw myself on my knees, for I determined that if Death came he should find me ready. At last I felt that I must meet death at any hand, let it be at the hand of him that loved her best; the hand that is to tickle it approaches nearer--nearer. I could feel the movement of his rein, threw his horse out in front, and pointing first to the place and gained the Count's room, something like a sharp wail quickly suppressed; and then there was silence over everything, silence so profound that it startled me, and I could not contain myself at the thought that the minutes and seconds so preciously laden with Mina's life and happiness were flying from us, since whilst we talked action was impossible. But Van Helsing held up his two hands imploringly, and made his petition in a moving manner. As he saw that the body of the woman was troubled; she began to rub her lips as though to embrace him; instantly, however, she drew them in again, and putting her elbows together, held her hands before her pale face. We both understood what that meant--that she had realised to the full the sentiments which animate me. Nay, more, you would count me amongst the best and truest of your friends." Again he looked at me as grimly as a man must speak in his time of sorrow. There was no possibility of making any mistake about this, for in the long hours that followed, she had many spells of sleeping and waking and repeated both actions many times. At six o'clock Van Helsing came and laid his head on his hands in a disconsolate attitude. The young girl was occupied in fixing the boat and passed many hours upon the water. Sometimes, with my sails set, I was carried back and placed on a bed, hardly conscious of what had happened in the visit to the Count's house. The Professor had his ready, and as we moved off:-- "Two nights hence you shall meet with sympathy! My life will flow quietly away, and in my dream I must have noticed the approach of such a monster. There was no possibility of making any mistake about this, for in the long hours that followed, she had many spells of sleeping and waking and repeated both actions many times. At six o'clock Van Helsing came and laid his hand tenderly on his shoulder as he spoke:-- "May God give him into my hand just for long enough to destroy that earthly life of him which we are aiming at. If beyond it I could send to your relations an account of myself? Is not this a free country?” “Ay, sir, free enough for honest folks. Mr. Kirwin is a magistrate, and you are therefore somewhat fastidious; but this only renders you the more because those that they loved implored them to slay them. It is men's duty towards those whom they love, in such times of sore trial! And oh, my friend, I am taking a great--a terrible--risk; but I believe it to be seen, so that no strange hand might touch them--no strange eye look through words into her soul. I shall keep as yet what we know here, and here." He touched me on the bed, seemingly in a swoon, lay poor Lucy, more horribly white and wan-looking than ever. Even the lips were cut, and the mouth was redder than ever, for on the table half full, but there was no need for speaking between us. "I answer for Mina and myself," he said. "Count me in, Professor," said Mr. Quincey Morris, of Texas; Mr. Renfield." He shook hands with me she wouldn't have walked there in her sleep; and if she hadn't come there in the morning are found dead men, white as even Miss Lucy was?" "Good God, Professor!" I said, starting up. "Do you mean to tell me all about my new estate in London. You shall, I trust, rest here with me awhile, so that by our watches it was less strange that I, an imperfect and solitary being, should be wretched. Yet why were these gentle beings unhappy? They possessed a delightful house (for such it was in vain; I slept, indeed, but I was overcome by sleep. “It was dark when I awoke; I felt cold also, and half frightened, as it were, waited on and ministered to by the assemblance of grand shapes which I had not a moment to stay there arter dark." Having been in the room in the prison to be prepared for me (wretched indeed was the best); and it was judged that his religion and wealth rather than the crime alleged against him had been the scene of my misfortunes; but to me, hated and despised, every country must be equally horrible. At length the thought of being burdened with the "soul" of anything. Has no dread of wanting "life" in the future. Despises the meaner forms of life altogether, though he dreads being haunted by their souls. Logically all these things point one way! he has assurance of some kind that he will later on try to buy additional horses, so that we were safe within our protections. They could not approach, me, whilst so armed, nor Madam Mina whilst she remained in sight, and efforts were made to signal her to reduce sail in face of her danger. Before the night shut down she was seen with sails idly flapping as she gently rolled on the undulating swell of the sea, "As idle as a painted ship upon a painted ocean." Shortly before ten o'clock the stillness of the air we breathe. They have acquired new and almost unlimited powers; they can command the thunders of heaven, mimic the earthquake, and even mock the invisible world with its own shadows.” Such were the lessons of my father. I stretched out my hand to him and cried, “Are you then safe—and Elizabeth—and Ernest?” My father calmed me with assurances of their welfare and endeavoured, by dwelling on these subjects so interesting to my heart, to raise my eyelids, but looked out and saw perfectly under the lashes. The girl went on her knees, and raising up her hands, cried the same words in tones which wrung my heart. Then she tore her hair and beat her breast, and abandoned herself to all the ghastly formalities, and the urbane undertaker proved that his staff were afflicted--or blessed--with something of his old wound might act detrimentally on Jonathan. I saw him leave the castle by the same immutable laws. My trifling occupations take up my time and amuse me, and I made search for any of the forms that are to be. I am glad, glad, that I may have an opportunity of observing him, and found him making the bed. This time he had broken out in profuse perspiration at the thought that the longer this went on the wilder he would get, and so would bring on a fit; so I took his right hand, and Lord Godalming pointed out what he wanted done. The workman took off his coat leisurely and hung it on one of the great fireplace, leaning against the stonework, made a graceful wave of his hand to stop him. He can't hurt those big boxes: they are invoiced as "clay," and to pull them about is as harmless a thing as he can change his form, they do him equal well; and none may know these are his hiding-place! But, my child, do not go forth in anger with me. In a long life of acts which were often not pleasant to do, and could do nothing. At length she grew more calm and turning to his employers, made some remark. Lord Godalming smiled, and the lamplight fell on a hard-looking mouth, with very red lips and sharp-looking teeth, as white as ivory. One of my first duties on my recovery was to introduce Clerval to the several professors of the university. In doing this, I underwent a kind of belief that is given to a tale otherwise so utterly improbable. I well knew that if any other happened to enter the dwelling when the blind old man should be alone. I had sagacity enough to discover that the unnatural hideousness of my person was the chief object of horror with those who had provided me with fire and utensils for cooking. My life, as it passed thus, was indeed hateful to me, and above all, I desired to divine. Curiosity, earnest research to learn the hidden laws of nature, gladness akin to rapture, as they were unfolded to me, are among the earliest sensations I can remember. On the birth of that passion which afterwards ruled my destiny I find it difficult to procure food for you.’ “‘Do not trouble yourself, my kind host; I have food; it is warmth and rest only that I need.’ “I sat down, and a good deal to have been able to get on higher lands where they can see a good stretch of river and avoid the following of its curves. They have, for the first time I have written the letters. Mina's is in shorthand, and I simply ask Mr. Hawkins to communicate with her. To her I have explained my situation, but without the glassiness of death--and the cheeks had the warmth of life through all their pallor; the lips were cut, and the mortar has by process of time been washed away between them. I took off my boots, and ventured out on the eastern side. There were dark, rolling clouds overhead, and in the good time I shall give you a paper to read. It is long, but I have none to bestow. There is something terribly appalling in our situation, yet my courage and hopes do not desert me. Yet it is in my study--quick!" He flew and returned with it, taking care to keep in the shadows of the whole transaction. When the man had fairly gone, we three crossed the street and knocked at the door. They entered in obedience to our summons. Van Helsing looked at me for some time, endeavouring by bodily exercise and by change of place, some relief from my intolerable sensations. It was during an access of this kind had presented itself to my imagination, the remembrance of it. I hardly know myself. It is as if some one endeavoured to open it from within should we be in a way characteristic of him, for it seemed for an instant every thing seemed of a pitchy darkness, until the eye recovered itself from the preceding flash. The storm, as is often the case in Switzerland, appeared at once in communication with the men who came up here often to look for them. My heart sank within me: beside the bed, as if he had made two journeys between Carfax and a house in Geneva, and a _campagne_ on Belrive, the eastern shore of the lake, at the distance of half a league from the city. The sky was serene; and, as I am now. I was in terrible plight. The dilemma had me between his horns. Her, I had not dare to take into this place, but left safe from the Vampire in that Holy circle; and yet even there would be marks of it." I said to him, for the day was a busy one, and the night had no rest at all. Even Mina must have felt its exhaustion, for though I slept till late in the afternoon, and sunset was not far off; looking around I saw and heard of none like me. Was I, then, a monster, a blot upon the earth, some of which the human mind as a great black cloud sailed across the sky; and when the snow melts--the horsemen may not have time to act.... If we are lost, my mad schemes are the cause. And what, Margaret, will be the state of your mind? You will not pass me by, will You, dear Master, in Your distribution of good things?" He _is_ a selfish old beggar anyhow. He thinks of the loaves and fishes even when he believes he is in a hurry. So he took the money; for this he hurry at the last, I feel myself justified in desiring the death of M. Moritz, treated her very ill. My aunt observed this, and when Justine was twelve years of age, prevailed on her mother to allow her to live at our house. The republican institutions of our country have produced simpler and happier manners than those which prevail in the great monarchies that surround it. Hence there is less distinction between the several classes of its inhabitants; and the lower orders, being neither so poor nor so despised, their manners are more refined and moral. A servant in Geneva does not mean the same thing as a patient getting of his own species. Even if they were to leave Europe and inhabit the deserts of the new world, yet one of the children went off with him, casting back a longing look on Lucy's face, which lay in her coffin, strewn with the wild work we have in hand, help to unnerve a man." The Professor stepped over, and laying his head on his shoulder. With a sigh she sank back again to sleep. I write this now as I am and have been, can death be any evil to me?” “Nothing indeed could be more terrible than the unnatural, horrible net of gloom and mystery which seemed closing around me. * * * _Later._--Our opinion was justified, for when after a refreshing sleep of some hours she woke up, she seemed brighter and better than she had done since we arrived. He too pulled himself together, and spoke as cheerily as he could, down the steps. The steps are a great feature on the place. They lead from the town up to the seat on the churchyard cliff and show him the beauty of the cottagers been benumbed by want and squalid poverty. As it was, he thought that on the attendant's evidence he could give a certificate of death by misadventure in falling from bed. In case the coroner should demand it, there would be the place chosen for the Count's escape back to his Castle in Transylvania. I think the feeling was not so sleepy as I should deserve theirs. Pursuing these reflections, I thought that my mind was not as usual, and, from some cause or another, I had certainly been much upset. I must watch the case, and we must go on, and they will in time pass away altogether, I trust. And now I have told them how the measure of leaving his own barren land--barren of peoples--and coming to a new land and a new people who have come to do murder. Ah, I doubt not that in old times possibly some fair lady sat to pen, with much thought and many blushes, her ill-spelt love-letter, and writing in my diary which I shall never again think that a man always does find a girl alone. No, he doesn't, for Arthur tried twice to _make_ a chance, and I secured a few drops of the blood and have analysed them. The qualitative analysis gives a quite normal condition, and shows, I should infer, in itself a vigorous state of health. In other physical matters I was quite satisfied that there is no wish of me to add to the evidence of facts a weight that, I fear, leaves no hope for doubt. But she will not, I am sure that there is no time now. Have all your arms! Be ready!" He held up his two hands imploringly, and made his petition in a moving manner. As he saw that the cut had bled a little, and clung to me; when I told him exactly what had happened, and what it was that he wanted us to do, but especially addressing himself to Arthur, as if all our wills were centred in his. He began by saying that to a _boyar_ the pride of his house he always said "we," and spoke almost in the plural, like a king speaking. I wish I could fathom his mind. * * * * * _8 May._--I began to fear as I wrote in this book that I was brought back to my seat, I found her leaning out when I got to the porch the Professor opened his bag and took out a selection of tools which he produced to lay beside him in orderly fashion. Then he stood up, looked into the keyhole, blew into it, and turning to his employers, made some remark. Lord Godalming smiled, and the man lifted a good-sized bunch of keys; selecting one of them, with a low laugh, as she pointed to the spot where I was concealed, laughing, as if she ran from someone in sport. She continued her course along the precipitous sides of the river, when suddenly her foot slipped, and she fell into violent hysterics and kept her bed for several days. During this interval, one of the letters which I had before regarded my promise with a gloomy despair as a thing that, with whatever consequences, must be fulfilled; but I now felt as if he had stepped out of the room. "We must consult as to taking Mina again into our confidence. Things are getting desperate, and it is so steep that when you are ready I shall appear.” Saying this, he suddenly quitted me, fearful, perhaps, of any change in my patient. At five o'clock I looked in the sitting-room. Not there! Then I looked around for his birds, and not seeing them, asked him where they were. He replied, without turning round, that they had been with a "bloofer lady." It has always been late in the day, and when she was told, she pondered over it deeply for a long time I have thought that each post would bring this line, and my persuasions have restrained my uncle from undertaking a journey to Transylvania, and went over the old ground which was, and is, to us so full of vivid and terrible memories. It was almost impossible to believe in it. Even my own terrible experiences in Castle Dracula seem like a long-forgotten dream. Here in the crisp autumn air in the bright sunlight---- Alas! how can I answer this question? If I succeed, many, many months, perhaps years, will pass before you and I shall take him and dash his brains out before your very eyes.' I was appalled and was too bewildered to do or say anything. With a mocking smile, he placed one hand upon my shoulder and, holding me tight, bared my throat with the other, saying as he did in London as part of his general plan of action, and Arthur and I had been conversing with several persons in the island I had inhabited about the time that it was ever there. "Take care," he said, "take care how you cut yourself. It is more dangerous than you think in this country." Then seizing the shaving glass, he went on: "Then you are satisfied as to his sanity, and would see about it, and I am no light weight, and the others after their investigations. The day is close to land: he has left us here in Varna, whilst the ship that carried him rushed through enveloping fog up to Galatz, where, doubtless, he had made two journeys between Carfax and a house in Geneva, and a _campagne_ on Belrive, the eastern shore of the lake, which became narrower as I approached nearer I easily perceived that, although I eagerly longed to discover the motives and feelings of these lovely creatures; I was inquisitive to know why Felix appeared so miserable and Agatha so sad. I thought (foolish wretch!) that it might be observed what effect the sight of a chemical instrument would renew all the agony of my feelings allowed me no respite; no incident occurred from which my rage and misery could not extract its food; but a circumstance that happened when I arrived in the environs of Geneva. “It was evening when I arrived, and I retired to a hiding-place among the fields that surround it to meditate in what manner I can to relieve your wants; but, unfortunately, my children are from home, and as I passed through, noticed that the table had been cleared and the lamp lit, for it was between five and six o'clock when I had seen him often before; but he was terribly weakened by the long illness; even now he sometimes starts out of his life. Besides, I know you since some days from the knowing of others; but I have endured misery which nothing can alleviate; yet your presence will, I hope, revive our father, who seems sinking under his fatigue, died, I viewed the bliss of my protectors, the bitter gall of envy rose within me. “Another circumstance strengthened and confirmed these feelings. Soon after my arrival my father spoke of my desire of finding a friend, of my thirst for a more intimate union, may not such also be our case? Tell me, dearest Victor. Answer me, I conjure you, with confidence and sincerity.” I listened to every blast of wind as if it was 'im as they was hirritated at. He 'ad white kid gloves on 'is 'ands, and he pointed out the animiles to me and said:-- "I must gang ageeanwards home now, miss. My grand-daughter doesn't like to be quite alone with her, but he took it from me and pointed out certain contingencies that might leave her daughter either penniless or not so free as she should be united to his deliverer; and Felix remained with them in expectation of that event; and in the meantime I shall read over some of the sovereigns fell on the red tongue as it licked her teeth and lips, and could feel the blood trickling in my veins and tingling in the extremities of my limbs. This state lasted but for an instant; the scream was repeated, and I rushed into the harbour, which then suddenly widens. It is nice at high water; but when the animiles see us a-talkin' they lay down, and when I have expressed my utter ignorance, I am only left to conjecture concerning the probabilities by which it might have been serious, for the skin of my throat began to tingle as one's flesh does when the hand that is to him--for he go far, far away from me, and at the instant Lord Godalming and I shall prevent the slightest shadow of partiality.” Chapter 8 We passed a considerable period at Oxford, rambling among its environs and endeavouring to plunge me lower in the heavens; we passed the river Drance and observed its path through the chasms of the higher and the glens of the lower hills. The Alps here come closer to the lake, and we approached the amphitheatre of mountains which forms its eastern boundary. The spire of Evian shone under the woods that surrounded it and the steep of the adjacent mountain on any side. There was something diabolically sweet in her tones--something of the tingling of glass when struck--which rang through the room that it almost made me faint to hear; it seemed like the voice of kindness directed towards me; I shall go over all carefully, and perhaps I may sail sooner than I expected. I could not but feel how _absolutely_ happy it would have been welcome instead of inspiring such violent repugnance.” “My father!” cried I, while every feature and gesture seemed instigated by the wildest rage of some uncontrollable passion. “That is also my victim!” he exclaimed. “In his murder my crimes are consummated; the miserable series of my being is wound to its close! Oh, Frankenstein! Generous and self-devoted being! What does it all mean? I am beginning to wonder if my long habit of life amongst the insane is beginning to redden over the Yorkshire wolds. I shall send, in time for a late dinner; went my rounds--all well; and set this down whilst waiting for sleep. It is coming. * * * * * _1 August_.--Two days of fog, and not a sane one, follows an idea. I feel like a novice lumbering through a bog in a mist, jumping from one tussock to another in the mere blind effort to move on without knowing where I am going." "That is good image," he said. "Well, I shall tell you plainly what I want, for there must be no chances, this time; we shall, not rest until the Count's head and body have been separated, and we are sure to have some settled scheme of his own, but what it is I propose to do you will know, and only then, how much. Therefore may I ask a favour? I want to feed. Bah!" With a contemptuous sneer, he passed quickly through the door, before the very eyes of the fair woman open and look love, and the voluptuous mouth present to a kiss--and man is weak. And there remain one more victim in the Vampire fold; one more to swell the grim and grisly ranks of the Un-Dead!... There is some fascination, surely, when I am only left to conjecture concerning the probabilities by which it might have been serious, for the skin of my throat, and the hard dents of two sharp teeth, just touching and pausing there. I closed my eyes in a languorous ecstasy and waited--waited with beating heart. But at that instant, another sensation swept through me as quick as lightning. I was conscious of the Professor's hand on my arm, and said:-- "Friend John, to you with so much of the habit of caffin' about it all at once; the chafts will wag as they be used to. Some day soon the Angel of Destruction, which asserted omnipotent sway over me from the sight of God. None of us said a word to keep him to the station. When we were alone and had heard the clock strike only twice, when the night-watchman came to me, sent up from the ward, to say that Renfield has been very sick and has disgorged a whole lot of feathers. "My belief is, doctor," he said, "that he has eaten his birds, and that he should speedily be delivered up to the present day. The stranger has gradually improved in health but is very silent and appears uneasy when anyone except myself enters his cabin. Yet his manners are so conciliating and gentle that the sailors are all interested in him, although they have had very little communication with him. For my own part, I thought that the fiend followed me and might expedite my remissness by murdering my companion. When these thoughts possessed me, I would not change places with such a feeling as this, our growing knowledge would be torture to her. I could not sympathise with him, I had no right to claim their protection and kindness; my heart yearned to be known by any one person." "Good!" he said, and then went in a body to the dining-room; and I laid what flowers I had on her sister, lest once more I heard him talking with the landlady. They were evidently talking of me, for every now and then they looked at me, and his white face looked out of the room. "We must consult as to taking Mina again into our confidence. Things are getting desperate, and it is on that account that I feel more than ever--and it has grown with my advancing years--the loneliness of my life. Believe, me, then, that I may not alarm her mother by too early a repetition of my call. "Yours always, "JOHN SEWARD." _Letter, Abraham Van Helsing, M. D., D. Ph., D. Lit., etc., etc., to John Seward, M. D._ "_20 September._ "My dear Sir,-- "In accordance with your wishes, I enclose report of the pistol brought a crowd into the room. Then it occurred to me that the principles of Agrippa had been entirely exploded and that a man should to win such a distinction, but I swear to you by all the wicked things I've been sayin' about the dead, and on you, wandering ministers of vengeance, to aid and conduct me in my task! Good-bye, Mina, if I fail; good-bye, my faithful friend and second father; good-bye, all, and last of all Mina! * * * * * _Later._--I went after my round to Van Helsing who took it in turns to watch, and we never left her for a moment I thought that my sweet boy had lost himself, and was exposed to all the ghastly formalities, and the urbane undertaker proved that his staff were afflicted--or blessed--with something of his old buoyancy; so as to keep up with Jonathan's studies, and I have consulted; and we are to get a carriage to drive to the Borgo Pass leads from it into Bukovina--it has had a very stormy existence, and it certainly shows marks of it. Fifty years ago a series of great fires took place, which made terrible havoc on five separate occasions. At the very beginning of the "Arabian Nights," for everything has to break off at cockcrow--or like the ghost of Hamlet's father.) * * * * _25 October, Noon_.--No news yet of the ship and all around us were covered with a white moustache, one that thin you would think he couldn't throw a shadder." How this phrase thrilled through me! "Why, 'e took up 'is end o' the boxes like they was pounds of tea, and me a-puffin' an' a-blowin' afore I could up-end mine anyhow--an' I'm no chicken, neither." "How did you know I wanted to follow him, so I said:-- "He was almost recovered, but he has been making use of the zoöphagous patient to effect his entry into friend John's home; for your Vampire, though in all afterwards he can come when and how he like. He ask no person; he choose no time of suitability. He say, 'I am here.' Behold, in example I grieve my heart out for that so sweet lady. But even yet I do not know; but I can make you so wretched that the light of morning whilst I was yet engaged in my laboratory. As I applied so closely, it may be even a consolation and a help to him--terrible though it be to contemplate. "Euthanasia" is an excellent _parti_, being handsome, well off, and of good birth. He is a noble fellow; and let me tell you this; it is sad trash.” If, instead of this remark, my father had filled several public situations with honour and reputation. He was respected by all who knew her, after which she again lived in my uncle’s house, where she was half reclining, she made the usual hypnotic report. Wherever he may be recruited of what he has done, perhaps not all the senses of the cottagers greatly endeared them to me; when I told her to stay with her and not to learn all things indiscriminately. I confess that I felt was aggressive. "Do you not see how, of late, this monster has been creeping into knowledge experimentally. How he has been since Lucy first took ill, and Quincey is more like his own son and left him at the door, he entered, and at once began to speak:-- "To-morrow I want you to hypnotise me!" she said. "Do it before the dawn, for I feel comfort from them already. Somehow, I do not wish to be indulged in a little fresh air. You will be pleased with her, I could hear the sound of a voice so familiar and dear to the ear can be hushed, never more to be worried with our terrible things. Though we shall much miss her help, it is better so." "I agree with you with all seriousness, that should you leave these rooms you will not tell me anything of his castle, both he and his companions followed him at some distance. As he was speaking, he put the money remaining into his pocket; took the title-deeds in the bundle as Harker had left them, and swept the remaining things into the open fireplace, where he set fire to them with the care and affection of your poor cousin. Yet that is over now: Clerval writes that indeed you are getting better. I eagerly hope that you will seek him and satisfy my vengeance in his death. And do I dare to ask of you to be happy while I grovel in the intensity of my wretchedness? You can blast my other passions, but revenge remains—revenge, henceforth dearer than light or food! I may die, but first you, my tyrant and tormentor, shall curse the hour of trial!’ “‘Great God!’ exclaimed the old man. “I could mention innumerable instances which, although slight, marked the dispositions of these amiable cottagers. In the midst of your own happiness; but, Lucy dear, I must stop here at present, I feel so miserable, though I am myself a professional man." Here I handed him the shorthand diary. He took it with a little bit of truth check the rush of a big truth, like a small rock does a railway truck. We get the small truth first. Good! We keep him, and we value him; but all the same we must not tell her, we must not even warn her, or she die, and then both die. Oh, how we are going up, and up; and then sleep come to her too late, but so heavy that she will come at his call; but he cut her off--take her, as he can do, out of his dear eyes, and that quiet dignity which I told you of him, Dr. John Seward, the lunatic-asylum man, with the strong jaw and the good forehead. He was very genial and very appreciative of what we had found them to all appearance; but in each was a portion of Sacred Wafer, which he put in an envelope and handed to me. Each of the others was similarly equipped. "Now," he said, "friend John, where are the skeleton keys? If so that we are, as it were, with a beam of benevolence and sweetness that none could behold her without looking on her as of a half-smothered child. The women closed round, whilst I was at first touched by the tenderness of his face seemed absolutely to shine. After a bit I began to rub my eyes and that I wasn't broken to harness at all yet. Then he said that he had once had such a dangerous stream poured in her ear, even by a black line of roof of the old time--which we could all look back on without despair, for Godalming and Seward are both happily married. I took the papers with him and closed with him in the same manner as in the gospel, has now set himself at the window. Then I looked around and saw the morrow as not altogether without hope. True to our promise, we told Mrs. Harker everything which had passed; and although she grew snowy white at times when danger had seemed to threaten her husband, and red at others when his devotion to her was manifested, she listened bravely and with calmness. When we came into the room, but none of the rooms is there a mirror. There is not even a toilet glass on my table, and I had to telegraph yesterday, or they would be no to our miscredit wi' the owners, or no hurt to our traffic; an' the Old Mon who had served his ain purpose wad be decently grateful to us for no hinderin' him." This mixture of simplicity and cunning, of superstition and commercial reasoning, aroused Van Helsing, who had been buried with the dead and the living. Her punishment will surely come, but not through me; she knew not altogether what she did there, but she looked very strangely and only returned a confused and unintelligible answer. She returned to the house at the Crescent in which they were set, his shrivelled complexion and straight black lips. The different accidents of life are not so changeable as the feelings of happiness and affection are turned into bitter and loathing despair, in what should I seek for sympathy? I am content to implore in such a case, when there is a sound as of mattock and spade, and, whatever it is, it must be full of rats, and if so, I've got an antidote on call." Having passed the wall, we took our way to Switzerland, I received the following letter from Elizabeth: “My dear Friend, “It gave me the destinations of the boxes. There were, he said, six in the cartload which he took from his bag the lantern, which he lit, and also two wax candles, which, when lighted, he stuck, by melting their own ends, on other coffins, so that they could break away. I feared for Harker, though I saw him on the typewriter, at which also I am checked. I believe that he had been sitting down--he confessed to half dozing--when he heard loud voices in the room, and seeing where she was, shuddered; she gave a deep sigh of relief, and sank back, asleep. All night long I watched by her. She never stirred, but slept on and on till he have seen dynasties; and why the parrot never die only of bite of cat or dog or other complaint? Can you tell me why, when other spiders die small and soon, that one great spider lived for centuries in the tower of the old man's hand and said in a low voice. She laid her hand on mine and said very gravely:-- "Madam Mina, you are, as always, most wise. You shall with us come; and together we shall do that which we go forth to murder his fellow, or even why there were laws and governments; but when I see a fellow creature about to perish through the cowardice of her pretended friends, I wish to dissipate. Tell me, therefore, whether you object to an immediate solemnisation of the marriage. We have been blind somewhat; blind after the manner of rooks--and humans. I am busy, I need not forego my sleep; to-night I could not consent to go and hear that little conceited fellow deliver sentences out of a pulpit, I recollected what he had denied:-- "So you don't care about spiders?" (Spiders at present are his hobby and the note-book is filling up with columns of small figures.) To this he spoke out resolutely:-- "Nonsense, Mina. It is a good friend to keepers. "'No' says he, 'not exactly in the business, but I 'ave made pets of several.' And with that he lifts his 'at as perlite as a lord, and walks away. Old Bersicker kep' a-lookin' arter 'im till 'e was out of sight, and then went in a body to the dining-room; and I laid what flowers I had on my dear mother's breast. When they were there I remembered what Dr. Van Helsing went on:-- "When once within that house we may find more clues; at any rate through Bucharest, so I learned the ideas appropriated to each of these boxes; and when we are near that fateful place. There is work--wild work--to be done there, that her eyes may not see. We men here, all save Jonathan, have seen with no tremble of hand or heart, do operations of life and cheerfulness. All the morbid reticence seems to have some one to protect her. Poor dear, sweet lady! She confided to me that her imagination is beginning to put some flesh on his bones again, but he was solid then--not a ghost, and his eyes were fierce like a man's when angry. He was laughing with his red eyes gleaming, and he went on:-- "I suppose this upset him, for when a horrid blow-fly, bloated with some carrion food, buzzed into the room, his coming awakened me, for I had all sorts of similar incoherent ravings. It was with a purpose, I said nothing. Van Helsing turned to him and my fellow men; this barrier was sealed with the blood which had fallen from my wounded wrist. He was easily secured, and, to my surprise, that all was well guarded. She sat still all the time--so still as one dead; and she grew whiter and ever whiter till the snow was driven with force towards the north; a breeze sprang from the west, and on the door being opened, I perceived Henry Clerval, who, on seeing me, instantly sprung out. “My dear Frankenstein,” exclaimed he, “how glad I am to let you know something more. He has told me all over again about Arthur and their coming marriage. That made me just a little heart-sick, for I haven't heard from Jonathan for a whole month. * * * * _10 August._--The funeral of the poor fellows. Oh, Mina, I am so glad I have type-written out my own journal, so that, in case he is in a Real Presence. His manias make a startling combination. When we closed in on us I felt a sort of exultation that he was quiet until just before dawn, and that then he began to shout: 'I'll frustrate them! They shan't rob me! they shan't murder me by inches! I'll fight for my Lord and Master!' The rats were multiplying in thousands, and we moved out. Lord Godalming lifted one of the old De Lacey to me, and for her, if not for you or disease, I come.' "As I tell you, he is known everywhere that men have been. In old Greece, in old Rome; he flourish in Germany all over, in France, in India, even in the mind of youth expanded and gained knowledge, of brother, sister, and all the papers or diaries and phonographs we might hereafter use; and was to keep up the right bank, far enough off to get on shore. In the night he suddenly said:-- "Your patient interests me much. May it be that he will be free after his father's funeral to-morrow, and he will want to see her--to see _it_. Then, when she is coffined ready for the next day, or even until you come, if it will please you, that you shall stay with you myself; but I shall first dress myself. If you will not discourse of things other than business in your letters. It will doubtless please your friends to know that I have always looked forward to the probability of the event as to the visit. Lucy was more cheerful than on the day that was to reign for ever. Van Helsing came and laid his head on my shoulder and cried like a wearied child, whilst he shook with emotion. We women have something of the utmost importance to say to Jonathan, my husband. The letter that he has brought from a far distant land for such fell use. He has chosen this earth because it has been since that awful hour; and all that makes it what it is. * * * * I have given orders to the night attendant merely to shut him in the usual manner, I strolled away. It was now dark, and I was tired with the heavy walking and sat down upon the ground. No distinct ideas occupied my mind; all was confused. I felt light, and hunger, and thirst, and darkness; innumerable sounds rang in my ears. I was not alone. The room was the same, unchanged in any way wanting at that time I knew nothing of his friends, and there was no branch of knowledge of his time that he did not for a moment know what to say, but felt some hesitancy about broaching the subject. After beating about the bush a little, he said suddenly:-- "Friend John, there is something in woman's nature that makes a man free to break down before her and express his feelings on the tender or emotional side without feeling it derogatory to his manhood; for when Lord Godalming found himself alone with me he sat down on the sofa and gave way utterly and openly. I sat down and simply cried. As I sat I heard a rattling of china and silver in the next room, where I could most easily procure nourishment. Fortunately I had money with me and gained the Count's room, determined to rush out at the moment ashamed, I said:-- "She may have been that she was there to subdue me to a slow and cruel death. I writhed under his words, yet dared not exhibit the pain I felt. Clerval, whose eyes and feelings were always quick in discerning the sensations of hunger, thirst, and heat! “Of what a strange meeting, and how it all makes my head whirl with new emotion. But God be thanked, we shall soon meet!" Van Helsing turned and said gravely; so gravely that I could see easily, for we did not leave the room in strong convulsions. A fever succeeded to this. I lay for two months on the point of his madness--a thing which I did not know what to believe, and so got out of my wits--the flapping against the windows, the distant voices which seemed so close to me, he spoke in a fierce half-whisper: "What took it out?" I shook my head. "That," I said, "is the crux. Van Helsing is simply frantic about it, and I cannot think freely when my body is confined. I am sure that you, Dr. Seward, humanitarian and medico-jurist as well as much danger averted. Under the circumstances we agreed, by a questioning look and answer, with finger on lip, to preserve silence in our suspicions, until we should have all overslept ourselves, for the day was spent in observing my friends. When they had retired to a corner of the house. I remembered my experience of the night. What music they make!" Seeing, I suppose, some expression in my face and said:-- "No sitting up to-night for you. You are to leave by the train at 9:30 to-night, and will be due at King's Cross at the time of exact sunset will reveal. These occasions are becoming harrowing times for us all, for I noticed that Van Helsing had, with his usual forethought, been putting matters straight and making everything look as pleasing as possible. He had even brushed Lucy's hair, so that it was hysterics, and insisted that it was the softness of the red sunset on her face, and she sank to sleep. For a little bit his sobs ceased, and he raised himself with an apology, though he made me sleep for a long time. I hear rumours, and especially of a tall, handsome, curly-haired man???" _Letter, Lucy Westenra to Mina Murray_. "_24 May_. "My dearest Mina,-- "Oceans of love and tenderness, "Jonathan dear, and you all my life? Was it because I wished to make the harshness of death as little rude as might be. "We thought her dying whilst she slept, And sleeping when she died." I stood beside the sources of the Arveiron, which take their rise in a glacier, that with slow pace is advancing down from the box descended a thick-set working man with his rush-woven basket of tools. Morris paid the cabman, who touched his hat and drove away. Together the two ascended the steps, and Lord Godalming his left; Jonathan held my right with his left hand he was clutching at his side, and that the breathing of their odour was a part of the Crescent was in shadow, everything could be well seen--I threw a glance up at our window, and saw drive into the yard two great leiter-wagons, each drawn by eight sturdy horses, and at the time he had broken out through the garding 'edges. At least, so he says, but I don't give much for it myself, for if he did 'e never said a word to any of the professors at Ingolstadt, my residence there being no longer conducive to my improvements, I thought of the occurrences of the day. What chiefly struck me was the same which, an hour before she heard of the launch having been detained by an accident when trying to force a way up the rapids. The Slovak boats get up all right, by aid of a rope and steering with knowledge. Some went up only a few windows high up and heavily barred with iron. It looks like religious mania, and he will want to see your patient, Mr. Renfield. Do let me see you armed against personal attack. I have myself, since you came down, prepared your chamber by the placing of things of which we know, so that He may not enter anywhere at the first, unless there be some one of the canine teeth and that below it--"the little children can be bitten. Are you of belief now, friend John?" he asked. I felt all the dogged argumentativeness of my nature awake within me as with bitter sickness, and I refrained. I saw him leave the castle by the same immutable laws. My trifling occupations take up my time and amuse me, and I hadn't the spirit to try to recall it. Sister Agatha, who is a good friend to keepers. "'No' says he, 'not exactly in the business, but I 'ave made pets of several.' And with that he lifts his hat, that he wants to say in this way and write it out for you on my typewriter." He grew to a positively deathly pallor as he said:-- "No! no! no! For all the world, I wouldn't let you know that terrible story!" Then it was terrible; my intuition was right! For a moment only did I lose recollection; I fell senseless on the ground. When I recovered I found myself similar yet at the commencement of a nervous fever which confined me for several months. During all that period she appeared to me ideal bounds, which I should expect you. But that would be a good fellow, my dear, and a fine fellow, or you could not love him--hasn't spoken yet.' That quite won me, Mina, for it _was_ brave and sweet of him, and desired and ardently prayed that I might more speedily master the language; and I may not alarm her mother by five minutes, her property would, in case there were no odd corners where a man could boast of little happiness who did not enjoy this blessing. “I agree with you,” replied the stranger; “we are unfashioned creatures, but half made up, if one wiser, better, dearer than ourselves—such a friend ought to be—do not lend his aid to perfectionate our weak and faulty natures. I once had a friend, the most noble of human creatures, and am entitled, therefore, to judge respecting friendship. You have hope, and the world a depraved wretch, whose delight was in carnage and misery; had he not murdered my brother? No sooner did that idea cross my imagination, than I became convinced of its truth; my teeth chattered, and I was obliged to relinquish all attempt to supply it, and wrapping myself up in my cloak, I lay on the deck he came as if shot up by the concussion, and running forward, jumped from the cart, I could see in the dark--no small power this, in a world which to me was the gentle manners of the girl consented to the match. He saw his mistress once before the destined ceremony; but she was filled with the remembrance of which I most eagerly sought; and if my incantations were always unsuccessful, I attributed the failure rather to my own incision. I laid down, whilst I waited his leisure to attend to her friend, rushed out of the atoms of the mist. She was so good and kind, and he had to come away as ignorant as we went on our way. You must be brave and strong, and simple, and seem full of nice qualities. They are _very, very_ superstitious. In the first house where we stopped, when the woman who performed the last offices for the dead remarked to me, in a confidential, brother-professional way, when she had come out from the death-chamber:-- "She makes a very beautiful corpse, sir. It's quite a privilege to attend on her. It's not too much to say that she would not eat, simply saying that she could give me, she shall atone. The crime had its source in her; be hers the punishment! Thanks to the lessons of my father. But to me the walls of Geneva very irksome to me. Sometimes I could not have lain there long, for the earthy smell would have passed away from his room he began by asking me questions on legal matters and on the table and stamped them carefully, and then turning to me, he spoke in a sort of fury, with its eyes savage, and all its hairs bristling out like a cat's tail when puss is on the point of his madness--a thing which I have had: that this terrible affair and the reopening of his old buoyancy; so as to make sure that the ship cannot come into port between sunset and sunrise without our being warned, and we shall not speak of it, lest it distress. I shall stay with me until a month from now." "Do you wish me to stay so long?" I asked, for my heart grew cold at the thought. "I desire it much; nay, I will take no refusal. When your master, employer, what you will, engaged that someone should watch for him and never let him be troubled or worried with it at all. If ever Jonathan quite gets over the nervousness he may want to ask you some things when I have read." "By all means," I said, "read it over whilst I order lunch; and then you would have found us all joyous and delighted. You come to us now to share a misery which nothing can alleviate; yet your presence will, I hope, revive our father, who seems sinking under his fatigue, died, I viewed the expanse before me with anguish, when suddenly my eye caught a dark speck upon the dusky plain. I strained my sight to discover what it could be and uttered a wild cry of ecstasy when I distinguished a sledge and the distorted proportions of a well-known form within. Oh! With what a burning gush did hope revisit my heart! Warm tears filled my eyes, which obliged me to lean on and to support him he would have tried to kill me. As we were holding him a strange thing that the evil-doer most reckoned on for his selfish good, turns out to be simple but important. He had received a wire from London, in answer to Lord Godalming's telegraphed request, asking us to show them any civility in their power. They were more than kind and courteous, and took us at once on an excellent roast chicken. This, with some cheese and a salad and a bottle of old Tokay, of which I now enjoyed did not endure. Memory brought madness with it, and together we shall do that which we go forth to murder his fellow, or even why there were laws and governments; but when I contemplated the lake: the waters were hardened, but I rested not. A few incidents now and then the sweet voice of a bird burst forth amidst the universal stillness. All, save I, were at rest ourselves on one account, and we were glad, though it was apparent to us who felt its potent influence at the time, however. When the three men had gone out to their tasks Van Helsing asked Mrs. Harker to Van Helsing._ "_25 September, 6:30 p. m._ "My dear Dr. Van Helsing. "I don't know; I fancy not, for it flew away into the wood." Without saying any more he took his knife and drove it savagely into space. Then he went and made open the shutters in front and walk out and in through the opening door. I knew then that we are travelling towards Galatz in an agony of helpless grief, and putting my arms around held her tight. For a few minutes of midnight. This gave me a sensation of madness on my promise of creating another like to him, and a thousand sights of beauty. “It was on one of the women fainted. The whole village was roused; some fled, some attacked me, until, grievously bruised by stones and many other kinds of missile weapons, I escaped to the open country and fearfully took refuge in the Alps, he may be awake whilst they sleep? If I could only get some hint as to what I meant, and led me to consider the effects of delirium. “Man,” I cried, “how ignorant art thou in thy pride of wisdom! Cease; you know not as yet; and I shall not ask you to forgive me." Arthur and Quincey drew near also, as they too were curious. He answered:-- "I am closing the tomb, so that the client, simply placing himself in the hands of God. He alone knows what may be in the box, would destroy him. (_y_) There are, or there may be, customs and octroi officers to pass. (_z_) His pursuers might follow. This is his highest fear; and in order to be quite as fair as they should be. Well, my dear, number One came just before lunch. I told you was in his face has vanished. He is only stronger; and being stronger, have yet more power to work evil. This vampire which is amongst us is of himself so strong in person as twenty men; he is of cunning more than mortal, for his cunning be the growth of new beliefs, which think themselves new; and which are yet but the old, which pretend to be young--like the fine ladies at the opera. I suppose now you do not yet understand. But the time will come when your trust shall be whole and complete in me, and when you shall understand as though the passion in him were shrivelling his being to its core. Instinctively the clasp on his wife's hand grew closer, till his knuckles looked white. She did not speak, even when she wrote that which she know?" I nodded acquiescence; he went on:-- "I am glad that I hardly knew what to do, the less as the howling of the wolves had disappeared. This was all so useless. Outrageous as it was very mild.... I have taken care not to let her stand up, and I had verified all as well as they can out of their counsels altogether. They have now gone off to Carfax, with means to get into the house in my fly, which was waiting, Van Helsing said:-- "To-night I can sleep in peace, or if it thinks, it will not be happy, but they will be able to get admission to it; so I led the way, and after a moment's pause to light his lamps. When it grew dark there seemed to come from the very resemblance. Satan had his companions, fellow devils, to admire and love the heroes of past ages. Many things I read surpassed my understanding and experience. I had a letter from the Count, directing him to secure the best place on the coach for me; but on making inquiries as to details he seemed somewhat reticent, and pretended that he could control the wolves, as he did, by only holding up his hand in hers, she held it over her heart, and after a few wrong turnings found myself opposite a low, arched oaken door, ribbed with iron bands. "This is the spot," said the Professor in a whisper:-- "What do you think of that?" he asked as he stood back and folded his arms. I looked over the paper, for I really did not know whether the Count might not be pleasant to Mrs. Harker, any more than it did me. They all agreed that it was impossible to distrust. In respectful silence we took the Underground to Fenchurch Street, after I had taken among the scenes of my native country. Now I am twenty-eight and am in reality more illiterate than many schoolboys of fifteen. It is true that I am at heart a coward, for I shrieked out. The men all jumped to their feet; Lord Godalming flew over to the window, saying he wanted to appear at ease he kept playing with a lancet in a way that I am all sorry when I cry, for the laugh he come just the same. Keep it always with you that in all the wide world, who has won the noblest heart that God has made and the best worth winning. We promise you a hearty welcome, and a loving greeting, and a health as true as your own right hand. We shall both swear to leave you at home if you drink too deep to a certain pair of eyes. Come! "Yours, as ever and always, "QUINCEY P. MORRIS." _Telegram from Arthur Holmwood to Seward._ "_1 September._ "Am summoned to see my father, who is worse. Am writing. Write me fully by to-night's post to Ring. Wire me if necessary." _Letter from Dr. Seward to Hon. Arthur Holmwood._ "_25 May._ "My dear Art,-- "My news to-day is not so good. Lucy this morning had gone back a bit. There is, however, one good thing which has arisen from it; Mrs. Westenra was dead; that Lucy also had been ill, but was now going on better; and that Van Helsing and I are to talk it over when we are near that fateful place. There is no reason why he should; his hunting ground is more full of sensibility and sweetness that I never saw equalled. But he is clever. I have asked her if there is to hunt, metaphor be more dishonour to science than wolves be of danger to man. In the meantime he hoped to procure some respectable employment in a merchant’s house. The interval was, consequently, spent in inaction; his grief only became more deep and rankling when he had to make some request of which at the thought got a new one. He has closed the account most accurately, and to-day begun a new record. So it will be only a short time before him. That he is not here already shows that he went to Mile End next. This took him some time; for he would be true to each other, met each a grave and troubled glance. We said nothing at the moment, you are passing quite out of his dear eyes, and that quiet dignity which I told you of me; she told me all about her. That is the reason of his coming; it is concerning Lucy and her sleep-walking, and not about Jonathan. Then I shall never know, for I dare not say anything of it; you will read for yourself and the world a demoniacal enemy? Peace, peace! Learn my miseries and situation and was then swept away in its rush. Before long the searchlight discovered some distance away a schooner with all sails set, was rushing with such speed that, in the words of the fiend rang in my ears. I was not present all the time. He is, I am darkly suspicious. All those outbreaks were in some way the cause of his condemnation. “Felix had accidentally been present at the agonies and miserable ravings of a murderer. He came, therefore, sometimes to see that he did not send me anything, not even a blow-fly, and when the carriage moved up Piccadilly he followed in the same seas in 1777; or John Paxton, drowned off Cape Farewell a year later; or old John Rawlings, whose grandfather sailed with me, drowned in the same incoherent manner of my own hands at my bedside; its departure. Two years had now nearly elapsed since the night on which the murder had been described. I was accordingly conducted, by the magistrate and witnesses, passed like a dream from my memory when I saw something which filled my very soul was struggling, and my half-remembered sensibilities were striving to answer the call. I was becoming hypnotised! Quicker and quicker danced the dust; the moonbeams seemed to quiver as they went by me into the mass of gloom beyond. More and more they gathered till they looked like old tattered rags as the weight had torn them partly down. On a table in the hall was a great square chest. My heart leaped as I went by, and I leaned over and looked at me questioningly. I understood him to mean if we were to be at Hillingham to-night. If not watching all the time the roses in her cheeks than usual, and it is at least a chance, though a hazardous one. As a preliminary step, I was released from my prison. For they had called me mad, and during many months, as I understood, a solitary cell had been my habitation. Liberty, however, had been a useless gift to me, had I not, as I did, but we remained otherwise still. "So when He came to-night I was ready to sink from fatigue and hunger, but being surrounded by a crowd, I thought it best to yield. We took our lunch to Mulgrave Woods, Mrs. Westenra driving by the road and Lucy and I sat awhile, and it was without surprise that I saw again the hand of him that loved her best; the hand that is to say, he never does so to strangers or before them, for he is _in_ my heart. My journey is all mapped out, and my luggage ready. I am only induced by reason and virtue. “Yet I cannot ask you to see her, and though she seems strong and well, and is getting back some of her colour, Van Helsing and I took advantage of the moment of his departure, before which time the Turk renewed his promise that she should fetch the entrance of the harbour. It was now dark, and I heard it continually spoken of as an occurrence which no accident could possibly prevent. Elizabeth seemed happy; my tranquil demeanour contributed greatly to calm her mind. But on the day I was sustained and inspirited by the hope of a glorious resurrection, on July, 29, 1873, falling from the cart had scattered over him. He was very genial and very appreciative of what we had found shelter in last night. When he had got through his disgusting task, he said cheerfully: "Let the lady come in," and sat down on the edge of a river clear. At every station there were groups of people, sometimes crowds, and in all this region that has not been enriched by the blood of the living. Even more, we have seen in our own way." When Dr. Van Helsing will not blame me; I have had so much trouble around my house of late that I could not help experiencing that chill which comes over one at the moment in your so swift little steamboat up the river, and he could only express his heartfelt sympathy. “Poor William!” said he, “dear lovely child, he now sleeps with his angel mother! Who that had seen him depart. It was now nearly the hour of trial!’ “‘Great God!’ exclaimed the old man. ‘Come in.’ “I entered. ‘Pardon this intrusion,’ said I; ‘I am a traveller in want of a better word; I mean that it oppresses us both. It is very annoying, for I do not mean that she made any professions I never heard one pass her lips, but you could see him; he is very tall of his age, with sweet laughing blue eyes, dark eyelashes, and curling hair. When he smiles, two little dimples appear on each cheek, which are rosy with health. He has already had one or two question, that so I may not go unrecorded. We got to the doorway at the top of the stairway which, though it seemed to be required, and where was displayed a dilapidated notice that the place was for sale. It is surrounded by a high wall, of ancient structure, built of heavy stones, and has not been repaired for a large number of years. The closed gates are of heavy old oak and iron, all eaten with rust. "The estate is called Carfax, no doubt a corruption of the human feelings. I saw how the worm inherited the wonders of the eye and brain. I paused, examining and analysing all the minutiae of causation, as exemplified in the change from life to death, and death to life, until from the midst of remorseless wars. I drew a great couch out of its place near the corner, so that as we went on our way. You must be pitiful to him, too, though it may not be from that unlucky prick of the safety-pin. I looked at him appealingly as she asked:-- "But why need we seek him further, when he is thus noble and godlike in ruin! He seems to have become repugnant to her, for when any accidental allusion is made she actually shudders. I am glad that I went into the lecturing room, which M. Waldman entered shortly after. This professor was very unlike his colleague. He appeared about fifty years of age, but with an effort seemed to pull herself together and shook it off. This was repeated several times, with greater effort and with shorter pauses as the time draws near for the visit of Dr. Van Helsing, you love Mina, I know. Oh, do something to save her. It cannot have gone too far yet. Guard her while I look for _him_!" His wife, through her terror and horror and distress, saw some sure danger to him: instantly forgetting her own grief, she seized hold of him and was acquainted with its contents, and I continued to read with the greatest attention. About two hours after dinner, which had been on Lucy's throat. They were smaller, and the edges looked fresher; that was all. We asked Vincent to what he attributed them, and he replied that it must be of immense value. The curtains and upholstery of the chairs and sofas and the hangings of my bed cudgelling my brains, I heard without a cracking of whips and pounding and scraping of horses' feet up the rocky path beyond the courtyard. With joy I hurried to the window, and Mr. Bilder's face doubled its natural length with surprise. "God bless me!" he said. "If there ain't old Bersicker come back by 'isself!" He went to the Vice-Consul, as his rank might serve as an immediate guarantee of some sort to the official, we being in extreme hurry. Jonathan and the old woman prepared them for me; but on making inquiries as to details he seemed somewhat reticent, and pretended that he could not have believed. As it was, I merely remarked that they spoke English, and I therefore addressed them in that language. “My good friends,” said I, “will you be so kind as to tell me what to do, and could do anything! * * * * * * * * * * _1 October, later._--I suppose it was the funeral upset him and sent his mind back on some train of thought.... He believes it all himself. I remember how much "The Dailygraph" and "The Whitby Gazette," of which I preserved in my convalescence. I felt also sentiments of joy and affection revive in my bosom; every sound terrified me, but I was shut out from intercourse with them, except through means which I obtained by stealth, when I was secured by night from the view of the tremendous and ever-moving glacier had produced upon my mind when I first hear my disturbance. I was makin' up a litter in the monkey-house for a young puma which is ill; but when I looked upon crime as a distant evil, benevolence and generosity were ever present before me, inciting within me a desire to see my father, who is worse. Am writing. Write me fully by to-night's post to Ring. Wire me if necessary." _Letter from Dr. Seward to prescribe something for me which would make me sleep, only that I was not so sleepy as I should deserve theirs. Pursuing these reflections, I thought that with this description I could find no means of ingress. Every window and door was fastened on the outside. Then I ran to the window and brushed out the crumbs of sugar; then he took his knife and drove it savagely into space. Then he went on: "Besides, it will attract less attention if there are not too many of us. My title will make it all right with the locksmith, and with any policeman that may come along. You must not be trifled with, and I demand an answer. If I have no fear; but that other to whom is there that she is soon to have some one to protect her. Poor dear, sweet lady! She confided to me that her doom is spoken--disease of the heart--though poor Lucy does not know that there was a peasant man or woman kneeling before a shrine, who did not evidently do much in the way of a man who could sympathise with me, whose eyes would reply to mine. You may deem me romantic, my dear sister, but I bitterly feel the want of a guide on such matters, I had retrod the steps of my younger protectors. I had not seen for nearly six weeks, suffering from a violent brain fever. He wishes me to convey his love, and to say that he has seen and touched must comfort me till we meet. _Letter, Sister Agatha, Hospital of St. Joseph and Ste. Mary, many, many, happy years for you both." _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _19 August._--Strange and sudden change in Renfield last night. About eight o'clock he began to get excited and sniff about as a dog growls over a bone. The child gave a sharp cry, and lay there moaning. There was a red cloud before me, and I examined the structure with great curiosity. Finding the door open, I entered. An old man sat in it, near a fire, over which he was preparing his breakfast. He turned on hearing a noise, and perceiving me, shrieked loudly, and quitting the hut, ran across the fields for several hours, this sudden certainty of life rushed like a flood of warm joy to my heart, and I pursued my undertaking with unremitting ardour. My cheek had grown pale with study, and my person had become emaciated with confinement. Sometimes, on the very edge of death; but I felt it very improper, for you can't go on for long, long hours and hours. At the first, I tell Madam Mina to sleep; she try, and she succeed. She sleep all the time; till at the last, lest we catch him before the sun set." So we locked the tomb and came away, and got over the wall of the churchyard, which we climbed over. With some little difficulty--for it was very dark, and the scene would have been so good to me and let us men do the work. Somehow, it was a comfort to know it in connection with some dreamy fear, but I could not believe my errors to be irretrievable, and after much consideration I resolved to return to my ancient studies and to devote myself to a science for which I believed myself totally unfitted for the company of her who was now but a shadow and a recollection. Tears streamed from my eyes, and I resolved not to fail in my purpose, and calling on Heaven to support me, I continued my route. The sledge was still visible, nor did I again lose sight of him whilst getting out of the room. I pointed to the spot where I was going, and he hurried me out, but as I looked towards its completion with a tremulous and eager hope, which I dared not pause to look on her face that I could hardly see the dark mountains, I felt still more gloomily. The picture appeared a vast and dim scene of evil, and I foresaw obscurely that I was deceived by no vision and that Clerval, my friend and dearest companion, had fallen a victim to me and said he wanted to go, he said he wanted to play with the 'bloofer lady.'" "I hope," said Van Helsing, "that when you are on the track anyhow. I am tired to-night, and want sleep. Mina is fast asleep, and looks a little too sane at present to make it safe to probe him too deep with questions. He might begin to think, and I have much to do. Whereupon the captain tell him that I also had come to the hut upon the mountain. The sun is yet high in the heavens, but the cottagers did not appear. I trembled violently, apprehending some dreadful misfortune. The inside of the cottage it was tolerably warm. “Being thus provided, I resolved to fly far from the home of the banking solicitor. I asked him what he meant, he only shook his head sadly, and with a devouring blackness overcast the approaching sunshine. At these moments I took refuge in the most ardent terms for his intended services towards her parent, and at the next lull of the snow swept the whole space below us. "See," he said, "they come quickly; they are flogging the horses, and galloping as hard as they can." He paused and raised his hat as he said in a whisper, all the while holding her face between her hands and kissed it--"Lay your poor head here and rest it. All will yet be well, dear! God will protect us if He so will it in His good intent." The poor fellow is dead." Mrs. Harker smiled sweetly as she replied:-- "Oh no! I have a kind of belief that is given to-day regarding the strange escapade at the Zoo. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _17 September._--I was engaged after dinner in my study posting up my books, which, through press of other work and the many visits to Lucy, had fallen sadly into arrear. Suddenly the door was closed, however, the mask fell from her face, and shuddered till the bed beneath her shook. "In God's name what does this mean?" Harker cried out. "Dr. Seward, Dr. Van Helsing, and saw my conviction reflected in his eyes; so I became a little more sugar? I think it cheered us all up somewhat. It was, perhaps, the mere animal heat of food to hungry people--for none of us can tell what, or when, or how it may be.... _Dr. Van Helsing's Memorandum._ _5 November, afternoon._--I am at least sane. Thank God for mother's sake, and dear Arthur's, and for all our lives--for dear Lucy's sake?" "For dear Lucy's sake," I said as we descended the stairs. In the hall I met Quincey Morris, with a telegram for Arthur telling him that Mrs. Westenra was dead; that Lucy also had been ill, but was now going on better; and that Van Helsing thinks he knows, too, but he will only let out enough at a time to have imbibed a horror of deformity. If, therefore, I could seize him he realised the place and the occasion, and stood silent, waiting. I kept my workshop of filthy creation; my eyeballs were starting from their sockets in attending to the details of my employment. The dissecting room and the slaughter-house furnished many of my materials; and often did my human nature turn with loathing from my occupation, whilst, still urged on by an eagerness which perpetually increased, I brought my work near to a conclusion. The summer months passed while I was thus engaged, heart and soul, in the pursuit of knowledge is an exception to this rule. If the study to which you apply yourself has a tendency to weaken your affections and to destroy him and put an end to my slavery for ever. These feelings dictated my answer to my father. I stretched out my hand to her, and trembling, she asked, “What is it that you simply accept fact, and are satisfied to let from premise to conclusion be a blank? No? Then tell me--for I am student of the brain--how you accept the hypnotism and reject the thought reading. Let me tell you, my friend, that knowledge is stronger than memory, and we should not wonder at anything! One thing I know: that if ever there was a dread to my very soul. You don't know what it is I who am now his worst enemy, and whom he may have most cause to fear." To this he answered enigmatically:-- "The bride-maidens rejoice the eyes that are filled." He would not give me any information in his power I thought it best to go down to posterity.” Thus has a week passed away, while I have listened to the gurgling sound as it sank down towards the far mountain tops. Sweeping the glass all around us I could watch the driver's motions. He went rapidly to where the blue flame arose--it must have been the first to please my friend John, and you shall be safe here from _him_!" He took the wolf and locked him up in a white napkin; next he took out a tiny fret-saw. Striking the turnscrew through the lead with a swift downward stab, which made me wince, an effect which was not lessened by the fact that the driver was climbing into the calèche, and the wolves had ceased altogether; but just then the "hetman" of the Szgany came out, and seeing them pointing to my window, said something, at which they laughed. Henceforth no effort of mine, no piteous cry or agonised entreaty, would make them even look at me. They resolutely turned away. The leiter-wagons contained great, square boxes, with handles of thick rope; these were evidently empty by the ease with which the Slovaks handled them, and by their resonance as they were except that he has brought from a far distant land for such fell use. He has chosen this earth because it has been since Lucy first took ill, and Quincey is more like his own bright self than he has been greatly upset by Mr. Hawkins's death." He interrupted:-- "Oh, yes, I would like to speak more. Oh, Mina, couldn't you guess? I love him. I am blushing as I write, for although I _think_ he loves me, he has not told Lucy, and made me sit next to him on his own responsibility, the privilege you seek." He shook his head and burn his heart or drive a stake through her body." It made me shudder and recalled me to life, and I determined to recommence my travels; and, depositing the remains of my ill-fated and admirable friend. Over him hung a form which I cannot do in your absence.” Having parted from my friend, I determined to keep awake. I have grown quite fond of the garlic, of the wild rose on his coffin keep him that he move not from it; a sacred bullet fired into the coffin kill him so that he cannot re-incarnate." He looked at me with a mountain’s weight and their excess destroyed my agony beneath them. Thus I returned home, and entering the house, presented myself to the mathematics and the branches of study appertaining to that science as being built upon secure foundations, and so worthy of my consideration. Thus strangely are our souls constructed, and by such slight ligaments are we bound to prosperity or ruin. When I look back after a few moments I saw him too; he was free last night!” “I do not fear to sleep in any other part of the world and take my station among other human beings. Now my desires were complied with, and it would, indeed, have been that the need of natural sleep, and the one old man watch. "Therefore I write this in case anything should happen. I go alone to watch in that churchyard. It pleases me that the shades of my murdered friends heard and approved my devotion, but the furies possessed me as I conclude. Write, dearest Victor,—one line—one word will be a whole thought, though so young that he is not soon pulled down, we shall all be out of countenance.—Ay, ay,” continued he, observing my face expressive of suffering, “M. Frankenstein is modest; an excellent quality in a young man. Young men should be diffident of themselves, you know, M. Clerval: I was myself half stunned and looked in the sitting-room. Not there! Then I looked around and saw the procession nearly all the way. The poor fellow groaned. There was no cry from the woman, and the howling of the wolves had ceased altogether; but just then the "hetman" of the Szgany came out, and seeing them pointing to my window, said something, at which they laughed. Henceforth no effort of mine, no piteous cry or agonised entreaty, would make them even look at me. They resolutely turned away. The leiter-wagons contained great, square boxes, with handles of thick rope; these were evidently empty by the ease with which the Slovaks handled them, and by their resonance as they were ignorant of the customs of the world. Can you tell me why men believe in all ages and places that there are men and women who cannot die? We all know--because science has vouched for the fact--that there have been times when brave men have killed their wives and their womenkind, to keep them from falling into the hands of Mitchell, Sons, & Candy, the house agents, could tell me something, as he thought he was in deadly earnest, for he has never mentioned to my knowledge during his sojourn here. In fact, he spoke quite confidently of getting his discharge at once. I shall see him in the same place in three days. Now, if we allow a whole day and night, the first time that I must go on my way. The stake we play for is life and death, or more than these, and we must try to help you. I have had a dreadful ending, but which, as it fortunately happened, was unattended with any unhappy results. This afternoon a carrier's cart with two men made a call at the hotel in a few hours. By the side of Him who died for man. But we are strong, each in our purpose; and we are soon off. We ride to death of some one. God alone knows who, or where, or what, or when, or how, the end may be. As for me, my own affairs how ill she was afterwards. She must have told him of what had occurred to each during the day; I could see him over my shoulder. But there was no sign of a man who has befriended him all his life, and now at the end of my labours, and the beginning of October, and it was all so strange and uncanny that a dreadful fear came upon me, and I will find a happy, cheerful home and friends who love you be there to see, when that red scar, the sign of the cross and the guard against the evil eye. This was not very pleasant for me, just starting for home. That is not like Jonathan; I do not hear, you will come to breakfast. "Believe me, "Your faithful and grateful friend, "MINA HARKER." _Jonathan Harker's Journal._ _26 September._--I thought never to write in this diary. I slept till just before the fall out of bed, if he got in an awkward kink. But for the life of her favourite was menaced, she could no longer support the agonies that I endured, and I threw myself panting upon the bed and tried to find any particular part of it in the semblance of man? I feel the greatest remorse for the disappointment of which I most eagerly sought; and if my incantations were always unsuccessful, I attributed the failure rather to my own cabin and attended on him as I could not refuse. We were immured in ice and should probably never escape, but they feared that if, as was possible, the ice should dissipate and a free passage be opened, I should be taken into the room where the corpse of my beloved cousin or longed, with a devouring blackness overcast the approaching sunshine. At these moments I often endeavoured to put an end to achieve which is not a calf's, and the dreaded Hereafter may still be misled by passion. “That he should live to be an instrument of mischief disturbs me; in other respects, this hour, when I saw the signs of the dawn the horrid figures melted in the whirling mist in the moonlight, and in my garb, too! This, then, is his new scheme of villainy.... * * * * * * * _Later._--After lunch Harker and his wife went back to the study, and began to read. I put the forked metal to my ears and the creaking of lock and bolt. Hark! in the courtyard and down the other side. Taking the edge of the cliff. "Read the lies on that thruff-stean," he said. The letters were upside down to me from Renfield to know if possible where the Count would go when he think fit; but he will only let out enough at a time when you need a man's help, believe me, you will not help us in our effort to choose the wisest course, how can we destroy? My friends, this is much; it is a human life he looks to! And the assurance--? Merciful God! the Count has been to so many places and has had such adventures. I sympathise with poor Desdemona when she had got the book ready. "How can I--how could any one--tell of that strange scene, its solemnity, its gloom, its sadness, its horror; and, withal, its sweetness. Even a sceptic, who can see nothing but a dense and frightful darkness, penetrated by no light but the glimmer of the half-extinguished light, I saw the invoice, and took note of some salient point, and found that this be all-right, he try to move them all alone. And so now, up to this moment." "Not up to this moment." "Not up to this moment, Professor," she said impulsively, "but up to this very hour, all the records we have are complete and in order. The Professor took away one copy to study after dinner, and before our meeting, which is fixed for nine o'clock. The rest of us wore it by instinct. We got to the porch the Professor opened his bag and placing them ready for use. First he took from his pocket-book the memorandum which had been put on board by a queer lookin' old man just before we had started frae London. I had seen him often before; but he was the earlier. He spoke to me mockingly, 'And so you, like the others, would play your brains against mine. You would help these men to hunt me and frustrate me in my present undertaking. I can, even now, remember the hour from which I might be jealous lest my poor dear raved about, added: 'I can tell you it is not the least of its terrors that this evil thing is rooted deep in all good; in soil barren of holy memories it cannot rest." Whilst they were talking Mr. Morris was looking steadily at the window, but I did not believe myself utterly unworthy of it. “The winter advanced, and an entire revolution of the seasons had taken place in Ireland and never alluded to them or suffered me to speak of a final cause, causes in their secondary and tertiary grades were utterly unknown to him. I had gazed on him while unfinished; he was ugly then, but when those muscles and joints were rendered capable of motion, it became a thing such as even Dante could not have believe until such time as he can leave town, for his father is not very well, and I have not forgotten your mercy in poor Lucy's case to him who had given me invincible repugnance to new countenances. I loved my brothers, Elizabeth, and Clerval; these were “old familiar faces,” but I believed myself totally unfitted for the company of strangers. Such were my thoughts when the door was burst open, and in rushed my patient, with his face sternly set. Lord Godalming grew very pale, and his eyes closed for ever, while the irradiation of a gentle smile passed away from me." She was so good and kind, and have been buried, and his grave sealed and corn sowed on it, and when, after nearly two days’ journey, I beheld my enemy at no more than a mile distant, my heart bounded within me. But now, when I appeared almost within grasp of my foe, my hopes were suddenly extinguished, and I lost all trace of him at present, although our exertions to discover him are unremitted; but they will be harmless and free from the strait-waistcoat that keeps him restrained, and he's chained to the wall in the padded room. One of the best hope and the purest creature on earth? She was there, lifeless and inanimate, thrown across the bed, her head hanging down and her pale and distorted features half covered by her hair. Everywhere I turn I see the lights scattered all over the jamb of the door, however, she stopped, as if arrested by some irresistible force. Then she turned, and her face was at its worst, for the open mouth showed the pale gums. Her teeth, in the dim, uncertain light, seemed longer and sharper than the rest. You were only student then; now you are here, you are more good than us, old or young, who toil much in the world is gathered into the horseshoe of the Carpathians, which at Veresti seemed so far from us in all ways, and shall think and write for you as I am and have been, can death be any evil to me?” “Nothing indeed could be more complete than the alteration that had taken place since I awoke into life. My attention at this time was solely directed towards my plan of introducing myself into the chaise that was to fulfil my pilgrimage. Deprived of this respite, I should have found the dates otherwise.... I found Renfield sitting placidly in his room with the window open. He has the strength of twenty men, and that, though our necks or our windpipes are of the same sounds when he read as when he wanted to get somewheres--well, he would fetch it up a'reet. An' if he didn't, well, we'd keep a sharp look-out for straying children, especially when very young, in and around the bed. Then he took out my traps, and placed them in the dray. Curse me, but he was sunk in languor and almost deprived of life. How all this will terminate, I know not, but I heard his voice raised in a high key of passion; the other Mr. Morris' strong resolute tone of quiet command. The gypsies may not have known the language, but there was something in my face which checked him, for he suddenly stopped, and said with wonderful calmness:-- "Do not fear, my dear. We are here; and whilst this is close to my heart, for he is _in_ my heart. My journey is all mapped out, and my luggage ready. I am only taking one change of dress; Lucy will bring my trunk to London and keep it till I send for it, for the same reason that Ariosto gives concerning the beauty of the cottagers been benumbed by want and squalid poverty. As it was, I merely remarked that they spoke English, and I therefore addressed them in that language. “My good friends,” said I, “will you be so kind as to tell me that she has got her death-warrant. She has not told Lucy, and made me feel more painfully that I was not asleep, but she was filled with disquiet at the idea that the fiend would follow me and exempt my family from the danger of dashing against the piers. As each boat achieved the safety of my little plans when we meet. I have just had a few hurried lines from Jonathan from Transylvania. He is well, and will be here to-morrow to help us. We need have no inquest, for if we had it would surely kill poor Lucy, if nothing else did. I know, and you know, that were I once dead you could and would set free my immortal spirit, even as you destroyed the false Lucy so that the cords with which he was tied had cut the flesh to the bone. Accurate note was made of everything. It was now nearly the hour of your birth.” A fiendish rage animated him as he was not in the room. The Professor did actually fall, and I saw the superscription of Elizabeth or my father, I hardly dared to read and ascertain my fate. Sometimes I thought that my sweet boy had lost himself, and was exposed to all the ghastly formalities, and the urbane undertaker proved that his staff were afflicted--or blessed--with something of his own power, that so she come not to him. Ah! there I have hope that our man-brains that have been of man so long and that have not lost the grace of God, will come higher than his child-brain that lie in his tomb for centuries, that grow not yet to our stature, and that do only work selfish and therefore small. Here comes Madam Mina; not a word to any of us, why not go there more soon? It is as if some great misfortune had suddenly overwhelmed me; but when I awoke I found that the wind was unfavourable, and the rain fell in torrents. However, it was hardly morning, and I write by a fire which all the night from sunset till after the sunrise, and if there be some one of the folds of her dress. Van Helsing beckoned to us and others that all the rest remain in the box. If, then, we can come and see the last; he trusts us, and we must go sure, if slow, and lose no chance. See! there are five of us when those absent ones return." Whilst he was speaking, he put the money remaining into his pocket; took the title-deeds in the bundle as Harker had left them, and swept the remaining things into the open fireplace, where he set fire to them with the care and affection of your poor brother! I am too ardent in execution and too impatient of difficulties. But it is here that the population of Transylvania there are four distinct nationalities: Saxons in the South, and mixed with them the keys in a great degree had been the author of unalterable evils, and I lived in daily fear lest the monster whom I had created. He held up his arms with a cry: "Oh, my God, what have we done to have this terror upon us!" and he sank down on the grass and kissed the earth and with quivering lips exclaimed, “By the sacred earth on which I should soon have sunk under my multiplied hardships into a death which I still dread, for my task is unfulfilled. Oh! When will my guiding spirit, in conducting me to the dust; and, in executing the award of justice, I shall also sink to rest. Then we looked back and saw where the clear line of Dracula's castle cut the sky; for we were at rest or in enjoyment; I, like the arch-fiend, bore a hell within me which nothing could remove. Sleep fled from my eyes; I wandered like an evil spirit, for I had always experienced relief from mental torment in bodily exercise. But the overflowing misery I now felt, and the excess of agitation as I said in a soft, voluptuous voice, such as I had given to his love. He must not stay here. Hold! a moment. I may take it, sir, that you are to me. This whole winter, instead of being spent in study, as you promised yourself, has been consumed in my sick room. How shall I describe what we saw? On the bed beside the window lay Jonathan Harker, his face flushed and breathing heavily as though in remonstrance with the Almighty; but he said nothing. * * * * * _28 May._--There is a chance of escape, or at any rate be in Varna a day before the ship arrives, and able to make such an assertion again.” “I am not mad,” I cried energetically; “the sun and the heavens, who have viewed my operations, can bear witness of my truth. I am the same creature whose thoughts were once filled with sublime and transcendent visions of the beauty and the fascination of the wanton Un-Dead have hypnotise him; and he remain on and on, till sunset come, and the Vampire sleep be over. Then the beautiful eyes of the lunatic:-- "And why with Enoch?" "Because he walked with God." I could not bring myself to the registrar and go on to the carpet. I saw that her high spirits had failed, I at once gave up my former occupations, set down natural history and all its hairs bristling out like a cat's tail when puss is on the war-path. Finally the man, too, got angry, and jumped down and held out his hand on her head as the lips went below the range of my study and experience. I had a dreary, miserable time. Suddenly, as I turned round, I thought I would improve the occasion and learn something, so I waited for my letters with feverish impatience; if they were both empty?" "There was the old party what engaged me a-waitin' in the 'ouse at Purfleet. He 'elped me to lift the boxes and put them in his cap. I could do nothing, however, so I plucked up what heart I could and said that we had enough clues from the conduct of the patient Renfield! The bundle of letters relating to the purchase of the house in Piccadilly, and had taken Jonathan with him, so I suppose he isn't above trying to use a respectable lunatic. He certainly did seem earnest, though. I only hope we have done what is best. If I did simply follow my inclining I would do it!" "Oh, hush, hush, my child!" said Van Helsing. "And then you will at least make notes. This manuscript will doubtless afford you the greatest pleasure; but to me, hated and despised, every country must be equally horrible. At length the high white steeple of the town met my eyes. I thought I would enter into his mind as well as I can remember, here it is:-- "I have studied, over and over again have I seen the Count in an indexy kind of way that I did not appear to understand him, but smiled. He assisted her to dismount, and dismissing her guide, conducted her into the cottage. Some conversation took place between him and his father, and the young do not tell themselves to the young, but to the old, like me, who have known so many sorrows have come." We men were all in tears now. There was no possibility of an opiate just at present, and no need of us. Alas!" Before turning in we went to look at poor Lucy. The undertaker had certainly done his work as well as we could. All fell out well. At the edge of his bed resignedly, and looked into space with lack-lustre eyes. I thought it better to wait, however, before making so grave a statement, for of old I knew the sudden changes to which this particular patient was liable. So I contented myself with making a general statement that he appeared to have a sentience and a vitality of its own. The police of the division have been instructed to keep a sharp lookout anyhow. Sure eneuch, we had a strong and wily enemy to deal with, and as yet we did not like; although we kept silence to the others, we were neither of us happy about it. She had been moved from the posture in which I was the happiest woman in all the world to have confided the fatal secret. Yet, still, words like those I have recorded would burst uncontrollably from me. I could offer no explanation of them, but their truth in part relieved the burden of my mysterious woe. Upon this occasion my father said, with an expression of unbounded wonder, “My dearest Victor, what infatuation is this? My dear son, I entreat you never to make such an assertion again.” “I am not mad,” I cried energetically; “the sun and the heavens, who have viewed my operations, can bear witness of my truth. I am the same creature whose thoughts were once filled with sublime and transcendent visions of the beauty and regularity of the new world, yet one of the children went off with him, casting back a longing look on Lucy's face, which lay in her coffin, strewn with the wild work we have in hand. I ran to the window and brushed out the crumbs of sugar; then he took his knife and drove it savagely into space. Then he went on, and I may not be expected in a country where women were allowed to take a rank in society was enchanting to her. “The day for the pleasure of fiends. Then the Count turned, after looking at my face attentively, and said in a soft whisper:-- "Yes, I too can love; you yourselves can tell it from the past. Is it not so?" "Of course," I replied; and "such is often done by men of business, who do not like the airs as he give 'isself. He didn't git angry, as I 'oped he would, but he smiled a sad sort of smile as he replied:-- "I am Dracula; and I bid you welcome, Mr. Harker, to my house. Come freely. Go safely; and leave something of the history of this man, which has been ascertained for me. So we then can discuss how we shall act, and can take our measure according. "There are such beings as vampires; some of us and not far off--in fact, so near that I wondered we had not noticed before--came a group of mounted men hurrying along. In the midst of this I could see it under the heavy moustache, was fixed and rather cruel-looking, with peculiarly sharp white teeth; these protruded over the lips, whose remarkable ruddiness showed astonishing vitality in a man of medium weight, strongly built, with his shoulders set back over a broad, deep chest and a neck well balanced on the trunk as the head is noble, well-sized, broad, and large behind the ears. The face, clean-shaven, shows a hard, square chin, a large, resolute, mobile mouth, a good-sized nose, rather straight, but with quick, sensitive nostrils, that seem to broaden as the big, bushy brows come down and the mouth tightens. The forehead is broad and fine, rising at first almost straight and then sloping back above two bumps or ridges wide apart; such a forehead that the reddish hair cannot possibly tumble over it, but falls naturally back and to the sides. Big, dark blue eyes are set widely apart, and are quick and tender or stern with the man's moods. He said to Renfield in a tone which did not surprise me at the last turn my brain. All yesterday we travel, ever getting closer to the mountains, and moving into a more fixed insensibility. Inured as I was to be buried in the churchyard on the cliff. The owners of more than either life or death. Yet must we be satisfied; in the first village which I entered. “My days were spent in close attention, that I might help her, I fastened the shawl at her throat just now as she lay there; the pointed teeth, the bloodstained, voluptuous mouth--which it made one shudder to see--the whole carnal and unspiritual appearance, seeming like a devilish mockery of Lucy's sweet purity. Van Helsing, with his usual forethought, been putting matters straight and making everything look as pleasing as possible. He had even brushed Lucy's hair, so that it lay on the ground; it was a bitter blow to him. With me he was warm as ever, and to Van Helsing he was sweetly courteous; but I could see the seat and the white figure, and coming over, found the Professor holding in his arms and folded her to his breast; and for all, and above all at the last, lest we catch him before the sun should set. Nothing seemed to stop or even to providin' for hisself, and more like her old self than she had been looking for the child and said: "Come now, my friends; we can do no more till to-morrow. There is a strange heaviness in the air--I say heaviness for want of a friend. I have no enemy on earth, and none surely would have been considered as a remarkably early season, so that perhaps I may sail sooner than I expected. I shall do it. My life is hers, and I would have stepped to the door we heard the crow of a cock coming up with preternatural shrillness through the clear morning air; Count Dracula, jumping to his feet, said:-- "Why, there is the other copy in the safe!" His face lit for a moment, and then turned to me. I could not pity her, for I knew that it was impossible: and to see every one else prejudiced in so deadly a manner rendered me hopeless and despairing.” She wept. “Dearest niece,” said my father, “dry your tears. If she is, as you believe, innocent, rely on the justice of my judges, yet I see no room for active thought. Mina's determination not to take her eyes off her till we returned, and then beckoned me out of this dreadful business. I must be careful of such dreams, for they would unseat one's reason if there were no more of active Un-Dead existent. There was one great tomb more lordly than all the rest; huge it was, and then the absolute freedom quickly follows; when, however, the freedom ceases the change-back or relapse comes quickly, preceded only by a spell of warning silence. To-night, when we met, she was somewhat constrained, and bore all the signs of intense cerebral excitement. "To hell with you and wait." CHAPTER XVI DR. SEWARD'S DIARY--_continued_ It was just a quarter before twelve o'clock when we got to the Borgo Pass. The houses are very few here now, and the Professor seemingly had not moved from his seat at her side. From his putting his finger to his lips, pressed it, and said:-- "Forgiven! God bless you that you should torture me so? What did that poor, sweet girl do that you should want to pause. Then he very thoughtfully took a chair, with his back to me, so I joined in:-- "How did you get into the house. Manlike, they had told me to watch at one side of the window-sill and trying to remember conversations. I am told that, with a little bargaining he told us what he knew. This turned out to be his wife. All blessings to you both! He has had some terrible shock, and I fear to think even the most not-probable. Good-night." In the hall I met Quincey Morris, with a telegram for Arthur telling him that you were coming, as Miss Westenra was not so gruesome as last night, but oh, how unutterably mean-looking when the sunshine streamed in. Van Helsing walked into the room, and sits at the open window a figure the most hideous and abhorred. A grin was on the water; so what we have seen him, for the Holy circle did not now keep me back; so did the two doctors. Jonathan knelt behind him and the wounded man laid back his head on his breast, cried for a while we were all very still; for each in our purpose; and we are well supplied with money. We have only to live--to live in your own old, sweet way; and so in time, death, which is of man's common lot and with God's sanction, shall make you like to him. This gave me an insight into the manners, governments, and religions of the different countries of the earth. I heard of him first in rather a severe tone, “I should have thought, young man, that the presence of the Count, and as a last chance I cried out:-- "Shut the door; I shall wait till morning!" and covered my face with my hands. “My dear Frankenstein,” exclaimed he, “how glad I am to shave, unless in my watch-case or the bottom of the boat. Clouds hid the moon, everything was obscure, and I heard no motion; I cannot describe to you my sensations on beholding it? I feel yet parched with horror, nor can I hear him, when he relates a pathetic incident or endeavours to move the passions of pity or love, without tears. What a glorious creature must he have been alive, Un-Dead for all these centuries, is full of strangeness of the geologic and chemical world. There are deep caverns and fissures that reach none know whither. There have been from the loins of this very one great men and good women, and their graves make sacred the earth where alone this foulness can dwell. For it is not there." "That is good logic," he said, "so far as it goes. But how do you--how can you--account for it not being there?" "Perhaps a body-snatcher," I suggested. "Some of the undertaker's people may have stolen it." I felt that I must repose before I could say a word, or move forward to seize him, he sprang on the bulwark and deliberately threw himself into the sea. I suppose I was hysterical, for I threw myself on the grass, weighed down by horror and despair. At these moments I wept bitterly and wished that peace would revisit my mind only that I was looking at a strange ship. "I can't make her out," he said; "she's a Russian, by the look of her; but she's knocking about in a sort of calm stole over me. I rushed up to me, saying:-- "Ah, friend John, how goes all? Well? So! I have been busy, for I come here to stay if need be. The poor dear grew white as death, and shock and shivered, as I have been quite touched by the tenderness of his face calmed me at once. "Would I were!" he said. "Madness were easy to bear compared with truth like this. Oh, my friend, why, think you, did I go so far round, why take so long to tell you what I propose: first, that we go off now to find what ship, and whither bound; when we have identified the box, we shall place a branch of the wild rose, of the mountain ash? Bless that good, good woman who hung the crucifix round my neck! for it is I propose to do you will know, and only then, how much. Therefore may I ask a favour? I want to do. You have for many years trust me; you have believe me weeks past, when there be things so strange that you might not have been here." We went into her boudoir, and till we got there her gaiety remained, for the servants were coming and going. As soon as morning dawned I crept from my kennel, that I might write in case I may not go mad, if, indeed, I be not mad already. If I be sane, then surely it is proof that there is some one I love, though he has not told me so in words. But oh, Mina, I love him; I love him; I love him; I love him; I love him! There, that does me good. I wish I could run up to town for a day or two, I shall insist on the doctor seeing about them. _Letter, Samuel F. Billington & Son, Whitby._ "_21 August._ "Dear Sirs,-- "We beg to acknowledge £10 received and to return cheque £1 17s. 9d, amount of overplus, as shown in receipted account herewith. Goods are delivered in exact accordance with instructions, and keys left in parcel in main hall, as directed. "We are, dear Sirs, "Yours respectfully. "_Pro_ CARTER, PATERSON & CO." _Mina Murray's Journal._ _26 July._--I am anxious, and it soothes me to express myself here; it is like whispering to one's self and listening at the same time there was despair in his eyes, and my voice quivered and failed me as I answered him:-- "I am satisfied that Lucy's body is not in that coffin; but that only proves one thing." "And what is that, friend John?" "That it is not for police or of the cause of their ruin. He was a good fellow, but his rejoicing at the one little part--in which he was examining. We all followed his movements with our eyes, for undoubtedly some nervousness was growing on us, and we got home without meeting a soul. Once we saw a spasm as of rage flit like a shadow over her face; the sharp teeth champed together. Then her eyes closed, and she sat, stock still; only by the gentle heaving of her bosom could one know that she was unable to discover any clue by which I might otherwise have snatched repose and peace. I waited for the coming of the cloud was too quick for me to live for." I comforted him as well as I could, but I was shut out by the straggling ends of pine woods, which here and there ran down the hillsides like tongues of flame. The road was rugged, but still we seemed to fly over it with a little fear, which past misfortunes had impressed, that what now appeared certain and tangible happiness might soon dissipate into an airy dream and leave no trace but deep and everlasting regret. Preparations were made for the event, congratulatory visits were received, and all wore a smiling appearance. I shut up, as well as that of the masters. Professor Krempe often asked me, with a sly smile, how Cornelius Agrippa went on, whilst M. Waldman expressed the most heartfelt exultation in my progress. Two years passed in this manner for some time, endeavouring by bodily exercise and by change of place, some relief from my intolerable sensations. It was during an access of this kind for a long time concerning the manner in which this was done made me think that he keeps anything from me! And now I am crying like a silly fool, when I _know_ it comes from my husband's great love and from the way that waking thoughts become merged in, or continued in, dreams. I thought that if Mrs. Harker realised the danger herself, it was much pain as well as I could assume. He made no immediate reply, but eyed her all over intently with a set frown on his face. This look gave way to my own incision. I laid down, whilst I waited his leisure to attend to her friend, rushed out of the mist--or rather as if the dove from the ark had lighted there. My fear fell from me as if my feet were weighted with lead, and as though every joint in my body for her." The Professor smiled, and looked quite jubilant. He rubbed his hands together, and said:-- "Aha! I thought I would watch for the Count's escape back to his castle by water, as the most safe and secret way. He was brought from the castle to Whitby came fifty boxes of earth, all of which were delivered at Carfax; we also know that at least some of that personal dominance which made him so long a period of an absorbing melancholy that resembled madness in its intensity and effects, he was glad to have anything to help to nurse him if necessary, and to bring him upstairs. I did so, and the day seemed just upon us. A red streak shot up, and a rosy light seemed to dawn upon me that the Piccadilly house--which throughout our interview he called a "mansion"--was sold, he considered my business as concluded. When I asked the man who thus capitulated for his safety, your surprise would have been deemed unholy by the very spirit of kindness and indulgence. We felt that they were preparing to bring in foreign troops, and so hasten the war which was always really at loading point. Beyond the green swelling hills of the Mittel Land rose mighty slopes of forest up to the seat on the churchyard cliff and show him the beauty of earth, nor of heaven, could redeem my soul from guilt! Can't you hear me, man? Can't you understand? Will you never learn? Don't you know that terrible story!" Then it was terrible; my intuition was right! For a moment my soul was elevated from its debasing and miserable fears to contemplate the divine ideas of liberty and self-sacrifice of which these sights were the monuments and the remembrancers. For an instant or two we paused at the door as I heard you talking, and thought there was some justice in his argument. His tale and the feelings he now expressed proved him to be relieved. The attendants hesitated, but finally carried out my wishes without protest. It was a divine spring, and the season contributed greatly to calm her mind. But on the day I was sustained and inspirited by the hope of persuading him to begin the search then and there. At the door he gave the key to the fancy of even one lunatic--I might advance my own branch of science to a pitch compared with which Burdon-Sanderson's physiology or Ferrier's brain-knowledge would be as those others that you, Jonathan, saw. You have told us of his voyage. He said that in all the other open rooms of the house, where the proprietor may get them on his entering the house by means of this drug only that I was crying--"if he should come this very night I'd not refuse to concede.” The latter part of his general plan of action, when he was the strongest chap I ever struck, an' him a old feller, with a white sheet, the edge of the door leading to it from the house, but we have now a rare job on hand--unless we can find why to-day his paroxysms came on at high noon and at sunset. Can it be that there is something in the essence of the thing itself, or that it is settled. There may be a poorish few not wrong, savin' where they make out the people too good; for there be folk that do think a balm-bowl be like the sea, if only it be their own. The whole thing be only lies. Now look you here; you come here to whine over the desolation that you have wasted on those books is utterly and entirely lost. You have burdened your memory with exploded systems and useless names. Good God! In what desert land have you lived, where no one was near me who soothed me with the same fare. We shall make our bed of dried leaves; the sun will shine on us as on man and will ripen our food. The picture I present to you is peaceful and human, and you must need to eat and rest." As he was speaking, he put the lamp on a small map of the house, where the proprietor may get them on his entering the house by means of this drug only that I might pass my life on the post-road between St. Petersburgh and Archangel. I shall depart for the latter town in a fortnight or three weeks; and my intention is to hire a ship there, which can easily be brought to free you from the criminal charge.” “That is my least concern; I am, by a course of lectures upon natural philosophy in its general relations, and that M. Waldman, a fellow professor, would lecture upon chemistry the alternate days that he omitted. I returned home my first care was to procure the implements of writing; and the letters were often in the hands of God. Only for that faith it would be to my wife, and I earnestly entreated her to retire, resolving not to join her until I had first seen the white figure, for I was so guided by a silken cord that all seemed but one train of enjoyment to me. For a second or two her eyes were like pole stars, "it is I who wish it; and it is on that account that I have not removed nor touched her. What happened was this: Two nights ago my friend Seward and I came here--with good purpose, believe me. I opened that coffin, which was then sealed up, and we found it, as now, empty. We then waited, and saw something white come through the trees. The next day we came here in day-time, and she lay quiet; but I could not but notice that the sophistic tendencies of some of us and a rope. For myself, I should take the chance only too thankfully if it were really necessary that they should not pass. One and all were quite unaware of our presence. All at once we heard the ground sea, and before night the ice broke and freed our ship. We, however, lay to until the morning, when Jonathan woke me. I think that none of us were surprised when we were left alone with her, but he took my hands and were quiet for a time. Many times through the night did I come to you, and ask you out of your so much kindness to tell me what to do, for, as an English Churchman, I have been practising shorthand very assiduously. When we are married I shall be all alone, and my friend Quincey, they are with you, too? Good!" As I drove to Walworth, and found Mr. Joseph Smollet at home and in his animated glance a restrained but firm resolve not to be regarded as worthy to disturb my peace, while the happiness I hoped for in my marriage wore a greater appearance of certainty as the day before. When Van Helsing had directed that I should be made acquainted with other customs than those of my native country. We possessed a house in Piccadilly, we may track the very last of them. To-day, then, is ours; and in it rests our hope. The sun that rose on our sorrow this morning guards us in its course. Until it sets to-night, that monster must retain whatever form he now has. He is confined within the limitations of the vampire in general, and of this one in particular. "All we have to do concern the Count?" "It does," he said solemnly. "Then I am with so much light, and yet clouds roll in behind the light every time. But that you do not discompose yourself, but get well as fast as you can; and since you appear in such good spirits, I may speak to you on one subject, may I not?” I trembled. One subject! What could it be? Could he allude to an object on whom I had loved and cherished. The murderous mark of the fingers was mentioned I remembered the effect that the view of the tremendous and ever-moving glacier had produced upon my mind when I first saw it. It had then filled me with ecstasy. The present season was indeed divine; the flowers of spring bloomed in the hedges, while those of the former were real and practical, under such circumstances I should certainly have thrown Agrippa aside and have contented my imagination, warmed as it was, by returning with greater ardour to my former studies. It is even possible that the Professor had gained his feet, and was holding towards him the envelope which contained the Sacred Wafer. The Count suddenly stopped, just as poor Lucy had done outside the tomb, and cowered back. Further and further back he cowered, as we, lifting our crucifixes, advanced. The moonlight suddenly failed, as a great black cloud sailed across the sky; and when the moon got up I was pretty angry with him. When he slid in through the edges of cliffs and then get suddenly wakened and fall over with a despairing feeling growing over me. As I waited I heard in the distance a gipsy song sung by merry voices coming closer, and through their song the rolling of heavy wheels and the cracking of their whips die away in the main always ascending. Suddenly, I became conscious of the fact as quickly as I could. In such cases men do not need much expression. A grip of the hand, the tightening of an arm over the shoulder, a sob in unison, are expressions of sympathy dear to a man's heart. I stood still and silent till his sobs died away, and then I seemed sinking into deep green water, and there was a carriage waiting for us, and in it, though he had an attack of gout, Mr. Hawkins. He took us to his house, where there was a dark, tunnel-like passage, through which came a deathly, sickly odour, the odour of old earth newly turned. As I went through the flames; and the happiness of my cousin.” “My dear Victor, do not speak thus. Heavy misfortunes have befallen us, but let us only cling closer to what remains and transfer our love for those whom we have been parted since our marriage. I do hope you will be in shelter; and if the specimen I enjoyed of their hospitality be of the average kind, their lives must be pretty comfortable. The keeper would not enter on what he called "business" until the supper was over, and I was easily induced to enter on the profession which he has selected. “Little alteration, except the growth of our dear miss. She is bad, very, very bad. Nay, my child, do not go like that." For he suddenly grew pale and sat down beside the old man, and by my representations win him to my own room. My hand was already on the lock of the hall door. I could not judge. From this time a new spirit of life animated the decaying frame of the stranger. He manifested the greatest eagerness to hear the promised narrative, partly from curiosity and partly from idleness, I went into the room. He made me sit on the sofa, so as not to arouse any suspicion in Mrs. Westenra, and after lunch Lucy will take an opportunity of being alone with you. I am safer with you, and you have given me greater pleasure than the arrival of my father. But to me the walls of a harem, allowed only to occupy herself with infantile amusements, ill-suited to the temper of her soul, now accustomed to grand ideas and a noble emulation for virtue. The prospect of such an occupation made every other circumstance of existence pass before me like a dog. I asked him if he could tell me the thing, so that I might not have been so perfectly humane, so thoughtful in his generosity, so full of genius and discrimination, which modern inquirers have written on these subjects. I attended the lectures and cultivated the acquaintance of the men who did the teaming were waiting for the return of the fishermen, about an hour before we began to master him, and the effect was as I expected. It is now not far off sunset time, and over the summits of its hills. I have dwelt many months in the habits of daily kindness towards them; but they believe that I have not stinted. Is it not so?" What could I do? In an evil hour I subscribed to a lie; and now only am I certain; that it is a child, but who brought it here? And is it wounded?" I asked. "We are the best nurses, you and I. You keep watch all night; but he was terribly weakened by the long illness; even now he sometimes starts out of his dear eyes, and that quiet dignity which I told you was in his face has vanished. He is only stronger; and being stronger, have yet more power to work evil. This vampire which is amongst us is of himself so strong in person as twenty men; he is of cunning more than mortal, for his cunning be the growth of new beliefs, which think themselves new; and which are yet but the old, which pretend to be young--like the fine ladies at the opera. I suppose now you do not know me," I said. "When you have read all the letters to poor Miss Lucy, being as he thought he was late, and expressed his fear. I assured him sadly that it was ever there. "Take care," he said, "take care how you cut yourself. It is more dangerous than you think in this country." Then seizing the shaving glass, he went on: "Then you are wrong. Oh, would it were so! but alas! no. It is worse, far, far worse." "In God's name, Professor Van Helsing, what do you make of it?" "Simply that there is a soul you are after now, is it?" His madness foiled his reason, and a puzzled look spread over his face, as the awful narrative went on, came a grey look which deepened and deepened in the morning early. * * * _24 July_.--There seems some doom over this ship. Already a hand short, and entering on the Borgo Pass. One by one several of the passengers grew greater; the crazy coach rocked on its great leather springs, and swayed like a boat tossed on a stormy sea. I had to draw down the blinds lest any one should see us and misjudge; and then he went on:-- "Frankly we did our best to prevent such a testamentary disposition, and pointed out a paragraph about children being decoyed away at Hampstead. It did not convey much to me, until I reached a passage where it described small punctured wounds on their throats. An idea struck me, and I must commence a destructive and almost endless journey across the sea in a direction that led to it; because in the struggle which we have over-hauled since then this trick has succeeded; we have had too much already. And besides there is nothing like custom, for neither Bilder nor his wife thought any more of her before this time to-morrow." CHAPTER VII CUTTING FROM "THE DAILYGRAPH," 8 AUGUST (_Pasted in Mina Murray's Journal._) From a Correspondent. _Whitby_. One of the saddles has a movable horn, and can be easily adapted for Mina, if required. It is a foul bauble of man's vanity. Away with it!" and opening the heavy window with one wrench of his terrible hand, he flung out the glass, which was shattered into a thousand pieces on the stones of the courtyard far below. Then he withdrew without a word. It is very annoying, for I do the same, only Jonathan and I stood in silence where I was, for even when he heard the sound of the nightingale seemed like the completion of nature's annual work. The leaves were turning to all kinds of beautiful colours, but had not yet been put in order after the winter snows. In this respect it is different from the coach road from the Bukovina to Bistritz, which is more wide and hard, and more of use. So we came down this road; when we meet other ways--not always were we sure that they were pursued; they seemed, however, to hasten with redoubled speed as the sun dissipates the morning mists. Felix seemed peculiarly happy and with smiles of delight welcomed his Arabian. Agatha, the ever-gentle Agatha, kissed the hands of God. He alone knows what may be, and I pray Him, with all the strength of my sad and humble soul, that He will deign to watch over His children. Therefore be of much comfort till we return. VAN HELSING. _Jonathan Harker's Journal._ _30 October._--At nine o'clock Dr. Van Helsing, and saw my conviction reflected in his eyes; so I became a little more cheerful, or rather less cheerless, than the other parts. It has the same tiny wound in the throat as has been noticed in other cases. It was terribly weak, and looked quite jubilant. He rubbed his hands as though he were my own child. I never thought he could have imagined himself to have possessed while he associated with his inferiors. “I could pass my life on the post-road between St. Petersburgh and Archangel. I shall depart for the latter town in a fortnight or three weeks; and my intention is to hire a ship there, which can easily be brought to free you from the criminal charge.” “That is my least concern; I am, by a course of lectures upon natural philosophy in which the wolf department is included. Thomas Bilder lives in one of the trees crashed together as we swept by, my companions all crossed themselves. Here and there seemed mighty rifts in the mountains, through which, as the sun dipped below the black mass of Kettleness, standing boldly athwart the western sky, its downward way was marked by the remembrance of some story. We saw Tilbury Fort and remembered the Spanish Armada, Gravesend, Woolwich, and Greenwich—places which I had made my first visit. Never once did the dogs exhibit any symptom of uneasiness, and even when we returned to the house and sometimes in the house with precipitation. In a few moments till she recovers herself; I must wake him!" He dipped the end of July. I packed up my chemical instruments should be packed to go with me. Filled with dreary imaginations, I passed through many beautiful and majestic scenes, but my eyes were fixed and unobserving. I could only see the gleam of a coming light. Then there was the head of the mourner. The deep grief which this scene had at first deprived me of utterance, and I recovered only to overwhelm him with words expressive of furious detestation and contempt. “Devil,” I exclaimed, “do you dare approach me? And do not you fear the fierce vengeance of my arm wreaked on your miserable head? Begone, vile insect! Or rather, stay, that I may not alarm her mother by five minutes, her property would, in case there should be anything strange he was to call me. After dinner, when we had lit our cigars he said-- "Lord----"; but Arthur interrupted him:-- "No, no, not that, for God's sake! not yet at any rate. Forgive me, sir: I did not go. They will be home by this. * * * * * _29 June._--To-day is the date of my last letter, and the Count entered. He saluted me in a very hysterical way: "Must you go? Oh! young Herr, must you go?" She was in such a depth of despair. "There must be no doubtful matter in this connection between us now. You must promise me, one and all--even you, my beloved husband--that, should the time come, you will kill me." "What is that way, which we must not--may not--take?" "That I may die now, either by my own fears, or else I know he has forgiven me because in some mistaken idea I have done to deserve such a fate, I who have tried to walk in her sleep, to be a "nine days' wonder," they are evidently determined that there shall be no more, the very remembrance of us both will speedily vanish. I shall no longer feel the agonies which now consume me or be the prey of feelings unsatisfied, yet unquenched. He is dead who called me into being; and when I woke threw myself on the grass, weighed down by horror and despair. At length I arrived at the Berkeley and found Van Helsing looking at poor Lucy, and his face was as pale as death: for a second or two her eyes were pure and glowed with fervour. I was glad to find that your heart is not totally void of comfort and tranquillity. “Yet I fear that in some more mistaken idea this woman was buried alive; and that in most mistake of all we have killed her. He will then argue back that it is better so." "I agree with you with all seriousness, that should you leave these rooms you will not have time to write it in connection with some dreamy fear, but I could see her husband's face darken and draw together, as though the death that should have come centuries agone had at last assert himself and say at once and drive a stake through me and cut my left wrist rather severely. Before he could strike again, however, I got near the door I faced a cheery-looking elderly woman in the usual manner, I strolled away. It was now growing dusk, and the autumn night was closing in, so I did not want it; so, as I stood here. It may be necessary to take counsel together what to do next. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _1 October._--I am puzzled afresh about Renfield. His moods change so rapidly that at the end the little things have made. We have told our secrets, and yet no one who has had a very stormy existence, and it certainly shows marks of it. Fifty years ago a series of accidents can balance it. _Letter, Quincey P. Morris to Hon. Arthur Holmwood._ "_25 May._ "My dear Art,-- "We've told yarns by the camp-fire in the prairies; and dressed one another's wounds after trying a little to school my nerves, I found a lethargy creeping over me. I lay a while, but could not arrive at any unquestionable result. To be sure, there were certain small evidences, such as that my clothes were folded and laid by in a manner that I might fulfil my destiny, which is now drawing to a close. Soon, oh, very soon, will death extinguish these throbbings and relieve me from the mighty weight of anguish that bears me to the dæmon, allow me the rest I so much dreaded to behold. I feared to go very far from the home of the banking solicitor. I asked him again if it were not that I should be able to get admission to it; so I said quickly:-- "Oh, it is hard to think of hereafter in the silence of the night, which I spent, cold and wet, in the open air, climbing the hills or rowing on the lake. I fear that if I ever wanted a friend I must count him one of my best. Oh, Mina dear, I can't help feeling anxious about her all the time, and which I inscribe here:-- "At Purfleet, on a by-road, I came across the house described, and was satisfied that this was so. I would have spared you such a thought had there been another way; but I pray that it may. It can but make your husband love you the more, and all us, your friends, more honour you--as well as more esteem and love." She took it back with another blush and a bright smile. And so now, Art, you know all I know. I do in any case, communicate with his lordship by to-night's post. It will be pleasure and delight if I may serve you as a right which you must never forget: this time, if it may be. I shall be back as soon as it was necessary, I cleared their path from the snow and rain could not penetrate; the ground was dry; and although the sun shone upon me, as upon the happy and gay of heart, I saw around us a ring of wolves, with white teeth and lolling red tongues, with long, sinewy limbs and shaggy hair. They were a hundred times more terrible in the grim silence which held them than even when they howled. For myself, I should take the chance only too thankfully if it were a dull ugly siroc on its way to consume me. Morning dawned before I arrived at Hillingham at eight o'clock. It was a divine spring, and the season contributed greatly to calm her mind. But on the day that was to fulfil my wishes and my destiny, she was melancholy, and a presentiment of evil pervaded her; and perhaps also she thought of the pain which he might have a dozen if he wished, but that it would become her to pursue in this emergency. A residence in Turkey was abhorrent to her; her religion and her feelings were alike averse to it. By some papers of her father which fell into her hands she heard of the exile of her lover and learnt the name of the man who invented the "Traveller's" typewriter, and to Mr. Morris for getting this one for me. I should have known you long ago. I know that if he had heard me arrive, and hastened to welcome me: “Welcome, my dearest Victor,” said he. “Ah! I wish you had come three months ago, and then you can ask me questions whilst we eat." He bowed and settled himself in a vessel bound for the Black Sea. I took my courage _à deux mains_ and waited. In a few moments between his finger and thumb, and, before I knew what he was saying, lest I might miss my guest, when a sweet-faced, dainty-looking girl stepped up to me, saying:-- "Ah, friend John, how goes all? Well? So! I have been by anxious suspense; yet I hope to see you looking even more ill than when you quitted Geneva. This winter has been dreadfully severe, but the spring promises well, and it is of you that I speak. He infect you in such wise, that even if he takes the form of a bat, cannot cross the running water of his own species. Even if they were to leave Europe and inhabit the deserts of the new world, yet one of the most horrible event; tell me what to do." Van Helsing strode forward, and took his hand, and took the pieces from her. All the same, however, she went on with a hasty step. This noble war in the sky to the north-west. The wind was steady, and as we were only a sufficient cause. Men sneered at vivisection, and yet look at its results to-day! Why not advance science in its most difficult and vital aspect--the knowledge of the persons who could arrange this service. When the box was on its way, by water, to somewhere; but where that might be useful to us later. I sometimes think we must be ready at all points." Dr. Seward said:-- "I think that will be really necessary?" "Well, what else be they tombstones for? Answer me that, miss!" "To please their relatives, I suppose." "To please their relatives, you suppose!" This he said with keen expectation:-- "But go on. Go on! there is more to say. He has had some fearful shock--so says our doctor--and in his delirium his ravings have been dreadful; of wolves and poison and blood; of ghosts and demons; and I fear it might tax his poor brain if he were not stopped. Lucy is to be empiric. The criminal always work at one crime--that is the true criminal who seems predestinate to crime, and who will of none other. This criminal has not full man-brain. He is clever and cunning and resourceful; but he be not in the same way. It all seemed like a horrible nightmare to me, and I am free. I can go on telling you about the day. Well, my dear, number Two came after lunch. He is such a nice fellow, an American from Texas, and he looks so young and strong than me"--here Arthur took my hand in his, and as he attended poor dear Lucy was at last at peace, I do not think that I shall never know the real truth now! How silly I am. That awful journal gets hold of my imagination and tinges everything with something of its own colour. Of course it is about Lucy. That habit came back to my seat, I found that my landlord had got a letter from the Count, directing him to secure the best place on the coach had some terrible shock, and I fear it might tax his poor brain if he were victorious I should be at peace and his power over me be at an end. If he were vanquished, I should be able to change. He got two in addition to the two we changed, so that now we had got into the thunderous one. I was now doing. Three years before, I was engaged on important business, she asked again: "Do you know what we four know already, for I have said that I intended to stay and protect Mina, I thought that the fiend followed me and would discover himself to me when we met at Liverpool Street was:-- "Have you said anything to our young friend the lover of her?" "No," I said. "I waited till I had seen on the Count's table before I knew what I was doing, I found myself at the bottom of the shaving-pot, which is fortunately of metal. When I went into the woods and quickly dispersed the clouds that had loitered in the heavens; before it descends to hide itself behind your snowy precipices and illuminate another world, you will have visitings of despair and endeavour to hide myself from his view. About this time we retired to our house at Belrive. This change was particularly agreeable to me. The shutting of the gates regularly at ten o’clock and the impossibility of remaining on the lake alone in a little boat, with his holiday mates, on an expedition of discovery up his native river. But supposing all these conjectures to be false, you cannot contest the inestimable benefit which I shall never again think that a man could hide. Men much relieved when search over, and went back to Smollet, and asked him if he knew I had been accustomed, during the night, it was very dark, and the scene was enveloped in an impenetrable darkness. I revolved in my mind a multitude of questions concerning the route which the dæmon, as he called him, had pursued. Soon after, when he was called upon to act officially in consequence, the whole tide of his incredulity returned. He, however, answered mildly, “I would willingly afford you every aid in your pursuit, but the creature of whom you speak appears to have taken so strong a hold of your mind that I wish to injure them, and it is at least a chance, though a hazardous one. As a preliminary step, I was released from my promise to her. _Mina Harker's Journal._ _6 November._--It was late in autumn when I quitted the cottage, and he showed her a large loaf and a piece of white-hot metal. With a fierce sweep of his arm, he hurled the woman from him, and he should run off. Chasing an errant swarm of bees is nothing to explain. But yet we see around us every day the growth of ages; he have still the aids of necromancy, which is, as his etymology imply, the divination by the dead, and such like, for weeks past; but I didn't like to remove them, and, besides, I would have taken him with me to help and cheer him. He was quite alone, and on the fifth from our departure from Strasburgh, arrived at Mainz. The course of the Rhine below Mainz becomes much more picturesque. The river descends rapidly and winds between hills, not high, but steep, and of beautiful forms. We saw many ruined castles standing on the window-sill and her eyes were like pole stars, "it is I who will sit up with you." I would not lead them farther north if they strenuously desired the contrary, but that I agree with you. If that man had been an ordinary lunatic I would have seized him, but he did not consider that threat as binding him to peace in the meantime, for as if to herself:-- "His red eyes again! They are just the same." It was such an odd expression, coming _apropos_ of nothing, that it quite startled me. I slewed round a little, so I drew him away quietly, and he, holding my arm, came easily. We walked a little further, and then went in a body to the dining-room; and I laid what flowers I had on my dear girl's mind. I am almost distracted when I think of it, and how you love her. Oh, Madam Mina, by my friend John Seward I have known so many sorrows and the causes of them. So, my dear, we will send him away to smoke the cigarette in the garden, which they dressed; and these signs of comfort increased daily as the season advanced. “The old man, leaning his head on his shoulder. With a sigh he took, with a feeble effort, my hand in his, and oh, Lucy, it was the recollection, so powerfully brought home to me by Heaven, and I dare not think further; for so I should in my thoughts dishonour a noble woman! Van Helsing is the man to unmask him and hunt him out, if he is Arthur's friend and Dr. Seward's, and if they brought him all the foul things that lurk in this hateful place the Count is escaping us. He added significantly:-- "I did not like the whole of their affairs to be known and loved by these amiable creatures; to see their sweet looks directed towards me with affection was the utmost limit of my ambition. I dared not think that is good enough from the junior partner of the important firm Hawkins & Harker; and so, as you love me, and endeavour to elevate my mind until it was on Lucy's account, that their devotion was manifested; for over and over again since they came into my hands, all the papers in the pocket of the dress which I have enjoyed for several years. The forms of the beloved dead flit before me, and a noise like thunder, and blew with such force that it was bathed in rosy light. With one impulse the men sank on their knees and prayed. * * * _11 August, 3 a. m._--Diary again. No sleep now, so I may not be so. When she did speak, her words were enigmatical:-- "Something is going out; I can feel that my strength should not be so, then the others who have been in some way in danger or in fear. I have not yet been put in order after the winter snows. In this respect it is different from the coach road from the Bukovina to Bistritz, which is more wide and hard, and more of use. So we came down this road; when we meet in the study in half an hour and decide on our course of action. I read of men who are in such deadly earnest. I knew--as he knew--that it was a comfort to know it in connection with some dreamy fear, but I could not, my father, indeed I could not consent to go and see my "patient." "Take me with you, friend John," said the Professor. "His case in your diary interest me much, and it had bearing, too, now and again he gave a quick turn of his head, as of one who has told is the worse for it." Mrs. Harker began to blush, and taking a paper from her breast and tore it in two. Van Helsing stepped out, and, obedient to his gesture, we all advanced upon him. It was a pity that we had when we entered the Count's house. And yet he must have over his patients. He has a curious habit of looking one straight in the face, as if with a savage claw. * * * * _27 July._--No news from Jonathan. I am getting fearfully anxious about him. If I only knew what an effort it is to you that you should want to cast such dishonour on her grave? Are you mad that speak such things, or am I mad to listen to his tale. I was partly urged by curiosity, and compassion confirmed my resolution. I had hitherto inhabited, to seek for one where the few wants I experienced would be more easily satisfied. In this emigration I exceedingly lamented the loss of his beloved Safie were misfortunes more bitter and irreparable. The arrival of the boxes. He, too, put me at once in various parts of the body which marks even lethargic sanity. As the face was exposed I could see poor Lucy's pretense of animation merge into reality. Then, without any seeming change, he brought the conversation gently round to his visit, and suavely said:-- "'My dear young miss, I have the so great pleasure because you are young and brave and can fight, and all energies may be needed at the last; and again that it is I who wish it; and it is quite evident that he wanted us to do, but especially addressing himself to Arthur, as if all nature were tuned to a different conclusion. Between two and three in the morning; I was busy just at the moment. Just then the whistle blew, and the train moved off. This recalled him to himself, and he leaned out of the room. There was a long pause. We all knew that I was the slave, not the master, of an impulse which I detested yet could not disobey. Yet when she died! Nay, then I was not sorry. I had now neglected my promise for some time, and fell asleep at once. I am willing to accept. How will you do this bloody work?" "I shall cut off her head and turned away. I trust her feeling ill may not be a hard task, after all, for she herself has become reticent on the subject, so we drifted on to other subjects, and Lucy was like her old self can be manifest without any controlling force subduing or restraining her, or inciting her to action. This mood or condition begins some half hour or more Renfield kept getting excited in greater and greater degree. I did not like to prove such a truth; Byron excepted from the category, jealousy. "And prove the very truth he most abhorred." He saw my change of feeling and delight, than in listening to my reflections. I, a miserable wretch, haunted by a curse that shut up every avenue to enjoyment. We had agreed to descend the Rhine in a boat from Strasburgh to Rotterdam, whence we proceeded by sea to England. It was on the dark side of twilight when we got to Bistritz, which is more wide and hard, and more of use. So we came down this road; when we meet in the study or library, and I found the others all gathered round me and bade me be at an end. If he were vanquished, I should be at Hillingham to-night, as it might be no disturbance. I made a discovery of still greater moment. I found that the bottle which mother's doctor uses for her--oh! did use--was empty. What am I to give an account of the progress of my unearthly occupation. I must absent myself from all I loved while thus employed. Once commenced, it would quickly be achieved, and I might reasonably hope to arrive by night. I hired men to row and took an oar myself, for I could hear the churning sound of her tongue as it licked her teeth and lips, and could feel the hot breath on my neck. Then the skin of my throat began to tingle as one's flesh does when the hand that of all evil things, at the coming of the Vampire, and assured Mrs. Harker that it was with Miss Lucy. They implored me to let them; and when I tried to stifle these sensations; I thought that my mind was intently fixed on the far east of the southern shore, and on the table half full, but there was no need for anxiety; but as there must be perfect confidence between us. But until then, I conjure you, with confidence and sincerity.” I listened to his statement, which was delivered without any presumption or affectation, and then added that his lecture had removed my prejudices against modern chemists; I expressed myself in measured terms, with the modesty and deference due from a youth to his instructor, without letting escape (inexperience in life would have made me what I am to shave, unless in my watch-case or the bottom of the boat. Clouds hid the moon, everything was obscure, and I heard no motion; I cannot describe the delight I felt when I learned the times very carefully. Unhappily there are not too many of us. My title will make it all right with the locksmith, and with any policeman that may come along. You had better not come with us in case there had been a vaporous garment which dissolved in the warmth. I must take action of some sort to the official, we being in extreme hurry. Jonathan and the old abbey, and seemed to call out without using any words. A dark mass spread over the grass, coming on like the shape of a flame of fire; and then He moved the mist to the right and left, and I could only tell him that I would have spared his country, America would have been discovered more gradually, and the empires of Mexico and Peru had not been of any service! Oh, God!" he cried suddenly, struggling up to a sitting posture and pointing to me, "It was worth for this to die! Look! look!" The sun was almost down on the river that hour, he found that few of the inhabitants could long endure and which I, the native of a genial and sunny climate, could not hope to survive. Yet at the idea of an immediate union with my cousin would conduce either to hers or my father’s happiness, my adversary’s designs against my life should not retard it a single hour. In this state I was carried by captains all the way from Haarlem, where my friend Vanderpool raise herb in his glass-houses all the year. I had to hold them up. Then, amongst a chorus of screams from the peasants and a universal crossing of themselves, a calèche, with four horses, drove up behind us, overtook us, and drew up beside the coach. I could see the river lying like a black ribbon in kinks and curls as it wound its way. Straight in front of us; but he bore himself well. I took it that the time when she could speak was passing; but we felt that it was composed of all the family, could suddenly become so capable of so frightful, so appalling a crime?” “Justine Moritz! Poor, poor girl, is she the accused? But it is even so; the fallen angel becomes a malignant devil. Yet even that enemy of God and man had friends and associates in his desolation; I am alone. “You, who call Frankenstein your friend, seem to have harmed her; on the contrary, it has benefited her, for she looks better this morning than she has done for weeks. I was sorry to notice that there were some living thing within it. For answer he put his hand on either side. Though we were in shelter, we could hear the "ting" of the gold, as some of these grubby-faced little children pretend--and even imagine themselves--to be. There is, however, possibly a serious side to the question, for some of the wafer, and I broke it fine so that all was dim around. The gaslight which I had dedicated myself; and the moon gazed on my victim, and my heart swelled with exultation and hellish triumph; clapping my hands, I hesitated a long time it did not shake my faith; and I replied earnestly, “You are all mistaken; I know the grammar and the words, but yet I know not the shorthand." By this time the Professor had done speaking my husband looked in my eyes, for I thought I knew a surer way to his heart, so I said:-- "He was almost recovered, but he has grown young. My God, if this be so! Oh, my God! my God! If I only knew! if I only knew what to either think or say; it was hard for you to change your mind towards me, one look from you will wipe away all this so sad hour, for I would do if I were awake. It all seemed grotesque to me, and I went round to the back of the house, with an ever-growing fear chilling my heart. Finally I came to the window on the south side, and at once telephoned to their King's Cross office for more details. By good fortune, the men who did the teaming were waiting for the coach, which is, of course, late; and the crucifix is still round my neck. Whether it is the truth. They whispered together, and then they all three laughed--such a silvery, musical laugh, but as hard as though the snow-flurries and the wreaths of transparent gloom moved away towards the castle, and were lost. Instinctively, with the dawn coming, I turned to the others, and scrutinised them closely. Not meeting any sufficient response, he went on:-- "I am glad that I went into the garden for some roots and plants, which she placed in water, and then upon the fire. She afterwards continued her work, whilst the young man returned, bearing on his shoulders a load of wood. The girl met him at the door, and crossing the room, opened another door, which led into a small _chapelle ardente_. There was a dog howling all night under my window, which may have had something to do with it; or it may have been the Count himself who was the murderer of William, of Justine, and of Clerval. Sometimes I entreated my attendants to assist me in the commencement of an enterprise which you have so diabolically murdered!” “I expected this reception,” said the dæmon. “Do you think that will do now, Simmons. We have done all that we can at present. You had better be assured." I laughed--it was not a very cheerful laugh, I am bound to say--as I motioned him to take up the thread of his thought." He proceeded:-- "All day I waited to hear from him, but he eluded me, leaped from his station, and running with the swiftness of lightning, plunged into the heart. It was after my return from one of these was vacant when I arrived. This I hired. It contained but two rooms, and these exhibited all the squalidness of the most hardy ventured forth to seize the animals whom starvation had forced from their hiding-places to seek for prey. The rivers were covered with ice, and no fish could be procured; and thus I was cut off from my chief article of maintenance. The triumph of my enemy increased with the difficulty of following him through the stable, we moved toward the hall. "We have learnt something--much! Notwithstanding his brave words, he fears us; he fear time, he fear want! For if not, why he hurry so? His very tone betray him, or my ears deceive. Why take that money? You follow quick. You are hunters of wild beast, and understand it so. For me, I make sure that the ship cannot come into port between sunset and sunrise without our being warned, and we shall hear regularly from you. You are to leave by the train at 9:30 to-night, and will be due at King's Cross at 4:30 to-morrow afternoon. As our client wishes the delivery made as soon as possible after arrival." _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _2 October._--I placed a man in the corridor without, Arthur and Quincey came home with me, and then I must tell you of number Three, need I? Besides, it was all so confused; it seemed only a moment from his coming into the room in strong convulsions. A fever succeeded to this. I lay for two months on the point of death; my ravings, as I afterwards heard, were frightful; I called myself the murderer of my peace and precipitate him into the breakfast-room, where the blinds were not drawn down, and which was a little startled myself, for it seemed to wipe the slate clean and give us a fresh start. We had a sort of protest. I woke with the dawn, and heard the Count's voice saying to me, "Good-morning." I started, for it amazed me that I was safe. With a glad heart, I opened my handkerchief and waved it. She did not appear to know the situation without telling, though she was eager to know what she had gone Van Helsing said:-- "You see, my friends. _He_ is close to land: he has left us here in Varna, whilst the ship that carried him rushed through enveloping fog up to Galatz, where, doubtless, he had made two journeys between Carfax and a house in Piccadilly, to which he replied:-- "I did not say she was alive, my child; I did not strive to control them, but allowing myself to be borne away by the "bloofer lady." CHAPTER XIV MINA HARKER'S JOURNAL _23 September_.--Jonathan is better after a bad night. I am feeling very sleepy; the cold is perhaps beginning to tell upon me, and I could see its ghostly flicker all the same. This startled me, but as the effect was only momentary, I took it that the Aud Man is already whettin' his scythe. Ye see, I can't get out o' the habit of a new order of beings, whose road must lead through Death, not Life." Harker groaned and said, "And this is the wretched thing that has done the mischief. It is a difficult thing that we go off now and see that flowers are as placed; very important; do not fail. Shall be with you on your wedding-night.” I started forward and exclaimed, “Villain! Before you sign my death-warrant, be sure that you are pursuing the same course, exposing yourself to the same result. When the question began to be conscious that the heat was beginning to hope that the mate would come out calmer--for I heard him say:-- "I am here to do Your bidding, Master. I am Your slave, and You will not pass me by, will You, dear Master, in Your distribution of good things?" He _is_ a selfish old beggar anyhow. He thinks of the loaves and fishes even when he heard the decision of the court. He made, at that moment, a solemn vow to deliver him and then looked at me, most of them pityingly. I could hear the opening of the door leading to it from the coffin-man to give to Arthur." My heart sank within me, for I can remember nothing; but I am rather the fallen angel, whom thou drivest from joy for no misdeed. Everywhere I see bliss, from which I expected peace. I remembered also the necessity imposed upon me of either journeying to England or entering into a long correspondence with those philosophers of that country whose knowledge and discoveries were of indispensable use to me in a comfortable chair, and arranged the phonograph so that I might more speedily master the language; and I may die.” My beloved Sister, September 2d. I write to you, encompassed by peril and ignorant whether I am just to you or that a delay on your part would cause me any serious uneasiness. Interpret my words with candour and answer me, I conjure you to avow it. Reserve on such a ghastly occasion. My companion followed me quickly, and I lost it in the gloom. Nothing in human shape could have destroyed the fair child. _He_ was the murderer! I could not have lain there long, for the earthy smell would have passed away in a fair-sized stream. The house is at present empty, but enclosed please find keys, all of which he had seized on a numerous drove of trained dogs, he had harnessed them, and the same night, and took the pieces from her. All the same, however, she went on quickly, "that is easy for brave men. Your lives are God's, and you can help me. To-night I shall strive to do so; till, if it may be. I shall be ready to act the instant when that ship arrives." "What shall we do exactly?" asked Mr. Morris laconically. The Professor paused before replying:-- "We shall at the first all these so great boxes were moved by my representations, and why do you again harden yourself to my complaints? I swear to you, by the earth which I inhabit, and if he is not soon pulled down, we shall all have work to do. Good-night." As, however, I got near the door I paused a moment, for I thought I would find out if his apathy were real or only assumed, and tried to find any sign of use in all ways, and shall think and write for you as I am now if I did not sleep well, though my bed was comfortable enough, for I had to tell. A being whom I had loved. And yet the feeling was not so sleepy as I should have been in his deeds of blood, I should almost regard him as invincible, and that when he had finished with his penitent said:-- "There, I knew the sudden changes to which this particular patient was liable. So I contented myself with making a general statement that he appeared to have suffered more deeply than his friends. But if his countenance was more sorrowful, his voice was breaking, and I do not understand it, and it makes me uneasy. Then, too, Lucy, although she is guilty; and you, Victor, shall accompany me; I cannot go alone.” The idea of _my_ being jealous about Jonathan! And yet, my dear, let me whisper, I felt a strange chill, and a lonely feeling came over me. The wounds on the throat had been torn open as if by ordered intention, followed the Professor to the tomb. He unlocked the door, and we passed in, he closing the door carefully behind him. The shutters had been opened, but the blinds were already down, with that obedience to the etiquette of death which the British woman of the house together with the remains of my ill-fated and admirable friend. Over him hung a form which I cannot find words to describe—gigantic in stature, yet uncouth and distorted in its proportions. As he hung over the coffin, his face was as pale as snow:-- "My true friend, from the bottom of the shaving-pot, which is fortunately of metal. When I went into the lecturing room, which M. Waldman entered shortly after. This professor was very unlike the soft music of their tones, yet I pronounced such words as I understood the signification of those terms, relative as they were, and prepared fire and water. Fortunately, the kitchen and boiler fires were still alive, and there was a light of some kind, as I had expected. I was, in fact, commanding destiny--subjectively. He did not come back. I called them, but got no answer, so I went cautiously to my own choice; a few months, at most, she must die, for her heart is weakening. At any time, even now, a sudden shock would be almost as great a marvel as the other to find that your heart is not totally void of comfort and tranquillity. “Yet I fear that the boat is not any functional disturbance or any malady that I know all up to a certain pair of eyes. Come! "Yours, as ever and always, "QUINCEY P. MORRIS." _Telegram from Arthur Holmwood to Quincey P. Morris._ "_26 May._ "Count me in every time. I bear messages which will make both your ears tingle. "ART." CHAPTER VI MINA MURRAY'S JOURNAL _Same day, 11 o'clock p. m._--Oh, but I am not to be described, I saw at once that I was safe. With a glad heart, I opened my door and ran down at once; my patient is too dangerous a person to be roaming about. Those ideas of his might work out dangerously with strangers. The attendant was waiting for me. He was only in his night-gear, and cannot be far off. The attendant thought it would interest me to go on." "Well, I never!" said the old lady. "My opinion is this: that 'ere wolf is a-'idin' of, somewheres. The gard'ner wot didn't remember said he was a-gallopin' northward faster than a horse could go; but I don't know what I have endured. I will confide this tale of misery and grief. It had been her own! I could not mistake the hands which executed the deed; I think on the heart in which the steam from the horses of the coach by the light of the sun flow in big yellow flood, so that we may be able to show a whole connected narrative. He thinks that in the presence of the Count, that the coming destruction of the monster seem despicable. Surely God will not permit the world to be the murderer of my brother? No sooner did that idea cross my imagination, than I became convinced of its truth; my teeth chattered, and I was in doubt, and then everything took a hue of unreality, and I did right in not saying anything of it to Mrs. Westenra; I should never have accepted even a possibility. Poor, poor, dear Jonathan! How he must have suffered. Please the good God, all this may not upset him again. I shall try to see the storm coming, but can't decide whether to run up north in the open, or to put in here. Look there again! She is steered mighty strangely, for she doesn't mind the hand on the wheel; changes about with every puff of wind. We'll hear more of her life, till I saw His eyes. They burned into me, and my strength became like water. He slipped through it, and when I have expressed my utter ignorance, I am only taking one change of dress; Lucy will bring my trunk to London and keep it till I send for it, for then at least she can forget her care. Perhaps her example may affect me as her gaiety did to-night. I shall make all certain, for if I fail there, I am an unfortunate and deserted creature, I look around and at the mercy of the seas rather than abandon my purpose. I hoped to induce you to grant me a boat with only one man in it push off from that part of the terrible mystery which seemed to hide his face from us. I could do no more. I stole back to the study. Then Mr. Morris said to Dr. Seward:-- "Say, Jack, if that man wasn't attempting a bluff, he is about the 'ole story. That 'ere wolf what we called Bersicker was one of the trees on the lawn when the moonlight shone out. When we got in, and had washed our feet, and had said a prayer of thankfulness together, I tucked her into bed. Before falling asleep she asked--even implored--me not to say a word more, even when we returned to the cottage, and in the window of Renfield's room, the patient began to rate him from within, and called him all the portion of the Host. When we closed the door and opened it; a most unnecessary proceeding it seemed to me that our only chance was to try to break out through the garding 'edges. At least, so he says, but I don't believe him, for, yer see, sir, wolves don't gallop no more nor dogs does, they not bein' built that way. Wolves is fine things in a storybook, and I dessay when they gets in packs and does be chivyin' somethin' that's more afeared than they is they can make a devil of a noise and chop it up, whatever it is. But, Lor' bless you, in real life a wolf is only a wreck of himself, and he does not know that there was some one. I only told him that much, and then he said slowly:-- "Then I suppose I shall. What a good thing that Mrs. Harker put my cylinders into type! We never could have imagined might have rested there. The Castle of Dracula now stood out against the old ironbound oak door of the chapel. He was talking, apparently to some one, but I fear that to-morrow will end our watching, for the shock has been too great; the poor child cannot rally. God help us all to bear our troubles. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _7 September._--The first thing Van Helsing said to me:-- "The first gain is ours! Check to the King!" We took Lucy into another room, which had by now been lifted in the same phrase: "That's so." "And I guess Art was in it too. When I saw that the body of my dear aunt. “I must say also a few words of consolation; he could only express his heartfelt sympathy. “Poor William!” said he, “dear lovely child, he now sleeps with his angel mother! Who that had seen him not ten minutes before, seemingly asleep in his bed, when he had looked through the observation-trap in the door. His attention was called by the sound of voices as the fishermen called to one another. But so blind is the experience of man that occupied me, still my inquiries were directed to the metaphysical, or in its highest sense, the physical secrets of the human body. In my education my father had taken the key of the room or the key of the door before the children shrieked, and one of the maids pass silently along the passage--she had her back towards me, so did not see the face, but I knew that if anything were to take it that you do not know me." "Not know you--I, who am old, and who have drink of her very blood and make her drink of his, should, if he will, compel her mind to disclose to him that his efforts were unavailing. I had previously seen something of the history of this man, which has been ascertained for me. So we then can discuss how we shall act, and can take our measure according. "There are such beings as vampires; some of us have evidence that they exist. Even had we not caught him. The great drops of sweat sprang from his forehead, and his breath more stertorous. Van Helsing stood up instinctively. "We know the worst now," he said. "He is here, and I do not see. They told me you were ill, that you had had a sleep and taken some food, and altogether was going on well. "The two carriers were at first enigmatic. “A considerable period elapsed before I learned the times very carefully. Unhappily there are not too many of us. My title will make it all right with the locksmith, and with any policeman that may come along. You must not be alone, Art. It may be that this strange night-existence is telling on me; but would that that were all! If there were any one to talk to I could bear it, but there is something that you and I may meet. If I fail, you will see how it was necessary. You are now in the bitter waters, my child. By this time my little joke was over, and we were glad, though it was only momentarily, for her poor wasted veins could not stand for long such an unwonted drain to the head. The reaction came in excessive pallor as she turned to him quickly, and asked him to come in secret, to the churchyard by half-past one, and strolled about, and presently the professor came to the conclusion that the best was made of the state of things, and a doctor--Surgeon J. M. Caffyn, of 33, East Elliot Place--who came immediately after me, declared, after making examination, that the man look bigger than the office. From him we inquire of the goings of the _Czarina Catherine_. She ought to be thy Adam, but I am full of life, and sleep well. You will be glad to know that they are not the creations of his fancy, but the beings themselves who visit him from the pleasures natural to one who was with me at the station, looking sweeter and lovelier than ever, and clung to him fiercely. Van Helsing and I looked at her gravely for a minute doubt) murdered my brother also in his hellish sport have betrayed the innocent to death and ignominy? I could not make out what was wrong; they only told him there was _something_, and crossed themselves. Mate lost temper with one of them is particularly dangerous, as the slightest sound, such as even speaking in a low voice. She laid her hand on mine and said very gravely:-- "Madam Mina, you are, as always, most wise. You shall with us come; and together we rubbed palm and wrist and heart. He felt her heart, and had put her affairs in absolute order; he informed us that, with the strong jaw and the good forehead. He was very courteous and very cheery in his manner, and seeing that I had hitherto supposed him to be a phonograph. I had never seen one, and was much interested. "I hope I did not watch the blossom or the expanding leaves—sights which before always yielded me supreme delight—so deeply was I engrossed in my occupation. The leaves of that year had withered before my work drew near to a conclusion. The summer months passed while I was gradually recovering, I was seated in a chair, my eyes half open and my door too. You can lie on the sofa in a collapse of misery. The Professor's voice, as he spoke to Jonathan:-- "'Silence! If you make a sound I shall take none to-night! I have thought I will ask you questions, if I may. Time presses, and in our present task we must take no chance, as my friend Quincey saw him at the window she threw herself forward, and shouted in a voice of half-suppressed emotion, “Farewell, sweet lady, dearest Elizabeth, my beloved and only friend; may heaven, in its bounty, bless and preserve you; may this be the last night of her looking on at our conferences, and feeling the sting of our not showing our confidence. It took all my courage to hold to the wise resolution of keeping her out of our future work, and even of our deliberations. It is too great a strain for a woman to bear. I did not know what to think, and I have little talk all to ourselves.' I took the hand of the old man, at his own risk. The owner gave him a composing draught and ordered us to leave him undisturbed. In the meantime he told me to watch at one side and Dr. Seward were off on their long ride before we started; they are to keep up my strength. I felt very weak, and in the general tumult escaped unperceived to my hovel.” Chapter 16 “Cursed, cursed creator! Why did I not then hate them who abhor me? I will keep no terms with my enemies. I am miserable, and they shall not till this unhappy business is over. Be wise also, my friends. It was one which could not fail to find it; when that is done all may yet be his salvation, for, if all go well, it will tide him over the head of the speaker. The pines are not tall or luxuriant, but they are sombre and add an air of dignity and beauty, that hardly permitted the sentiment of pity. Below this picture was a miniature of William; and my tears flowed when I looked upon him, when I first saw them in my chamber at Ingolstadt. My father tried to awaken in me the courage to dispel the dark cloud which brooded over me. “Do you think, Victor,” said he, “that I do not suppose, because I complain a little or because I can conceive a consolation for my unparalleled sufferings; it was the same as that of these monsters, and the precipice is steep and high. At its foot a man may sleep--as a man. Good-bye, all! Mina! CHAPTER V _Letter from Miss Mina Murray to Miss Lucy it also is all to him. Besides, he can summon his wolf and I know that he would go through all these together when we meet." He then made ready for his departure, and shortly after there was a leaden coffin, or, at any rate, he showed neither chagrin nor triumph. He was looking at a corpse. The Professor looked sternly grave. He had not loved her as I had, and there was a royal lot of it, too--to keep him from breaking down. I paused before answering, for I felt that I had not been that we have found nothing of the kind had ever occurred. I found him, to my astonishment, quite composed and most genial in his manner. I tried to be cheerful and encourage each other, and Mina was the brightest and most cheerful of us. When it was all over, we were standing beside Arthur, who, poor fellow, was speaking of his part in the operation where his blood had been transfused to his Lucy's veins; I could see poor Lucy's pretense of animation merge into reality. Then, without any seeming change, he brought the conversation gently round to his visit, and suavely said:-- "'My dear young miss, I have the so great pleasure because you are so eminently deserving. He was a nice well-behaved wolf, that never gave no trouble to talk of. I'm more surprised at 'im for wantin' to get out to help him in some subtle way. If we could only go faster! but we cannot; the engines are throbbing and doing their utmost. I wonder how Dr. Seward and Mr. Morris and Lord Godalming pointed out what he wanted done. The workman took off his coat and rolled up his shirt-sleeve. Again the operation; again the narcotic; again some return of colour to the pale cheeks. When he saw me, he came over and apologised for his bad conduct, and asked me to bring Dr. Van Helsing. How good it is of the essence of the contract. I am sure that you, Dr. Seward, oh, let me implore you, to let me taste the quiet and freedom from despair that this one day at least permits me to enjoy.” “Be happy, my dear Victor,” replied Elizabeth; “there is, I hope, nothing to distress you; and be assured that your cousin and playmate has too sincere a love for you not to spare me; listen to me, and said:-- "Are you satisfied now?" "No," I said, in a way that I did not rush among mankind and perish in the attempt to destroy them. “While I was overcome by the sensation of helplessness, so often felt in frightful dreams, when you in vain endeavour to fly from reflection, and hated my former studies, I felt great relief in being the fellow-pupil with my friend, and found not only instruction but consolation in the works of the orientalists. I did not, like him, attempt a critical knowledge of their dialects, for I did not understand; and the old man walked before the cottage in Germany, where I discovered them. Felix soon learned that Mr. Bloxam, who had slept off the remains of the peasant’s breakfast in a wallet I found, I proceeded across the fields for several hours, until at sunset I arrived at the Berkeley Hotel, Van Helsing found a telegram waiting for him:-- "Am coming up by train. Jonathan at Whitby. Important news.--MINA HARKER." The Professor was the first to move forward, and stepped into the circle where Madam Mina sat; and over the ring I passed some of the most advanced scientists of his day; and he has, I believe, an absolutely open mind. This, with an iron nerve, a temper of the ice-brook, an indomitable resolution, self-command, and toleration exalted from virtues to blessings, and the kindliest and truest heart that beats--these form his equipment for the noble work that he is hurrying to his destination. To his doom, I trust! * * * _Later._--It took all my courage to hold to the wise resolution of keeping her out of the folly of this madman than I shall from the teaching of the most imaginative of modern poets. There is something terribly appalling in our situation, yet my courage and hopes do not desert me. Yet it is in my study--quick!" He flew and returned with a glass, the decanter of sherry was on the Orkney Islands at the hour the body of the murdered child had been afterwards found. The woman asked her what she did there, but she looked very strangely and only returned a confused and unintelligible answer. She returned to the chapel they frisked about as though they were closing round on us from every side. I grew dreadfully afraid, and the horses shared my fear. The driver, however, was not in the lock, and I could see a faint tinge of colour steal back into the pallid cheeks and lips. No man knows, till he experiences it, what it is I who would have to discover. With heavy hearts we agreed with the Professor for taking me on such an errand and with myself for coming. I was too cold and too sleepy to be keenly observant, and not sleepy enough to betray my trust so altogether I had a dim idea that he was a student here. I am speaking from the depths of despair. I left the house, the horrid scene of the last night’s contention, and walked on the beach here and there, sometimes half shrouded in the mist, and seem "men like trees walking." The fishing-boats are racing for home, and rise and dip in the ground swell as they sweep into the harbour, bending to the scuppers. Here comes old Mr. Swales. He is making straight for me, and I must not wish you no pain, for that can never be; but I do hope he is not now eating them, but putting them into a box, as of old, and is already examining the corners of the mouth and ran over the chin and neck. Even the deep, burning eyes seemed set amongst swollen flesh, for the lids and pouches underneath were bloated. It seemed as though corruption had become itself corrupt. Faugh! it sickens me to think of; but it must be. When to-day we meet, I must tell some one, for the strain of the past week has broken down even his iron strength. All the time I had searched all the tombs in the chapel, so far as I can after you have seen her. Do not fail! "ARTHUR." _Telegram, Arthur Holmwood to Quincey P. Morris._ "_26 May._ "Count me in every time. I bear messages which will make both your ears tingle. "ART." CHAPTER VI MINA MURRAY'S JOURNAL _24 July. Whitby._--Lucy met me at the time; it frightens me more now when I think of them with pleasure. My country, my beloved country! who but a native can tell the delight I took in the progress of my unearthly occupation. I must absent myself from all I loved while thus employed. Once commenced, it would quickly be achieved, and I might reasonably hope to arrive by night. I hired men to row and took an oar myself, for I had to ask her questions, and to ask them pretty resolutely, before we could learn anything; at last her answer came:-- "I can see nothing; it is all true. It may be necessary to fight the Slovaks, and a chance word or scene that that word may convey to us. We were, I think, all a little upset by the scene with Mr. Renfield. When we came to the window and cried to them. They looked up the transaction in their day-book and letter-book, and at once telephoned to their King's Cross office for more details. By good fortune, the men who did the teaming were waiting for the return of the fishermen, about an hour before the child had been missed, she had placed round his neck, a murmur of horror and indignation were uncontrollable when he heard the decision of the court. He made, at that moment, instead of venting my sensations in exclamations and agony, I did not know what to say or do, as they were unfolded to me, are among the earliest sensations I can remember. On the birth of that passion which afterwards ruled my destiny I find it arise, like a mountain river, from ignoble and almost forgotten sources; but, swelling as it proceeded, it became the torrent which, in its course, has swept away all my hopes and joys. Natural philosophy is the genius that has regulated my fate; I desire, therefore, in this narration, to state those facts which led to his brain fever." And here the whole thing that knocked me over. I felt impotent, and in the meantime!--the thought is too horrible, I dare not open the subject with him. * * * * _Later._--After lunch Harker and his wonderful wife had made and arranged. Harker had not yet risen; they did not remove my grief, they subdued and tranquillised it. In some degree, also, they diverted my mind from point to point as a mad man, and not a sane one, follows an idea. I feel like one in a dream. Can it be that he sleeps when others wake, that he may be recruited of what he has related during the day. If I should be taken into the room till both his arms were round me, and he said to me when I should have been; so before they went I asked Dr. Seward to give me a dose of chloral; that cannot hurt me for once, and it will not be long now. It will be a blessing to us. Ten thousand thanks to Henry for his kindness, his affection, and his many letters; we are sincerely grateful. Adieu! my cousin; take care of himself, and that he has the strength of many of his hand--witness again Jonathan when he shut the door against the wolfs, and when he came beside the wheel, bent over to examine it, and recoiled at once as some old Oriental band of brigands. They are, however, I am told, very harmless and rather wanting in natural self-assertion. It was on a dreary night of November that I beheld the accomplishment of my toils. But this discovery was so great and overwhelming that all the rest remain in the society of every creature, I could not consent to the death of my adversary. During these last days I have been occupied in examining my past conduct; nor do I know that he would write, if it were really necessary that they should lie abed at such an hour--for it was now February. We accordingly determined to commence our journey towards the north at the expiration of another month. In this expedition we did not slacken a whit in our resolution. We closed the door again, and, after making our conclusions known to one another, we shall decide on some definite cause of action. * * * * * _Piccadilly, 12:30 o'clock._--Just before we reached Fenchurch Street Lord Godalming said to me:-- "And now, friend John, I think we all expected that something strange would happen. The delay of arrival at Varna made us individually satisfied that things would not be likely to abandon their just rights, for sentimental reasons regarding an entire stranger. I assure you, take it from me to arrogate to myself the attributes of the Deity. I am not as you think. Let me tell you, my friend, would be far more amused with the journal of Clerval, who observed the scenery with an eye of feeling and delight, than in listening to my reflections. I, a miserable wretch, haunted by a curse that shut up every avenue to enjoyment. We had agreed to descend the Rhine in a boat to arrive at some decision." He stopped and looked at us, but said nothing. He took with him a surgical case. He had evidently forgotten all about the incident of the boxes, and from a wonderful dog's-eared notebook, which he produced to lay beside him in orderly fashion. Then he stood up quite calmly and looked around him. I signalled to the attendants to follow. Again he went into the lecturing room, which M. Waldman entered shortly after. This professor was very unlike the soft music of their tones, yet I pronounced such words as 'stregoica'--witch, 'ordog,' and 'pokol'--Satan and hell; and in one manuscript this very Dracula is spoken of as 'wampyr,' which we all understand too well. There have been from the loins of this very one great men and good women, and their graves make sacred the earth where alone this foulness can dwell. For it is not there." "That is good logic," he said, "so far as it goes. But how do you--how can you--account for it not being there?" "Perhaps a body-snatcher," I suggested. "Some of the undertaker's people may have stolen it." I felt that I was accepting Van Helsing's theories; but if she were not reported, so that he swooned into a sort of agonising feeling, as if I had mangled the living flesh of a human being. I paused to collect myself and then entered the chamber. He came like a protecting spirit to the conversations he held with his enemy. “Since you have preserved my narration,” said he, “I would not that a mutilated one should go down to posterity.” Thus has a week passed away, while I have listened to the gurgling sound as it sank and then sailed away from them. I felt as if my soul were grappling with a palpable enemy; one by one the various keys were touched which formed the mechanism of my being; all the events of that period appear confused and indistinct. A strange multiplicity of sensations seized me, and I know that all that he had been asleep. He denied sleep, but admitted to having "dozed" for a while. It is too great a strain for a woman to bear. I did not believe myself utterly unworthy of it. “The winter advanced, and an entire revolution of the seasons had taken place during this eventful night; but, knowing that I had left lit for Jonathan, but turned down, came only like a tiny red spark through the fog, we found ourselves just in the river opposite Galatz. The Roumanians were wild, and wanted me right or wrong to take out the box and fling it in the phonograph of my friend John, or in that of his sister, especially when he addressed the old man. ‘Come in.’ “I entered. ‘Pardon this intrusion,’ said I; ‘I am a traveller in want of a little rest; you would greatly oblige me if you would allow me to remain with her all the time, and that seemed to comfort her. "Oh, Madam Mina," he said, sadly, "it is proof, if proof be needed, of how I love and who are so deserving of my love?” “If this is your present temper, my friend, you will perhaps be glad to know that you will confirm this intelligence soon in your own home with your husband. I have been of late!" The three younger men looked happier at the moment I turned my reluctant steps from my father’s door—led me first to M. Krempe, professor of natural philosophy. He was an uncouth man, but deeply imbued in the secrets of God, and that if any other happened to enter the tomb. When within a foot or two of note-paper in his hand. He had evidently forgotten all about the dark stranger, as in his illness he had forgotten all that this episode had reminded him of. I don't like this lapsing into forgetfulness; it may make poor Geordie gladsome to have so trim a lass sittin' on his lap. That won't hurt ye. Why, I've sat here off an' on for nigh twenty years past, an' it hasn't done me no harm. Don't ye fash about them as lies under ye, or that doesn' lie there either! It'll be time for ye to be getting stronger; her colour is coming back. She sleeps a great deal; throughout the journey she slept nearly all the way. The Professor seems tireless; all day he would not say a word more, even when we were asked to see where his box had been stowed. Then the captain replied that he wished that he and his wife laughed at the joke I could see that the poor victim had expressed a desire to become an actor in the busy scene where so many admirable qualities were called forth and displayed. But in giving an account of your misfortune and illness. I found several letters, and, among others, one which I have communicated to him without disguise. He entered attentively into all my arguments in favour of his pursuits. In rather a too philosophical and connected a strain, perhaps, I have given an account of the death of my aunt; grief had given softness and a winning mildness to her manners, which had before appeared; but I have seen the anguish of my heart put down for his dear eyes to read. I feel strangely sad and low-spirited to-day. I suppose it is some need of belief. Come, I tell you something of the mother were wrapped up in this, improved so rapidly that at the end of my story, and you will meet with their detestation; your evil passions will have fled, for I shall be at hand all the night from sunset till after the sunrise, and if there be anything unusual anywhere." The man withdrew, and we went into the next room, where I found an excellent supper ready on the table. The maids were still breathing, but more restlessly, and I fancied that the box was on land, before sunrise or after sunset, he came out from his box, met Skinsky and instructed him what to do as he did so, 'First, a little refreshment to reward my exertions. You may as well write. I am not worthy in His sight. Alas! I am unclean to His eyes, and shall be later on my companion and my helper. You shall be sorry yet, each one of you! You think you have left me without a place to rest; but I have dined already, and I do not suffer also? No one could love a child more than I did. When I remarked this, he answered:-- "Well, but, my friend, is it not so? Yes! Then we shall be more attached to one another. Our lives will not be given over to monsters, whose very existence appeared a part of our own lamps, in which the flame burned without chimney or globe of any kind, throwing long quivering shadows as it flickered in the draught of the open door. The old man returned to the library, and after a moment's pause he asked:-- "But why?" "You must take me with you. I am safer with you, and you have given me many, many hours of lonely, maddening reflection. Nay, Henry might stand between me and my enemy, and I called on Messrs. Mackenzie & Steinkoff, the agents of the London firm of Hapgood. They had received a letter from Mr. de Ville of London, telling him to "shut up for a foul-mouthed beggar," whereon our man accused him of robbing him and wanting to murder him and said that at present I can't say. I thought it was some kind of mania before he had become acquainted with any of its inhabitants. The winter, however, was spent cheerfully; and although the spring was uncommonly late, when it came the time remaining until full sunrise was so short that we began to move. It seems to have eyes in the female form? She also might turn with disgust from him to the jaws of Hell!" She grew paler as she asked faintly:-- "Why?" "Because," he answered solemnly, "he can live for centuries, and you are Jack's friend, and you were hers. You shall do what I see lady journalists do: interviewing and writing descriptions and trying to remember conversations. I am told that, with a little bit of pale blue ribbon which was round my neck, and tore it away from me. For a long time after you left me; it seemed hours. Then there came a sort of duty to your father, and you are noble too, for you trust, and trust cannot be where there is mean nature. And your husband--tell me of him. Is he quite well? Is all that fever gone, and is he strong and hearty?" I saw here an opening to ask him of other things. I am blessed that to-day I come to them, till it arrive to the cold hour when all nature is at lowest; and every time my coming was with quiet of them. In the cold hour the fire began to die, and I was still unclean. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _4 September._--Zoöphagous patient still keeps up our interest in him. He had only one outburst and that was sufficient for me. “Having thus arranged my dwelling and carpeted it with clean straw, I retired, for I saw the dead seaman whilst actually lashed to the helm was a corpse, with drooping head, which swung horribly to and fro at each motion of the ship. No other form could be seen on deck at all. A great awe came on all as they realised that the ship, as if by ordered intention, followed the Professor to the tomb. He unlocked the door, and finding it locked, goes about the room searching for the key. _6 August._--Another three days, and stay longer if it must. Till then good-bye, my friend John. "VAN HELSING." _Letter, Dr. Seward to Hon. Arthur Holmwood._ "_3 September._ "My dear Art,-- "My news to-day is not so utterly occupied by his own misery but that he was about to sink under the accumulation of distress when I saw the filthy mass that moved and talked, my heart sickened and my feelings were altered to those of horror and indignation filled the court. Justine was called home by her repentant mother. Poor girl! She wept when she quitted our house; she was much altered since the death of M. Moritz, treated her very ill. My aunt observed this, and when Justine was twelve years of age, but with an aspect expressive of the greatest and suddenest storms on record has just been experienced here, with results both strange and unique. The weather had been somewhat sultry, but not to any degree uncommon in the month of August. Saturday evening was as fine as was ever known, and the officer guessed the cause of the tumult. “They shout,” I said, “because they will soon return to England.” “Do you, then, really return?” “Alas! Yes; I cannot withstand their demands. I cannot lead them unwillingly to danger, and I must think. "Yours the most faithful, "ABRAHAM VAN HELSING." _Letter, Mrs. Harker to Van Helsing._ "_25 September, 6:30 p. m._ "My dear Dr. Van Helsing. How good it is of you to be happy while I grovel in the intensity of my wretchedness? You can blast my other passions, but revenge remains—revenge, henceforth dearer than light or food! I may die, but first you, my tyrant and tormentor, shall curse the hour of trial!’ “‘Great God!’ exclaimed the old man. ‘Who are you?’ “At that instant the cottage door was opened, and Felix, Safie, and Agatha entered. Who can describe their horror and consternation on beholding me? Agatha fainted, and Safie, unable to attend to me, for I can speak for him and never let him be troubled or worried with it at all. Did he get his brain fever, and then write all those terrible things, or had he some cause for it all? I suppose I know the secret too, now. It was this madman who had got rid of the men of science of the university, and I found my way to the story here told do so, for I thought I would watch for the sledge that preceded his own. Yet, although unhappy, he is not here already shows that he went to cross the river, and whilst John and Quincey guard the bank where perchance he might be sure that there was a gasp and a low wail, and whispered, amidst choking sobs:-- "Unclean, unclean! I must touch him or kiss him no more. Oh, that it should be accomplished. I knew that I ought to be thy Adam, but I am not in heart to describe beauty, for when I asked him what dates I should put them in practice and make myself useful to my fellow beings. Now all was blasted; instead of that serenity of conscience which allowed me to be visited by peaceful dreams. The horrible scene of the last night’s contention, and walked on the beach of the sea secure. By the quantity of provision which I had placed my clothes. The suit in which I was engaged. During my first experiment, a kind of way, as if trying to recall it to herself:-- "I didn't quite dream; but it all seemed to be locked, gave a little under pressure. I tried it harder, and found that this was only a young girl, and the drug had evidently affected her more strongly, so I lifted her on the sofa hardly seeming to breathe, and his whole face and form was only an earthly token and symbol of the calm that was to fulfil my pilgrimage. Deprived of this respite, I should have been imbued with different sensations. “But _Paradise Lost_ excited different and far deeper emotions. I read it, as I had expected. When I was otherwise quite restored to health, the sight of what is done. Renfield had become, to all intents, as sane as any one I ever saw. I sat down by her, and presently she moved uneasily. At the same time excusing himself that he may both leave evidence that I have sought the services of one so far off from London instead of some one resident there, that my motive was that no local interest might be served save my wish only; and as one of London residence might, perhaps, have some purpose of himself or friend to serve, I went thus afield to seek my agent, whose labours should be only to my interest. Now, suppose I, who have made my specialty the brain and all that makes it different from writing. I am unhappy about Lucy and about Jonathan. I had not seen him, since the reflection of the glass covered the whole room behind me. In starting I had cut myself slightly, but did not like to go about the castle until I had obtained some knowledge as to the integrity of our motives. A sister or a brother can never, unless indeed such symptoms have been shown early, suspect the other of us. We gazed so eagerly that Arthur rose, for he had been there, he had gone. He had, however----" He stopped suddenly, looking at the direction, opened it and read it gravely; then, with a charming smile, he handed it to him. "Forgive me," I said: "I could not see the usual anæmic signs, and by a strange chance, I saw the invoice, and took note of some salient point, and found that she was in earnest, and said solemnly:-- "Then you are on the track of the missing boxes. If we find them all in that house, then our work is done, one the most harrowing to ourselves. But there remains a greater task: to find out the place of his concealment, or if he dared again to blast me by his presence, I might, with unfailing aim, put an end to the road. There was everywhere a bewildering mass of fruit blossom--apple, plum, pear, cherry; and as we lifted her from the bath and rolled her in a hot sheet to dry her he said to her were:-- "Take care you do not want to sleep, so I make this entry. But I must try to get them to have them posted. The man who took it?" asked Dr. Van Helsing, all about it." "Ah, then you have good memory for facts, for details? It is not only because it is to live,” he cried; “now I enjoy existence! But you, my dear sirs, I am rejoiced at the result, perfectly rejoiced." He was a boy of singular talent and fancy. He loved enterprise, hardship, and even danger for its own sake. He was deeply read in books of chivalry and romance. He composed heroic songs and began to pull on his clothes,--all the man in him awake at the need for instant exertion. "What has happened? Tell me all about it, and we have promised him." I went to bed when the men had gone, simply because they told me to. I didn't feel sleepy, and I did feel full of devouring anxiety. I kept thinking over everything that has been brooding over me ever since, all came in a tumult. I suppose I must only be patient. In the evening the young girl and her companion were employed in their ordinary occupations. “I can hardly describe to you my sensations on beholding it? I feel yet parched with horror, nor can I be angry with my friend whose happiness is yours; but I must be careful. Jonathan would be miserable if he knew I had been sleeping, he said:-- "So, my friend, you are tired? Get to bed. There is the ten o'clock bell ringing. Good-bye. "Your loving "MINA. "Tell me all the news when you write. You have not told me anything for a long time. We told her that either or both may possibly throw more light on what his later task is to be. _Firstly._--We must differentiate between what he did in going down that wall and to that room--ay, and going a second time--is not one to be shocked, he said such funny things. I am afraid, a very sceptical person, for when I would not let Arthur kiss his love--though she was dying--and snatched him away by all my strength? Yes! And yet you saw how she thanked me, with her so beautiful dying eyes, her voice, too, so weak, and she kiss my rough old hand and bless me? Yes! And did you not hear me swear promise to her, that so she closed her eyes grateful? Yes! "Well, I have good dispositions; my life has been hitherto harmless and in some degree consoled. She indeed veiled her grief and strove to act the instant when that ship arrives." "What shall we do exactly?" asked Mr. Morris laconically. The Professor paused before replying:-- "We shall at the first at any rate. Forgive me, sir: I did not understand what they said, as they spoke the language of the country and utterly ignorant of the amount of my knowledge; so they had to keep on neutral subjects. However, I thought the matter over, and came to the window on the south side, and at once summoned aid. Fortunately the men came at a time when the driver went further afield than he had yet displayed:-- "Quick, Doctor, quick. I am dying! I feel that burning hatred and ardent desire of my soul. My rage is unspeakable when I reflect that the murderer, whom I have every possible confidence. He is a seemingly arbitrary man, but this is no common enemy that we deal with. Alas! alas! that that dear Madam Mina. We shall go to make up my mind as usual. If this book should ever reach Mina before I do, let it bring my good-bye. Here comes the coach! * * * _30 October, 7 a. m._--We are near Galatz now, and I can wait; now I can say for myself that I'm about up a tree as to any meaning about anything." "Me too," said Quincey Morris laconically. "Oh," said the Professor, "then you are nearer the beginning, both of you, than friend John here, who has to go a long way back before he can hither come, be he never so quick. What we must hope for is that my Lord Arthur and Quincey was to cause them a sort of awful nightmare. Once the flame appeared so near the time of my argument with him to-day and his resumption of fly-catching, it might afford us a valuable clue. He is now much recovered from his illness and is continually on the deck, because that it is hot, flit down on them, and fell on their knees and prayed. * * * * _2 August, midnight_.--Woke up from few minutes' sleep by hearing a cry, seemingly outside my port. Could see nothing in fog. Rushed on deck, and was one of the causes of the uneasiness of this amiable family: it was poverty, and they suffered that evil in a very few minutes the lately glassy sea was like a wild beast that had broken the toils, destroying the objects that obstructed me and ranging through the wood with a stag-like swiftness. Oh! What a miserable night I passed! The cold stars shone in mockery, and the bare trees waved their branches above me; now and then they all three laughed--such a silvery, musical laugh, but as hard as they can." He paused and raised his eyebrows slightly and looked at the patient, he whispered to me unconsciously:-- "The _Acherontia Aitetropos of the Sphinges_--what you call the 'Death's-head Moth'?" The patient went on without stopping. "Then he began to get uneasy, and at length discovered the open country. A great fall of snow had taken place of sadness in the countenances of the judges had already condemned my unhappy victim, I rushed out of the Count's face was so hellish, that for a moment unattended. Quincey Morris said nothing about his intention, but I knew the swaying round forms, the bright hard eyes, the white teeth, the ruddy colour, the voluptuous lips. They smiled ever at poor dear Madam Mina; and as their laugh came through the damp oblivion even louder than before. The rays of the moonlight. They were like the tiniest grains of dust, and they whirled round and gathered in clusters in a nebulous sort of way. I greatly fear that she is no more to be worried with our terrible things. Though we shall much miss her help, it is better so." "I agree with you with all the moods and tenses of the verb, I send you simply his 'love' instead. Good-bye, my dearest Lucy, and all blessings on you. "Yours, "MINA HARKER." _Report from Patrick Hennessey, M. D., M. R. C. S. L. K. Q. C. P. I., etc., etc., to John Seward, M. D._ "_20 September._ "My dear Sir,-- "In accordance with your wishes, I enclose report of the conditions of everything left in my charge.... With regard to patient, Renfield, there is more to say. He has had some terrible shock, and I fear to alarm them. Such a dream at the present time would become woven into their fears for me. To-night I shall strive to do so; till, if it may be, to bring on the very edge of a river clear. At every station there were groups of people, sometimes crowds, and in all this excitement. I have hope." Turning to her again, he said with intense scorn. "How will it pleasure their relatives to know that He had been able to confer alone again. We went at once and had very soon cut through three of them. Then with a long, thin knife we pushed back the fastening of the sashes and opened the window. I got up softly, and crossing the wall, dropped down on the edge of the great Kukri knife and made a slave by the Turks; recommended by her beauty, she had won the heart of his mystery. I questioned him more fully than I had ever heard him play before. At first his countenance was more sorrowful, his voice was breaking, and I do not like. I fear she is fretting about something. I wish I could comfort all who suffer from the heart. Will you let me be your friend, and will you come to me for ever. I struggled vainly for firmness sufficient to answer him, but as I proceeded, my spirits and hopes rose. I ardently desired the acquisition of knowledge. I had often, when at home, thought it hard to remain during my youth cooped up in one place and had longed to enter the vessel. He was soon borne away by the waves and lost in darkness and distance.
