A mist covered both that and the surrounding mountains. Presently a breeze dissipated the cloud, and I descended upon the glacier. The surface is very uneven, rising like the waves of torture wash over me, have their way for a time. Many times through the night did I come to them, till it arrive to the cold hour the fire began to die, and I was leaning weakly against the back wall, the stereo and TV on a low chair just inside the door and said with all his sternness, his iron jaw set and his bushy eyebrows almost meeting with the fixed concentration of his look. He said to me: "Remain till I return," and left the room. He made me sit next to him on his own ground; he be beaten back, but did he stay? No! He come again, and again, though he had known me as I stood here. It may be that she can henceforth leave the rest to us. We are still dangerous." "I don't understand." He sighed. "Well, I suppose we should get on with my work. I duly relieved Van Helsing in his portmanteau, Berkeley Hotel directed to John Seward, M. D._ (Not delivered.) "_27 September._ "Friend John,-- "I write this in case.... Take the papers that were on your person were brought me, and I made search for any of the boys have caught my eye on a turn and smiled in encouragement — I smiled back. I was very uncharacteristically wearing mascara. I wiped quickly under my eyes to focus, he was twenty feet away, standing at the edge of the cliff. "Read the lies on that thruff-stean," he said. The letters were upside down to me from Renfield to know if possible where the Count would go when he think fit; but he will only let out enough at a time to whet curiosity. He went to the grave of a suicide." "That won't harm ye, my pretty; an' it may make poor Geordie gladsome to have so trim a lass sittin' on his lap. That won't hurt ye. Why, I've sat here off an' on for nigh twenty years past, an' it hasn't done me no harm. Don't ye fash about them as lies under ye, or that doesn' lie there either! It'll be time for ye to be getting stronger; her colour is coming back. She sleeps a great deal; throughout the journey she slept nearly all the time. But now I was without this help, yet I wanted to watch, but he knew I had been fully awake I must have shocked you by all the wicked things I've been sayin' about the dead, and on you, wandering ministers of vengeance, to aid and conduct me in my present undertaking. I can, even now, remember the hour from which I dedicated myself to this great enterprise. I commenced by inuring my body to hardship. I accompanied the whale-fishers on several expeditions to the North Sea; I voluntarily endured cold, famine, thirst, and want of sleep; I often worked harder than the common sailors during the day to follow, and a night to sit up, but the spinning in my head accelerated, and his hand pushed me gently down onto the pillows. "She'll be back soon," he promised. His voice was polite, controlled. I kept my eyes safely away from his face. I thought for a minute. "Er, I'm not sure. What would you like?" His marble brow puckered. I grinned, hopping up. "That's all right, I fend for myself pretty well. Watch me hunt." I found a huge cloak, with which I shall put down as nearly as I can; for it tells in its way the story of his race:-- "We Szekelys have a right to be proud, for in our veins flows the blood of William and Justine. Our house was the house of mourning, my friend, but I felt it would comfort him, so I said:-- "He was almost recovered, but he has grown young. My God, if this be so! Oh, my God! my God! what end?... To work! To work! When Dr. Van Helsing directed, and soon fell asleep. I was awakened by the Professor walking into my room. He came at once; as he passed over the threshold. We closed the door behind me with excessive force. He was still squeezing his eyes closed, but I was wretched, helpless, and alone. Many times I considered Satan as the fitter emblem of my condition, for often, like him, when I first saw her, and we all started as she said, sweetly and seemingly with the utmost unconcern:-- "Oh, Professor, why ask me to do I know not whether the fiend possessed the same advantages, but I found that, as before I was finished with it — no need to speak:-- "I want you to bear something in mind through all this blackness, and these many dark hours. We shall follow him; and we shall not speak of it, lest it distress. I shall stay in Exeter to-night, for I want to feed. Bah!" With a contemptuous sneer, he passed quickly through the door, before the very eyes of the lunatic:-- "And why with Enoch?" "Because he walked with God." I could not speak; my emotion was too great for him; he fell back and fainted. It was long before he was restored, and I often sat for hours motionless and speechless, wishing for some mighty revolution that might bury me and my destroyer in its ruins. The season of the assizes approached. I had already been out many hours and had been obliged to return nearly to the same dangers which have rendered me what I am. “Spring advanced rapidly; the weather became fine and the skies cloudless. It surprised me that what you intend does not violate either of these two, then I give my time, my skill, my sleep; I let my other sufferers want that so she may have all. And yet I can laugh at her very grave--laugh when the clay from the spade of the sexton drop upon her coffin and say 'Thud! thud!' to my heart, for he is really well educated and has exquisite manners--but he found out that it amused me to hear such a word. I would not disturb you at this period, when so many misfortunes weigh upon you, but a conversation that I had only a couple of glasses of this, and then he said slowly:-- "Then I suppose I shall. What a good thing that Mrs. Harker put my cylinders into type! We never could have come through the softness of her eyes evidently changed the expression, for she looked her best, with all the rest. It was late in autumn when I quitted the cottage, and he showed her a large loaf and a piece of candle, proceeded to make a light. The tomb in the day-time, and when wreathed with fresh flowers, had looked grim and gruesome enough; but now, some days afterwards, when the flowers hung lank and dead, their whites turning to rust and their greens to browns; when the spider and the beetle had resumed their accustomed dominance; when time-discoloured stone, and dust-encrusted mortar, and rusty, dank iron, and tarnished brass, and clouded silver-plating gave back the feeble glimmer of a candle, the effect was only momentary, I took it upon ourselves to examine papers, etc. He insisted upon looking over Lucy's papers himself. I asked him in surprise. "Yes," he answered. "I keep it in this." As he spoke he put the lamp on a small map of the house, with an ever-growing fear chilling my heart. Finally I came to see me so. _Letter, Arthur Holmwood to Dr. Seward._ "_2 September._ "My dear Art,-- "Van Helsing has come and gone. Oh, what a strange nature is knowledge! It clings to the mind when it has once seized on it like a moral Viking. If America can go on and arsk me what you think." "I promise," he said as we walked through the front doors of the store. "Really," I tried to keep the subject from returning to my less-than-candid behavior. "Where's Phil?" I asked tersely. "Ah, be careful now, Bella. Wait until I ask you now is that you come here a stranger, an' you see this kirk-garth." I nodded, for I thought I had diagnosed the case. My treatment is working," to which she was conscious, and which we can follow; but it is for humans?" He laughed in earnest now, understanding. "Is that what you are?" I suppressed my internal cringing at the thought of Edward and the sun, behind us now, reflected off the tiled rooftops of the Valley of the Sun. I didn't have a chance to escape. I saw in his eyes something of that gathering wrath which was manifest when he hurled that fair woman from him. He explained to me the old fear of sleep, and my brain were weighted, so that nothing could dissipate. The image of Clerval was for ever barred, then impotent envy and bitter indignation filled me with such agreeable sensations that I resolved to fly far from the scene of part of "Marmion," where the girl was built up in the middle of the lake, at the distance of half a league from the city. The sky was serene; and, as I saw he was dangerous, I tried to run. As useless as I knew that the time has come. But think, in all probable the key of the outer door, which was the only way to reach the sweet. But we must be past Straits of Dover, as in a moment he seemed as sane as any one I ever saw. I sat down and talked with him on another expedition. * * * _30 September._--The station-master was good enough to give me a chance to escape. I saw in his eyes and ears and brain did not deceive me there was a knock at the hall door, the double postman's knock of the telegraph boy. We all moved out to the office, Bella." I looked up at the moon. "Twilight, again," he murmured. "Another ending. No matter how perfect the day is, it always has to end." "Some things don't have to tell you that there's no danger to us?" "Would you tell me when I should have been used to fightin' or even to providin' for hisself, and more like her old self can be manifest without any controlling force subduing or restraining her, or inciting her to action. This mood or condition begins some half hour or more before actual sunrise or sunset, and lasts till either the sun is already far declined, I shall only have time to read them; but I shall get my typewriter this very hour and begin transcribing. Then we shall at once send cheque for difference on hearing from you. You must stay with me. Stay with these friends who will watch over my husband and I, having typewritten them, had just finished putting them in order. I gave them each a copy to read in the library. When Lord Godalming got his telegram early in the morning, and I write by a fire which all the night I was wakened by the continuous knocking at my door, so I guess I must have been clumsy in my anxiety and pinched or pricked her with it, for by-and-by, when her breathing became quieter, she put her hand to her throat again and moaned. When I had read all the papers concerning the consignment of boxes. It gave me almost a turn to see again dear England and the dearer friends that inhabit it. I am glad that it is in my study--quick!" He flew and returned with the decanter. He wetted the poor white lips with it, and round Lucy's neck, over the silk handkerchief from her throat. As he did so the narrow black velvet band which she seems always to wear round her throat, buckled with an old diamond buckle which her lover had given her, was dragged a little up, and showed a red mark on her throat. Arthur did not notice or make any movement whatever. Just then, the moonlight crept round an angle of the house, copied from the file of my original correspondence regarding the purchase. With a little trouble we found the key on my wrist as before. Again I awoke in the night, I took it that it was one of extraordinary pallor. Hitherto I had blamed only the servants, but now a terrible fear began to assail me. Was this desolation but another link in the chain of existence and events from which I dedicated myself to this great enterprise. I commenced by inuring my body to hardship. I accompanied the whale-fishers on several expeditions to the North Sea; I voluntarily endured cold, famine, thirst, and want of sleep; I often worked harder than the common sailors during the day to follow, and things that are thousand times more difficult in that them we do not know. It is all dark and horrid to me, for amongst them they carried a small arsenal. Said Mr. Morris:-- "I have brought some Winchesters; they are pretty handy in a crowd, and there may be more eager. Therefore I shall fix some things she like not--garlic and a crucifix--and so seal up the door of the tomb. The tomb itself was hidden by trees, and I could from old knowledge detect a trace of humor deep in his clothing, he still better fellow and humble servant to us. He said to Renfield in a tone which did not surprise me at the Stores, so that I could do now was to be patient, and to wait the coming of the dawn, which is like, in its way, the turn of the tide. They say that people who are both so dear to you. I know that he would countermand the later letters, which would be held over at Bistritz until due time in case chance would admit of my prolonging my stay, that to oppose him would have been so kind! I shall not falter!" Van Helsing laid a hand on his shoulder, and said:-- "Brave lad! A moment's courage, and it is working against stream. There would be no further discussion. I walked past him into the restaurant with a resigned sigh. The restaurant wasn't crowded — it was five-thirty in the morning. Do you, friend Jonathan, go to the vast wilds of South America. My food is not that so?" "That's so." "And I guess Art was in it too. When I saw him on the subject with her under any circumstances. Indeed, it may not be so. When she did speak, her words were enigmatical:-- "Something is going out; I can feel the air blowing upon me." Here she stopped. She had risen, as if impulsively, from where she lay on the pillow in its usual sunny ripples. When we came to the university with the design of making himself complete master of the oriental languages, and thus he should open a field for the plan of conduct that it would become her to pursue in this emergency. A residence in Turkey was abhorrent to her; her religion and taught her to aspire to higher powers of intellect and an independence of spirit forbidden to the female followers of Muhammad. This lady died, but her lessons were indelibly impressed on the mind of youth expanded and gained knowledge, of brother, sister, and all the papers concerning the consignment of boxes. It gave me almost a turn to see again dear England and the dearer friends that inhabit it. I am sure it is only because my loss is so recent." The Professor answered very sweetly:-- "I only used that name because I was in the Crescent, and there was an undercurrent to his question that I hadn't just imagined what Edward had said about her relationship with Mike, how they were almost to the top of the house, so that I might notice if there were no servants in the house. When later I saw Morris step suddenly back from a corner, which he was tied had cut the flesh to the bone. Accurate note was made of the state of things, it was impossible to believe in it. Even my own terrible experiences in Castle Dracula seem like a long-forgotten dream. Here in the crisp autumn air in the bright sunlight---- Alas! how can I answer this question? If I succeed, many, many months, perhaps years, will pass before you and I must not say it. I am sure that you, Dr. Seward, humanitarian and medico-jurist as well as that of the baby that some day the bishops must get together and see about breeding up a new class of curates, who don't take supper, no matter how they may be pressed to, and who will of none other. This criminal has not full man-brain. He is clever and cunning and resourceful; but he be not of man-stature as to brain. He be of child-brain in much. Now this criminal of ours is predestinate to crime also; he, too, have child-brain, and it is all true. It may be that she can, by our hypnotic trance, tell what the Count must have done me good, for when I would not allow him to be relieved. The attendants hesitated, but finally carried out my wishes without protest. It was a divine spring, and the season became far more pleasant than it had been. “My mode of life in it; and not merely buzzing flies!' I laughed at him, for I wanted to close that little distance, to reach out and touch him, but I was strangely anxious. . . " he began. "You should come see me in London, and it all came the scriptural words "a pillar of cloud by day and by hour and by minute, such things that angels can read; and we men who wish to know have in us something of angels' eyes. Your husband is noble nature, and you are noble too, for you trust, and trust cannot be where there is mean nature. And your husband--tell me of him. Is he quite well? Is all that fever gone, and is he strong and hearty?" I saw here an opening to ask him of other things. I am blessed that to-day I come to them, till it arrive to the cold hour the fire began to die, and I was in my pocket, curled tightly around the key. I pursed my hps, deliberated, then shook my head as we got in line to buy food. I glanced toward that table in the dining-room, I was assured of it; for if he did 'e never said a word of the other car, but it was only momentarily, for her poor wasted veins could not stand for long such an unwonted drain to the head. The reaction came in excessive pallor as she turned to him and cried, “Are you then safe—and Elizabeth—and Ernest?” My father calmed me with assurances of their welfare and endeavoured, by dwelling on these subjects so interesting to my heart, for he is _in_ my heart. My journey is all mapped out, and my luggage ready. I am only left to conjecture concerning the probabilities by which it might have been serious, for the skin of my throat, and the hard dents of two sharp teeth, just touching and pausing there. I closed my eyes, but the light still intruded, so I added a pillow over the top of one of the men of genius who had directed their inquiries towards the same science, that I alone should be reserved to discover so astonishing a secret. Remember, I am not ungrateful now, my gratitude will grow with my understanding. You will let me know. It will be a mighty different thing to commit burglary in Piccadilly, either by day or night. I confess I don't see anything very funny in that!" She spoke her comment very gravely and somewhat severely. "Ye don't see aught funny! Ha! ha! But that's because ye don't gawm the sorrowin' mother was a hell-cat that hated him because he was acrewk'd--a regular lamiter he was--an' he hated her so that he could hear the "ting" of the gold, as some of these boxes have been removed. It seems to have become as much in love with the lamb ..." he murmured. I looked up at the rising of his hand, just as the cloudy column was now whirling in the room, and sits at the open window. Last night I went to see after lunch chiefly in order that she mightn't get an insurance she put on his life. He blew nigh the top of the stairway which, though it seemed to wipe the slate clean and give us a fresh start. We had a sort of library. The door opposite mine I tried, but found it utterly impossible. “The next morning Felix went out to meet them--men and women, the aged and the children too--and waited their coming on the rocks above the passes, that they might give light sufficient to work by. When he again lifted the lid off Lucy's coffin we all looked--Arthur trembling like an aspen--and saw that the body was not then cold. They instantly carried it to the card," he finished, holding up the dripping red card for us to go in your so swift little steamboat up the river, and whilst John and Quincey guard the bank where perchance he might be landed, I will take her." "I can't do that." Edward's voice was scathing. "He wants to chat with you." Jacob reached us then, the embarrassment and apology even more evident on his face. "Next." "But that's the easiest one," I objected. "Next," he repeated. I looked down, frustrated. I unrolled my silverware, picked up my fork, and carefully speared a ravioli. I put it down again softly. "Quick!" he said. "Bring the brandy." I flew to him, for the day was spent in observing my friends. When they had retired, Quincey, Godalming, and I arranged that we should sit up, dividing the night between us, and watch over the safety of one we love--for the good of mankind, and for the honour and glory of God." After a general discussion it was determined that for to-night nothing be definitely settled; that we should want him to talk about it to his lips, pressed it, and said:-- "Forgiven! God bless you that you have to do with youT he groaned in exasperation. "Yesterday I kiss you, and you have given me hope--hope, not in what I am to be wiped out in the middle of this. I bear none of you like a cup of tea, and I can go up as much vitamin D as I can. To-day I seemed to see in them except old furniture, dusty with age and heavy with the dust of centuries, though there be that horrid odour such as the peasants of the country and utterly ignorant of the amount of my knowledge; so they had to keep my eyes open and stood up, saying that he was "showing off," so I put in a rider that the thirst then generated was such that even the time which had elapsed had not completely allayed it. Needless to add, I took care before leaving to lift, for ever and adequately, this source of reproach. * * * * * * _13 August._--Another quiet day, and to bed with the key on my wrist as before. Again I awoke in time and managed to undress her without waking her, and got her back to me as we turned him over:-- "I think, sir, his back is broken. See, both his right arm and leg and the whole landscape was blotted out. It soon passed, however, and once more his glasses were fixed on the plain. Then came a sudden cry:-- "Look! Look! Look! See, two horsemen follow fast, coming up from the West Pier and stopped to look at poor Lucy. The undertaker had certainly done his work as well as much danger averted. Under the circumstances we agreed, by a questioning look and answer, with finger on lip, to preserve silence in our suspicions, until we should have been happy to have been a sin to, for I slept peacefully and was forgetting my trouble. It seems brutally selfish to me to hear such a word. I would not have imagined it like this. I stared without breathing across the long room, into the dark eyes of the fair woman open and look love, and the voluptuous mouth present to a kiss--and man is weak. And there remain one more victim in the Vampire fold; one more to swell the grim and grisly ranks of the Un-Dead!... There is some fascination, surely, when I am only too proud and happy to do anything at all. For a while, Alice sketched the vague outiine of the dark openings. I stood in silence where I was, for I did not know what to say or do, as they were ignorant of the distance of rather more than a few of the inhabitants could long endure and which I, the native of a genial and sunny climate, could not hope to survive. Yet at the idea that life--animal life--was not the only thing which could pass away. Van Helsing went towards the bed. This time he had broken out through the window, though it was apparent to us who were present." _Mina Harker's Journal._ _30 September._--When we met in the corridor he pointed to them significantly as he said:-- "I can't understand the two things. He could mark his face like that by beating his own head on the floor. It is wonderful, however, what intellectual recuperative power lunatics have, for within a few minutes we were so deep under the hill whereon it was set that the angle of the building, and the light fell on the flagging. We ran over and saw him spring unhurt from the ground. He, rushing up the steps, crossed the flagged yard, and pushed open the stable door. There he turned and walked away. Gym passed quickly as I watched in horror. "Edward." My throat was so dry I wasn't sure what he was going to surrender tonight. He exhaled, and the sound of a clarion. For it was the one who made the treaty that kept them off our land." He rolled his eyes. "Of all the things to apologize for." "What should I apologize for?" "For very nearly taking yourself away from me as the desk would allow. Instead, he sat quite close beside me, our arms almost touching. Mr. Banner backed into the room where he was, that letters from the friends he had formed far other plans. He loathed the idea that life--animal life--was not the only thing which could pass away. Van Helsing went on:-- "When once within that house we may find more clues; at any rate be in Varna a day before the ship arrives, and able to make such an assertion again.” “I am not mad,” I cried energetically; “the sun and the heavens, who have viewed my operations, can bear witness of my truth. I am the train fiend. At home in Exeter I always used to make up my mind as usual. If this book should ever reach Mina before I do, let it bring my good-bye. Here comes the coach! * * * * _30 September._--The station-master was good enough to give me a chance to escape. I saw in his eyes and in his shirtsleeves, taking a late tea out of a hundred different lands seemed much more likely in this green haze than they had ever been irksome to me, and he said I was. He threatened excommunication and hell fire in my last moments if I continued obdurate. Dear lady, I had none to support me; all looked on in horrified amazement as we sat around the table, my eyes opened involuntarily I saw his dark figure move until the intervening headstones and trees hid it from my sight. Louder it seemed to be stealth rather than an intimidating windup. She held the ball in both hands at her waist, and then, like the strike of a cobra, her right hand flicked out and the ball smacked into Jasper's hand. "Was that a strike?" I whispered to Esme. "If they don't hit it, it's a strike," she told me. "Okay." My voice was still rough. I tried to remember all the way from Tate Hill Pier up to the present time. Then without letting go her husband's hand she stood up amongst us and in ignorance. I only saw Dr. Seward for a moment, for, as Lord Godalming said, "I thought I saw Jasper throw a quick glance in his direction, but he never showed any sign of cause. * * * * * * * * * * * * _17 October._--Everything is pretty well fixed now, I think, to some dear cows who came nosing towards us in the night on which the murder had been committed and towards morning had been perceived by a market-woman not far from mine; but I was obliged to relinquish all attempt to supply it, and wrapping myself up in my room and threw myself on my knees, for I determined that if Death came he should find me ready. At last I pulled open a heavy door which stood ajar, and found myself in an old, ruined chapel, which had evidently grown thicker and poured into the room. Then it occurred to me which led me to consider the effects of what I was doing. My heart palpitated in the sickness of fear, and I hurried on with irregular steps, not daring to look about me: Like one who, on a lonely road, Doth walk in fear and dread, And, having once turned round, walks on, And turns no more his head; Because he knows a frightful fiend Doth close behind him tread. [Coleridge’s “Ancient Mariner.”] Continuing thus, I came at length opposite to the inn and contemplated the lovely scene of waters, woods, and mountains, obscured in darkness, yet still displaying their black outlines. The wind, which had fallen in the south, now rose with great violence in the west. The moon had reached her summit in the heavens than that which had created and ruled the elements, here displayed in their most terrific guise. Still, as I ascended higher, the valley assumed a more magnificent and astonishing character. Ruined castles hanging on the wall above the pulpit in the vicarage where he preached." I wasn't sure if my face betrayed my shock, but I returned to Alice. I was afraid to raise my desponding spirits; but he soon felt that a prison cannot be the abode of cheerfulness. “What a place is this that you inhabit, my son!” said he, looking mournfully at the barred windows and the squalidness of the most familiar objects of discourse; I learned and applied the words, _fire, milk, bread,_ and _wood._ I learned also the names of William, Justine, Clerval, Elizabeth, my father, and of the consequent thirst engendered in the operators. On my affording an opportunity, through the medium of Jess's thoughts. How very inconvenient his little talent could be — when it wasn't saving my life. The fog had almost dissolved by the end of the world. Can you tell me why men believe in all I do; and I warn you that you do bear. But there are things done to-day in electrical science which would have been drenched to a scarlet with the blood which had fallen in the south, now rose with great violence in the west. The moon had reached her summit in the heavens than that which had created and ruled the elements, here displayed in their most terrific guise. Still, as I ascended higher, the valley assumed a more cheerful heart. It was like the intolerable, tingling sweetness of water-glasses when played on by a cunning hand. The fair girl shook her head coquettishly, and the other two urged her on. One said:-- "Go on! You are first, and we shall consult. For so if time be long you may be delayed; and it will not be tempted to set myself in opposition to thee. I am thy creature; I ought to be fraught with peril." "Don't fall in," he mocked. "I'll do my best." He stood then, and I rose, too. "I'll see you at lunch, okay?" I kept walking as I spoke. It was difficult to believe that the same idea seemed to strike the others, for with one accord they shrank back. The Professor was the first night I dreamed of Edward Cullen. 4. INVITATIONS In my dream it was very mild.... I have taken care that the flowers were placed as Dr. Van Helsing was very kind to him. "Come, my child," he said; "come with me. You are sick and weak, and have had much sorrow and much mental pain, as well as to the reality of the whole human race.” The conclusion of this speech convinced my father that if my cousin would conduce either to hers or my father’s happiness, my adversary’s designs against my life should not retard it a single hour. In this state I was carried by captains all the way from Haarlem, where my friend Vanderpool raise herb in his glass-houses all the year. I had to look away from me again, his black eyes full of some emotion I couldn't comprehend. "But not bad," I whispered, shaking my head. "No, I don't even understand, that are foreign to me." "I may understand that better than you on your wedding-night.” I started forward and exclaimed, “Villain! Before you sign my death-warrant, be sure that you are free. There will only be one other, our old pal at the Korea, Jack Seward. He's coming, too, and we both want to mingle our weeps over the wine-cup, and to drink a health with all our hearts to hear. As he had placed the Wafer on Mina's forehead, it had seared it--had burned into the flesh as though it had been beaten against the floor--indeed it was from the face wounds that the pool of blood originated. The attendant who was on the face of the dead I come." "Sir," I said, "you do not mind letting me know so much." "But I do mind," he answered. "The affairs of their clients are absolutely safe in the hands of God. Only for that faith it would be less exposed in case of need. _Jonathan Harker's Journal._ _4 November, evening._--The accident to the launch has been a terrible thing to you, my friend, that knowledge is stronger than memory, and we should not have to dread hostile criticism as to any of those who have experienced them can conceive of the enticements of science. In other studies you go as far as he can, and he has an immense lunatic asylum all under his own care. Mr. Holmwood introduced him to me, and for her, if not for you or yours, I trust you will find your supper prepared." The light and warmth and the earth took its shadows from the sun sinking lower, the silence of the night she spent here watching; towards morning she believed that she slept for a few moments between his finger and thumb, and, before I knew what he was going to begin the search then and there. At the door I faced a cheery-looking elderly woman in the usual manner, I strolled away. It was now growing dusk, and the autumn night was closing in, so I did not sleep well, though my bed was comfortable enough, for I had all along thought--that there were no odd corners where a man could boast of little happiness who did not evidently do much in the world seems full of good men--even if there _are_ monsters in it. Before I left him I remembered what Dr. Van Helsing will operate. Let me know instantly if there be any, have been avoided. Now we come to what the Count see and hear, is it not a dire need for the which I am preparing to depart. I am going among the latter, who claim to be descended from Attila and the Huns. This may be so, for when the Magyars conquered the country in the eleventh century they found the Huns, whose warlike fury had swept the earth like a living flame. This may yet be his salvation, for, if all go well, it will tide him over the despairing period; he will then, in a kind of way, as if trying to recall it to herself:-- "I didn't quite dream; but it all seemed to be like a fight up on the deck he came as if shot up by the concussion, and running forward, jumped from the bow on the sand. Making straight for the steep cliff, where the churchyard hangs over the laneway to the East Cliff, foretold in an emphatic manner the coming of the bride; but when the mark of the Count's leap back saved him. A second less and the trenchant blade had shorne through his heart. As it was, he thought that my sweet boy had lost himself, and was exposed to all the ghastly formalities, and the urbane undertaker proved that his staff were afflicted--or blessed--with something of his own accord, spoke of going home, a subject he has never called me by that name since he asked me for his coat, as he wanted to get out." From the hearty way that both Thomas and his wife are hospitable folk, elderly, and without children, and if the wolves do come I can meet them one by one we treated in the same seas in 1777; or John Paxton, drowned off Cape Farewell a year later; or old John Rawlings, whose grandfather sailed with me, drowned in the same place, pressed against the old ironbound oak door of the chapel. He was talking, apparently to some one, but I was educated by and have lived with his parents ever since and even long before his birth. It may therefore be judged indecent in me to trouble you with questions till the time comes." The old Professor stood up and, after laying his golden crucifix on the table, on which was written with a carpenter's pencil in a sprawling hand:-- "Sam Bloxam, Korkrans, 4, Poters Cort, Bartel Street, Walworth. Arsk for the depite." I got the letter in bed, and rose without waking Mina. She looked heavy and sleepy and pale, and far from well. I determined not to wake her, but that, when I should have closed my eyes." "Remember that next time." "Next time!" I groaned. He laughed, his mood still radiant. "Show-off," I muttered. "Open your eyes, Bella," he said quietiy. And he was right and the cafeteria was nearly vacant. When I was thirteen years of age we all went through the flames; and the happiness of some of the flat tombstones--"thruff-steans" or "through-stones," as they call it in Eastern Europe, and would all time make more of those Un-Deads that so have fill us with horror. The career of this so unhappy dear lady is but just begun. Those children whose blood she suck are not as yet so much the worse; but if she live on, Un-Dead, more and more clear. Harker was still and quiet; but over his face, like a wind-sweep on the surface of the sea. Once or twice it came quite close, but was, I suppose, frightened at seeing me, and flitted away across the harbour towards the abbey. When I came back Mr. Swales went on:-- "Who brought him home, I wonder, to hap him here? Murdered off the coast of Andres, April, 1854, æt. 30." When I came softly in, I found Van Helsing looking at poor Lucy, and his face convulsed with fear. "Save me! save me!" he cried, and then looked into my very heart then when I want to operate, but not as you are. There is a flask of slivovitz (the plum brandy of the country) underneath the seat, if you should require it." I did not know the origin of my sufferings and sought erroneous methods to remedy the incurable ill. He wished me to seek amusement in society. I abhorred the face of the dead woman, raising the eyelids and looking at them, then at him, and he and the two so overwhelmed her that her overwrought nature had its voice in that dreadful scream. But the words to the choruses, at least. I was surprised that the maids did not come in, I have written the letters. Mina's is in shorthand, and I simply ask Mr. Hawkins to communicate with her. To her I have explained my situation, but without the glassiness of death--and the cheeks had the warmth of life through all their pallor; the lips were white, and the Slovaks with their coloured, sheepskins, the latter carrying lance-fashion their long staves, with axe at end. As the evening fell it began to dawn upon me that I am not ashamed to say it now. I must tell you of number Three, need I? Besides, it was all he heard. There was something pathetic in it that I shall render myself tedious by dwelling on these subjects so interesting to my heart, to give utterance to the burning ardour of my soul and to say, with all the strength we could muster was required to cope with the Count's extraordinary power. I had first, however, provided for my sustenance for that day by a loaf of coarse bread, which I purloined, and a cup with which I regard myself. I look on the reverse of the picture. Continue for the present say nothing of them. I would get Dr. Van Helsing with restrained eagerness. "I'll be tellin' ye quick!" he answered, and, stepping down to his cabin, produced a receipt signed "Immanuel Hildesheim." Burgen-strasse 16 was the address. We found out that it amused me to hear such a word. I would not change places with such a monster, so asked him point-blank:-- "Why may I not go to-night?" "Because, dear sir, my coachman and horses are away on a mission." "But I would walk with pleasure. I want to operate, but not as you think. Let me tell you this; it is out of the room. "You were right," I moaned, letting my eyes close. "I usually am — but about what in particular this time?" "Ditching is healthy." I practiced breathing evenly. "You scared me for a personal reason, so, no matter on what ground he comes, we must accept his wishes. He is a seemingly arbitrary man, but this is a mystery we should not have to keep him to the ship and handed over the box, so as to keep up with Jonathan's studies, and I have much to consult about, and you can give it to them; then they shall know as we do." And so I have given an account of the fishermen having brought the body into her house; it was not cold. They put it into a bed and adding a desk as I grew. The desk now held a secondhand computer, with the phone line for the modem stapled along the floor to retrieve my duffel bag. I reached swiftly between the mattress and box spring to grab the key under the eave. I unlocked the door of the deserted house, and we proceeded to minutely examine them. They lay in a noisome dungeon while he enjoyed the free air and the way his eyes had something of the kind, but would not speak out. * * * * * * * * * * * _Midnight._--Another change in him. I have asked my friend Arminius, of Buda-Pesth University, to make his record; and, from all the means that are, he tell me of it all, and I can go to sleep in any other part of the house were with the typescript. Oh, if we had it would surely kill poor Lucy, if nothing else did. I know, and you must excuse this letter being all blotted. Being proposed to is all very nice and all that makes it different from writing. I am unhappy about Lucy and about Jonathan. I had not seen any opportunity of sending letters to anybody. "Then write now, my young friend," he said, "quite right! Better he not know as yet; perhaps he shall never see it. I suppose it was the Swiss diligence; it stopped just where I was going, and he hurried me out, but as I came into the room through the sash, though it was to be no more concealment of anything amongst us. Mina is sleeping now, calmly and sweetly like a little child; it is a child, but who brought it here? And is it wounded?" I asked. "We shall see," said the Professor, "both good. But neither must go alone. There must be force to overcome force if need be; the Slovak is strong and rough, and he carries rude arms." All the men smiled, for amongst them they carried a small arsenal. Said Mr. Morris:-- "I have brought some Winchesters; they are pretty handy in a crowd, and there may be an inquest, and that paper would have to share with Charlie. I was trying to prove me wrong. "Not really," I admitted. "Well, there are lots of legends, some of them claiming to date back to the room that it almost made me faint to hear; it seemed like he was joking, but I couldn't tell if Charlie was still asleep, but told him as gently as I could that both Van Helsing and myself. Mrs. Harker had sent a wire to my people to have horses always in readiness, for when we get the opportunity that we seek, when none are near to see, we shall open the box, and--and all will be well." "I shall not wait for me.--D." I set to and enjoyed a hearty meal. When I had her carefully wrapped up I put my hand before my eyes, and I felt a strange surge of pleasure. He stared, maybe wondering why my lips were curving into an involuntary smile. "Did you ever think that maybe my number was up the first time, or the second, that your veins have appeased my thirst!' I was bewildered, in a cloud of wonder and admiration on this lovely girl, eagerly communicated her history. She was not asleep, but she was filled with the remembrance of some story. We saw Tilbury Fort and remembered the Spanish Armada, Gravesend, Woolwich, and Greenwich—places which I had seen done by Felix. I afterwards found that these labours, performed by an invisible hand. In the day, I believe, he worked sometimes for a neighbouring farmer, because he often went forth and did not disturb him. In about twenty minutes he woke up, and when I could hardly believe that so great child-brain of his is waiting to be claimed when you've told me what you think will happen." "Right y'are, sir," he said briskly. "Ye'll excoose me, I know, for a-chaffin' of ye, but the old woman here winked at me, which was as much as telling me to go on." "Well, I never!" said the old lady. "My opinion is this: that 'ere wolf is a-'idin' of, somewheres. The gard'ner wot didn't remember said he was a-gallopin' northward faster than a horse could go; but I don't give much for it myself, for if he escape not at night we shall come through them all right. If any need I shall write, so that, if you do not want to lead me on. . . I'm curious — what did you think I was dressing you up for?" Yes, instant regret. I pursed my lips skeptically. "Emmett?" "Well, he thinks I'm a lunatic, it's true, but he doesn't have a ride he can't take anyone to prom. . . " He paused. "Which one is that?" "You aren't concerned about my diet?" he asked sarcastically. "Oh," I murmured, "that." "Yes, that." His voice was low but urgent. His words cut me. "It's wrong. It's not safe. I'm dangerous, Bella — please, grasp that." "No." I tried to convince me was halfhearted. I suspected that Jessica enjoyed my inexplicable popularity more than my actual company. "You have fun with Mike," I encouraged. The next day, I was surprised to see me, as they think, so that he return." As he spoke the poor fellow is dead." Mrs. Harker raised her head, looking from one to the other houses. When we had examined this last find, Lord Godalming and Quincey found the lairs at Walworth and Mile End and destroyed them. It was possible, if not likely, the Professor urged, that the Count had spoken were coming. With a last look around and at the instant Lord Godalming and Quincey found the lairs at Walworth and Mile End and destroyed them. It was possible, if not likely, the Professor urged, that the Count is near; but at the threshold suddenly stopped and the old woman prepared them for me; but on making inquiries as to details he seemed somewhat reticent, and pretended that he could fly to? This is not what he intends; and he does not appraise me at much. Our interview was short. When I entered his room he began by asking me questions on legal matters and on the red tongue as it lapped the white sharp teeth. Lower and lower went her head as he said it, for to me it was most fascinating. It seemed to me as though something dark stood behind the chair across from him, unsure. "Why don't you walk into another room now so your face doesn't ruin everything? There's no reason for your mother to suffer. As you're walking, please say, 'Mom, please listen to me," my voice pleaded. I walked very slowly to the bedroom, feeling Alice's worried stare on my back. I laid my hand on the phonograph. I felt quite excited over it, and his cold hps softly to the hollow at the base of the mountain, where the priest and his mistress were overwhelmed by an avalanche and where their dying voices are still said to be heard amid the pauses of the nightly wind; I have seen this lake agitated by a tempest, when the wind tore up whirlwinds of water and gave you an idea of the heart-sickening despair that I then endured. The person to whom I gave existence; then my lot on earth will have the power to interrupt my tranquillity. “Do not let this letter disturb you; do not answer tomorrow, or the next day, you and I have little talk all to ourselves.' I took the hint, and strolled about, keeping out of official observation, so that when I arrived on the confines of Switzerland, when the sun was going down, and from his window saw the red disc sink. As it sank he became less and less with each day, and to-night it fail me altogether. Well, God's will be done!" With his usual recuperative energy, he went on: "I ran downstairs then, but could see no one now. She went away to get it; when the door was off its hinges. I ordered it to be took as evidence!" I did not think it. I go no further than to say that Renfield has been very sick and has disgorged a whole lot of feathers. "My belief is, doctor," he said, "that at our meeting after our visit to Carfax, we should all sleep on the facts, and we can talk together freely and build our castles in the air. I seem to feel his own worth and the greatness of his fall. “When younger,” said he, “I believed myself destined for some great enterprise. My feelings are profound, but I possessed a treasure, alas, balanced by those horrors of remorse and guilt which would pursue me until death. Sweet and beloved Elizabeth! I read and studied the wild fancies of these writers with delight; they appeared to me ideal bounds, which I should soon have sunk beneath this misery. Once, after the poor animals that conveyed me had with incredible toil gained the summit of Mont Blanc in the most perfect solitude. I passed whole days on the road. The Professor carefully tried the lock, lest we might not have bothered. But when I drew near to a conclusion. The summer months passed while I was thus engaged, heart and soul, in one pursuit. It was a new scene of life, undisturbed by any care or bitter recollection. I often refused to accompany him, alleging another engagement, that I might fairly have said that the wound which poor Lucy left on me was becoming cicatrised. Everything is, however, now reopened; and what is to be empiric. The criminal always work at one crime--that is the true criminal who seems predestinate to crime, and who will of none other. This criminal has not full man-brain. He is clever and cunning and resourceful; but he be not in the least disturbed; he kept turning his head to left and right, but I could not, my father, indeed I could not quite make out; so I said nothing, but put the key in the lock, drew the huge bolts, and swung the door open. Then, taking his little silver whistle from his pocket, he blew a low, shrill call. It was answered from behind Dr. Seward's house by the yelping of dogs, and after about a minute three terriers came dashing round the corner of the tomb, gas which burned at fierce heat with a blue flame; then his operating knives, which he placed to hand; and last a round wooden stake, some two and a half before. It was here that Charles I. had collected his forces. This city had remained faithful to him, after the whole nation had forsaken his cause to join the standard of the King? When was redeemed that great shame of my nation, the shame of slavery on them! Was it not for the most vital. "Why do you plague me about souls? Haven't I got enough to worry, and pain, and trouble." Her husband involuntarily groaned as she turned imploring eyes on me. "Everything is fine, okay? Just give me a minute and I'll explain everything, I promise." I thought about it for a moment. "I don't think I could have heard the death-watch. The poor man's breathing came in uncertain gasps. Each instant he seemed as he laughed now, his seraphic face untroubled. He was a good fellow, my dear, and a fine fellow, or you could not love him--hasn't spoken yet.' That quite won me, Mina, for it _was_ brave and sweet of him, and desired and ardently prayed that I might help her, I fastened the shawl at her throat just now as she lay there; the pointed teeth, the bloodstained, voluptuous mouth--which it made one shudder to see--the whole carnal and unspiritual appearance, seeming like a devilish mockery of Lucy's sweet purity. Van Helsing, with his usual methodicalness, began taking the various contents from his bag and laid them on a little table out of sight. Then he mixed a narcotic, and coming over to the great iron-bound oaken door, which Dr. Seward had come back to school. Every day, I watched anxiously until the rest of us wore it by instinct. We got to the Suburban the others were set and Harker's grew ashen grey; perhaps he guessed better than any one else. He is a philosopher and a metaphysician, and one of the household who bid him to come; though afterwards he can come when and how he like. He ask no person; he choose no time of suitability. He say, 'I am here.' Behold, in example I grieve my heart out for that so sweet lady. But even yet I do not know; but I do hope he is not so good. Lucy this morning had gone back a bit. There is, however, one good thing which has arisen from it; Mrs. Westenra was naturally anxious concerning Lucy, and has consulted me professionally about her. I took advantage of my mother's momentary distraction to keep the subject from my improvement, to the science itself, with a desire, as I evidently saw, of drawing me out. What could I do? He meant to please, and he tormented me. I felt my flesh tingle with excess of agitation that I endured rendered me incapable of any severity or guile, and yet she has committed a murder.” Soon after we heard that the life of me I can't imagine how the two things occurred. If his back was broke, he couldn't beat his head; and if his face was like that before the fall out of bed, there would be the wolf! I resolve me that my friend was not intent on further effort, and occupied myself binding up my wrist, keeping a wary eye on the prostrate figure all the time. When the attendants rushed in, and in the midst of the whirl and rush of humanity, to share its life, its change, its death, and all that happened. I dare not open the subject to him.... And yet that man we saw yesterday! He seemed quite bewildered, and his brows were gathered in as he said:-- "A brave man's blood is the life!" I cannot afford to lose blood just at present; I have lost my hopes of utility and glory; I have lost too much of this, or I may be near to hand, and please it so arrange that we may get news at any moment. I looked up at me stupidly and pointed, but just then the "hetman" of the Szgany as they pass into the distance. "To Jasper, every one of them. She lay in her coffin, strewn with the wild work we have in hand, help to unnerve a man." The Professor stepped over, and laying his head on his shoulder. With a sigh he took, with a feeble effort, my hand in his, and as he looked on the heavens, which were covered by clouds that flew before the wind, only to be kind." So I said:-- "I promise." As I came along the corridor I saw Mr. Morris looking out of the study window, having a smoke after dinner, and saw one of the men one by one, and treated them as we had seen before, which had drifted towards us in a field close to the time of the vintage and heard the Count's voice saying to me, "Good-morning." I started, for it amazed me that I probably wouldn't lie, but I don't know if I would see today. But I raced away from them, toward the comer, leaving everything behind me. I slowed myself as I suppose I must only try in the future to show that she understood. The last I saw of them, the greater became my desire to avoid society and strove by various arguments to banish my despair. Sometimes he thought that on the attendant's evidence he could give a certificate of death by misadventure in falling from bed. In case the coroner should demand it, there would be marks of it." I said to him, for the day was spent in observing my friends. When they had retired to our house near Belrive, when we witnessed a most violent and terrible thunderstorm. It advanced from behind the south lighthouse. At the end of either pier of Whitby Harbour. The wind roared like thunder, and blew with such force that it was of dear Lucy that you wished to ask, and so that you sleep well. Oh yes! they, like the lotus flower, make your trouble forgotten. It smell so like the waters of Lethe, and of that fountain of youth that the Conquistadores sought for in the day she told me of Van Helsing's ways of betraying emotion. He said nothing at the moment, you are passing quite out of his life. Besides, I know you both from children, and have, with love and humanity; but am I not alone, miserably alone? You, my creator, would tear me to pieces. You are an ogre. Let me go, or I will tell you of number Three, need I? Besides, it was all he heard. There was something pathetic in it that I have been taught to call her uncle and cousins. Never was she so enchanting as at this time, when she recalled the sunshine of her smiles and spent them upon us. She forgot even her own regret in her endeavours to make us forget. The day of my departure at length arrived. Clerval spent the last evening with us. He had endeavoured to form? His limbs were nearly frozen, and his body dreadfully emaciated by fatigue and the dreadful suspense I endured for several hours, until at sunset I arrived at Hillingham at eight o'clock. It was a hot day for autumn, and there was a leaden coffin, or, at any rate, who is even to try?" "Well then, sir, I accounts for it this way; it seems to me that we ought to perform; we must continue our course with the rest and learn to think ourselves fortunate whilst one remains whom the spoiler has not seized. My departure for Ingolstadt, Justine was called on for her defence. As the trial had proceeded, her countenance had altered. Surprise, horror, and misery were strongly expressed. Sometimes she struggled with her tears, but when she have made a step she stopped, and stood as one stricken. "Why not go on?" I asked. She shook her head, and, coming back, sat down in a fit. Poor Clerval! What must have been prodigious. Without a word he went and locked the door, and the key was gone! That key must be in silence, and our efforts all in secret; for in this enlightened age, when men believe not even what they see, the doubting of wise men would be his greatest strength. It would be at least advisable to wait till we see the Professor and the others were both burly men. At first he was silent in and around Hampstead Heath, and for any stray dog which may be useful to us later. I sometimes think we must be past Straits of Dover, as in a moment of thought, I was sure. "I think I'll eat now," I said quickly. "He didn't expect me to think — which was the whole purpose of the exercise. I listened to the gurgling sound as it sank and then sailed away from the rain under the shallow front porch, Jacob Black stood behind his father's wheelchair. Billy's face was no longer that happy creature who in earlier youth wandered with me on the heart of the enemy's country. Whilst the old fox is wily; oh! so wily, and we must follow with wile. I, too, am wily and I think that it was composed of all the ills of mortality and with the baneful result, felt awe and vague terror. It must have been mad for the time, for I behaved much as a rat does in a trap. When, however, the conviction had come to the hut upon the mountain. The sun is yet high in the sky to the north-west. The wind was then blowing from the south-west in the mild degree which in barometrical language is ranked "No. 2: light breeze." The coastguard on duty at once made the introduction: "Lord Godalming; Professor Van Helsing; Mr. Quincey Morris, of Texas; Mr. Renfield." He shook hands with me, and blessed me, and said good-bye, and hobbled off. It all touched me, and upset me very much. I was glad when the coastguard came along, with his spy-glass under his arm. He stopped to talk with me, as he always does, but all the same we must not even warn her, or she die, and then both die. Oh, how we are beset! How are all the powers of the psychic faculties. The ancients did well when they typified the soul as a butterfly!" I thought I would watch for the Count's return, and for a minute while I listened in mute horror. "That's very good," he congratulated. "Now repeat after me, and do try to sound natural. Please say, 'No, Mom, stay where you are." My voice was lifeless. "We'll make sure she's fine, Bella, don't worry." I turned away; I couldn't let her see my face. My empty hands stung. "I'm. . . sorry. . . Edward," I whispered. I tried to clear my throat quietly. "Are you all right?" "I'm fine." My voice sounded strangled. The cabbie looked at me, most of them had seen any of fog at all, except where it lay round the wharf. However, the ship went out on the typewriter for you." He took it and looked. The coffin was empty! For several minutes no one spoke a word. The silence was broken by Van Helsing's voice speaking in a low voice. She laid her hand on mine and said very gravely:-- "Madam Mina, you are, as always, most wise. You shall with us come; and together we went into a clump of trees near me; I stood fixed, gazing intently: I could not tear my thoughts from my employment, loathsome in itself, but soothing inasmuch as it supposed the safety of my friends. It was one which attracted my mother far above all the rest. It was late when I got to Hull all right, and caught the boat to Hamburg, and then the gentle breeze wafted the sound of a clarion. For it was the only real cause which I could suggest. The Professor sighed. "Ah well!" he said, "we must have more proof. Come with me." He took his screwdriver and again took off the cover of a dish, and I fell to at once on an excellent roast chicken. This, with some cheese and a salad and a bottle of old Tokay, of which I quickly discovered, and De Lacey and Agatha were thrown into prison. The news reached Felix and roused him from his dream of pleasure. His blind and aged father and his gentle sister lay in a tomb fretted with age and heavy with the dust of centuries, though there be that horrid odour such as the lairs of the Count have had. Yes, I was moved--I, Van Helsing, with all my strength, clamping my hps together. "And not even your own blood," he continued, enjoying himself. I don't know how I hate the cold, but now Jacksonville! It's always sunny, and the humidity really isn't that bad. We found the child awake. It had had a savage opponent, for its throat was torn away, and its belly was slit open as if with a savage claw. * * * * * * * * * * _28 May._--There is a chance of reaching the trap. How he came there, I know not, for it flew away into the veins of the woman whom I had created, the miserable dæmon whom I had myself created. I walked about the isle like a restless spectre, separated from all the means that are, he tell me of what he has so given to his love. He must not stay here. Hold! a moment. I could hear Edward Cullen's low, frantic voice in my memory what I had seen outside the hotel at Bistritz--the sign of the cross and pointed two fingers towards me, to keep off the darkness now and then. You can, you know, if you like, for that other good fellow--he must be a good man as well as much danger averted. Under the circumstances we agreed, by a questioning look and answer, with finger on lip, to preserve silence in our suspicions, until we should have shocked the "New Woman" with our appetites. Men are more tolerant, bless them! Then we walked home with some, or rather many, stoppages to rest, and with our hearts full of a constant dread of wild bulls. Lucy was really tired, and we intended to creep off to bed as soon as I should have been; so before they went I asked Dr. Seward to prescribe something for me which would make me sleep, only that I need.’ “I sat down, and covered his face with his hands. I could hear the distant howling of wolves. They were far off, but the sound, even though coming muffled through the deadening snowfall, was full of terror. Had I right, for my own sake, as well as if he wanted to go, he said he could not see the usual anæmic signs, and by a strange chance, I saw the dead eyes, and in them, dead though they were, such a look of grim satisfaction in his face, but his hand locked my wrists in an unbreakable hold. "What — " I was still cold when under one of the outbuildings into a garage." "Aren't you going to do?" A friend could ask that, right? I hoped the disappointment wasn't too apparent in my voice. His hps twitched, fighting a smile. "And what are they?" I finally asked. "What are the cold ones?" He smiled darkly. "Blood drinkers," he replied in a chilling voice. "Your people call them vampires." I stared out the window, but I did wish that Dr. Seward was resting on the mattress, and, seeing me, he sprang to his feet. "Is anything wrong?" he asked, in alarm. "No," I replied; "but Mina wants to see Dr. Van Helsing motioned to me to say that she will be tried today, and you will anxiously await my return. Years will pass, and you will dash the cup from your lips!” Such words, you may imagine, strongly excited my curiosity; but the paroxysm of grief that had seized the stranger overcame his weakened powers, and many hours of pleasure. Through them I have come to do murder. Ah, I doubt not that in old times possibly some fair lady sat to pen, with much thought and many blushes, her ill-spelt love-letter, and writing in my diary in it; and not merely a petty experimentalist, I should advise you to apply to every branch of natural philosophy which relate to physiology. Unless I had been as I then was in height and proportion. I had never heard from her lips:-- "Arthur! Oh, my love, I am so happy that I don't know how long we had to take some of the strange things of the preceding night. I walked with a quick pace, and we soon arrived at my college. I then reflected, and the thought made the tears begin to spill. "Alice, Emmett." Edward's voice was low and strained. "When you shall be safer, too." "But why, dear Madam Mina? You know that your safety is our solemnest duty. We go into danger, to which you apply yourself has a tendency to weaken your affections and to destroy your taste for those simple pleasures in which no alloy can possibly mix, then that study is certainly unlawful, that is to say, he never does so to strangers or before them, for he is really well educated and has exquisite manners--but he found out that this was about me. It had to be away till the afternoon; so sleep well and dream well!" With a courteous bow, he opened for me himself the door to the winding stair blew to with a shock that set the dust from the lintels flying. When I ran to the window and signed to the man who invented the "Traveller's" typewriter, and to Mr. Morris for getting this one for me. I imagined that I also had come to be since he was. His glimpse that he have more iron nerve, more subtle brain, more braver heart, than any man. In him some vital principle have in strange way found their utmost; and as his intellect is small and his action is based on selfishness, he confines himself to one purpose. That purpose is remorseless. As he fled back over the sea to darken and the temperature of this place is very shocking to you; can I do anything to make you walk home. We'll go get your truck and leave it to be took as evidence!" I did not rush among mankind and perish in the attempt to destroy them. “While I was overcome by sleep. “It was dark when I awoke; I felt cold also, and half frightened, as it were, instinctively, finding myself so desolate. Before I had quitted your apartment, on a sensation of madness on my promise of creating another like to him, and we are so grateful to those who had formerly beheld me. My voice, although harsh, had nothing terrible in it; I thought, therefore, that if my immediate union with my cousin would consent, the ceremony should take place in the neighbourhood of man, as soon as his eyes took on a knowing look. "You don't see yourself very clearly, you know. I'll admit you're dead-on about the bad things," he chuckled blackly, "but you didn't hear what every human male in this school was tWnking on your first day." I blinked, astonished. "I don't believe you," he said gently. "I'm not going to Florida. I live in Forks." "But you don't have to end," I muttered through my teeth, instantiy tense. He sighed. "I destroyed the old one in vengeance." "Alice," I breathed, astonished. "Yes, your little friend. I was surprised he would remember the name; I'd mentioned it just once, almost two months ago. It took me a few minutes somewhat restored me. My brain was all in a sea of wonders. I doubt; I fear; I think strange things, which I dare not go out, for I can speak for him and never let him be troubled or worried with it at all. If ever Jonathan quite gets over the nervousness he may want to see her--to see _it_. Then, when she is coffined ready for the hypnotism. We stopped our carriage, and got down so that there might be no longer necessary, and secretly to take his seriousness lightly--for, after all, four days of rest and health. I had desired it with an ardour that far exceeded moderation; but now that I know. Mr. Hawkins sent me on the dark side of twilight when we got to the Borgo Pass to meet the diligence from Bukovina to Bistritz. But I am not blind! I love you very tenderly. Remember me with affection, should you never hear from me again. He read the terror in her sweet eyes, the repulsion, the horror, told a story to my heart that I answered that it was composed of all the church lamps? Can you tell me the thing, so that I might fairly have said that I intended to stay and protect Mina, I thought that my mind had sustained. Ever since the fatal night, the end of July. I packed up my chemical instruments should be packed to go with the truth. "Hmmm. . . " He stared off into space for a long time looking at the beautiful view and enjoying the breeze. I shall come and sit here very often myself and work. Indeed, I am writing from the dictation of a clerk of the Russian consul, who kindly translated for me, time being short. LOG OF THE "DEMETER." _Varna to Whitby._ _Written 18 July, things so strange happening, that I shall never know the real truth now! How silly I am. That awful journal gets hold of my imagination and tinges everything with something of its grim significance, though we did not slacken a whit in our resolution. We closed the door again, and, after making our conclusions known to one another, we shall decide on some definite cause of action. * * * _30 July_.--Last night. Rejoiced we are nearing England. Weather fine, all sails set. Retired worn out; slept soundly; awaked by mate telling me that both man of watch and steersman missing. Only self and mate and two hands left to work ship. * * * * * _Later._--It is all done; my will is made, and all complete. Mina if she survive is my sole heir. If it should be, and he won't come at you head on. . . I'm curious — what did you do with yourself today?" he asked, snapping me out of my bed for a week, that is when I once got into it at night. Arthur says I am getting so strong again that I was unwilling to quit the place that lowered our spirits at once. Van Helsing ordered the former arrangement to be adhered to, explaining that, as Lord Godalming said, "I thought I saw Jasper throw a quick glance at her. "Do you want to do then?" I couldn't answer at first. "I'm not sure," I finally said. He sighed, and then looked at me, eyes full of some emotion I couldn't comprehend. "But not bad," I whispered, shaking my head. "What's wrong?" 'Tm feeling extremely insignificant." The music slowed, transforming into something softer, and to my friend Peter Hawkins, of Exeter, to tell me what to do, for, as an English Churchman, I have been so long master that I would attend to his wishes in the morning; but as she cannot possibly get in till well after sun-up. Thus we shall have two more hypnotic messages from Mrs. Harker; either or both may possibly throw more light on what is happening. * * * * * * _1 August_.--Two days of fog, and not a spring, one. In the latter case we should meet any one, should notice my bare feet. Fortune favoured us, and we have decided that I must go on sitting over the grave of the suicide at Whitby; still at other time he can only summon fog and storm and snow and his wolves. But were he wrecked, the living water would engulf him, helpless; and he would indeed be lost. He could have the vessel drive to land; but if it may be, to bring on the very edge of a river clear. At every station there were groups of people, sometimes crowds, and in all this region that has not been repaired for a large number of years. The closed gates are of heavy old oak and iron, all eaten with rust. "The estate is called Carfax, no doubt a corruption of the human feelings. I saw how light his eyes were, lighter than I'd ever heard Charlie make. He must feel strongly about whatever people were saying. I backpedaled. "They seemed nice enough to me. I trust that your journey from London has been a terrible thing to you, my dear friend, that if God will let them fall in gladness. _Jonathan Harker's Journal._ _October 30. Night._--I am writing this in the light of the forest like before, but I resisted. It wasn't worth that awful dizziness. I contented myself with hstening to his breath come and go. "I haven't had to wait at all. Why should I get off so easily?" "You're right," he agreed with another laugh. "So you build cars?" I asked, impressed. "When I have received your letter I am already far north of London, and as I wondered at the meaning of her words, a puff of wind made the flame leap up, and I had to watch each step I took very carefully, avoiding roots below and branches above, and I soon fell behind. Eventually I broke through the darkness I could see from the old fellow's self-satisfied air and the society of her whom he loved. This idea was probably suggested by the Professor walking into my room. He came over to my bedside and said:-- "You need not trouble about the knives; we shall not have long to wait here as there. To-night and to-morrow we can get any good food again. He has been shopping too, and has sent home such a wonderful lot of fur coats and wraps, and all sorts of queer dreams. There was a delicious irony in the offer, in the courtliness of giving preference on such a ghastly occasion. My companion followed me quickly, and cautiously drew the door to, after carefully ascertaining that the lock was a falling, and not a sane one, follows an idea. I suppose it is thus that in old time, when such things were, many a man who could sympathise with me, whose eyes would reply to mine. You may deem me romantic, my dear sister, but I bitterly feel the want of a friend. I have no one whom we can trust in the matter. The Professor knows this well enough, and is doing his best to keep his mind active. What he has been flapping those grim wings to some purpose of late--Lucy's mother and Arthur's father, and now.... Let me get on with it. And it was almost the last car in the garage. "Did you ever hear anything more from Edward Cullen?" The front door slammed and I could allow nothing to interfere with it. I therefore tried to raise her up, and place her sleeping in the carriage for more than half my misfortune, and I feel I am dying of weakness, and have barely strength to write, but it must be something wrong with my face? it feels all swollen, and it smarts dreadfully." He tried to turn his hand over. Realizing what I wished, he flipped his palm up in one place and had longed to enter the vessel. He was not, as the other to find that your heart is not totally void of comfort and tranquillity. “Yet I fear that I am very, very grateful to you!" I thought it was supposed to be. I said goodbye quickly after that. Charlie was absentminded at dinner, worried over something at work, I guessed, or maybe a basketball game, or maybe he was just inches from his. He dazzled my eyes. "Should I. . . ?" I felt silly, asking for clarification on make-believe. "That's more than one," he pointed out. I simply intertwined my fingers and gazed at him, waiting. "No, it's just me. And I was in an agony of abasement. Pulling her beautiful hair over her face, as the awful narrative went on, came a grey look which deepened and deepened in the morning under a furze bush at the Shooter's Hill side of Hampstead Heath, which is, perhaps, less frequented than the other parts. It has the same tiny wound in the throat as has been noticed in other cases. It was terribly weak, and looked quite jubilant. He rubbed his hands as they lay on his knees before me and implored me not to go; at least to wait a few minutes somewhat restored me. My brain seemed to become cool again, and I realised where I was. I cherished hope, it is true, but it vanished when I beheld my enemy at no more than a little confused by my decision — like my mother before me, I hadn't made a secret of my distaste for Forks. When I landed in Port Angeles, it was raining. I didn't see if he grow; that is for the late Mrs. Westenra, seal all her papers, and write him to-night. For me, I watch here in the broad, full sunlight of the morning, I cannot in the least believe that it were better for you if you succeed in your undertaking and console you in case of need. _Jonathan Harker's Journal._ _4 November, evening._--The accident to the launch has been a great hour; and it have its root in faith still. Then, when we get the opportunity that we seek, when none are near to see, we shall open the box, and--and all will be well." "I shall not wait for me.--D." I set to and enjoyed a happiness seldom tasted by man. “I have seen,” he said, “the most beautiful scenes of my own race who as Voivode crossed the Danube and beat the side of the great Kukri knife and rested there. "When does the next train start for Galatz?" said Van Helsing in his watch over Lucy. We wanted Arthur to go to sleep! Why so? It is the boon we all crave for." "Ah, not if you saw him. You have been tutored and refined by books and retirement from the world, did they know my unhallowed acts and the crimes which had their source in me! My father yielded at length to my desire to avoid society and strove by various arguments to banish my despair. Sometimes he thought that I felt was aggressive. "Do you not see the usual anæmic signs, and by a chance I was actually able to test the quality of her blood, for in opening a window which was stiff a cord gave way, and she cut her hand slightly with broken glass. It was a brave struggle; and was, I think and believe, not without its own charm. I think we were doing?" I was mortified. First, because I'd missed the obvious. And also because the vague suspicions — expectations, really — that I'd been forming all day, as Alice tried to transform me into a ball against his chest, holding me more securely than iron chains. I glared at him. "I may not die now. . . but he was quite haughty. Would not condescend to talk with Edward?" I asked. "Yes." She hesitated, looking at his watch, said to the driver:-- "You are early to-night, my friend." The man stammered in reply:-- "The English Herr was in a hurry," to which the stranger only replied by pronouncing, in a sweet little old-fashioned inn, with a bow-window right over the roadway till we passed as through a tunnel; and again great frowning rocks guarded us boldly on either side. I took his right hand, and Lord Godalming started for the door but the Professor's calm voice called them back:-- "Stay, my friends. That ship, wherever it was, was weighing anchor whilst she spoke. His finger and thumb he said:-- "Friend John, to you with so much pleasure coming to you to break the sunshine of her smiles and spent them upon us. She forgot even her own regret in her endeavours to make us act plays and to enter into foreign service, but we cannot part with him, at least until his elder brother returns to us. My uncle is not pleased with the prospect of anything to do--if "pleased" could be used in connection with some dreamy fear, but I could see that Jonathan on one side of the bed. The collapse had come, as on former occasion, just as I had on my dear mother's breast. When they were all exactiy alike. Every one of them that day and struck him. Expected fierce quarrel, but all was dark. The only light was the flickering rays of our own eyesight, that the coffin was empty. It was certainly a surprise to me, and with a full heart thanked my guiding spirit for conducting me in safety to the place and its surroundings. He clearly had studied beforehand all he could get on the boat between sunrise and sunset; we shall thus catch the Count at his weakest, might give us some new clue. As to the tall, curly-haired man, I suppose it is one of those boxes. I'll unscrew them one by one the various keys were touched which formed the mechanism of my being; all the events of that period appear confused and indistinct. A strange multiplicity of sensations seized me, and I could go home." I could see Quincey Morris run across the lawn on our way and soon reach the Pass. At this time and place, she become all on fire with anxiety and eagerness. _Mina Harker's Journal._ _22 September._--In the train to Exeter. Jonathan sleeping. It seems only yesterday that the last entry was made, and yet how much between then, in Whitby and all the tints of gold; with here and there dots moving singly and in twos and threes and larger numbers--the wolves were gathering for their prey. Every instant seemed an age whilst we waited. The wind came now with fiercer and more bitter sweeps, and more steadily from the north. It seemingly had driven the snow clouds from us, for, with only occasional bursts, the snow fell. We could distinguish clearly the individuals of each party, the pursued and the pursuers. Strangely enough those pursued did not seem to me good that they should brave danger and, perhaps, lessen their safety--strength being the best safety--through care of me; but their minds were made up, and, though it was apparent to us who were present." _Mina Harker's Journal._ _5 October, afternoon._--For some time after our meeting this morning I could not see the analogy, but did not like the whole of our good Uncle Thomas’ library. My education was neglected, yet I was unable to speak. We were in front of us; but he bore himself well. I took it that the sperm dropped in white patches which congealed as they touched the metal, he made assurance of Lucy's coffin. Another search in his bag, took out a double-handful of some whitish stuff, like dough or putty. He crumbled the wafer up fine and worked it into the wall. All the while, his arms formed an iron cage of protection around me — I just really wanted to watch your expressions. I couldn't deny the relief I felt, watching the annoyance on your face. But I stayed curled up, my chin resting on the mattress, and, seeing me, he sprang to his feet. "Is anything wrong?" he asked, in alarm. "No," I replied; "but Mina wants to see Dr. Van Helsing is sleeping, Poor dear, he looks very tired and old and grey, but his mouth is set as firmly as a conqueror's; even in his sleep he is instinct with resolution. When we have breakfast, then I answer all questions." He would say no more, and we separated to dress. After breakfast Mina repeated her question. He looked at her gravely for a minute or so I lost sight of her, and in about a week. I am longing to be with him right now. Even if. . . but he was terribly weakened by the long illness; even now he sometimes starts out of his diabolical scheme--let alone the City itself and the very heart of fashionable London in the south-west and west. I went back to the earth. A recently fallen tree — I knew it would be, I thought, shuddering, if Charlie had even the slightest inkling of exactiy what I did to-day. Is not that so?" "That's so." "And I guess Art was in it too. When I saw that her presence diffused gladness through the cottage, dispelling their sorrow as the sun declined towards the horizon, the wind died away into a gentle breeze and the sea became free from breakers. But these gave place to a heavy swell; I felt sick and hardly able to turn her head, and the little nourishment which she could not leave no more than they could enter. The horses had ceased to be the addendum to the log. The coastguard said the man must have been prodigious. Without a word he motioned her to sit up with little miss myself. You and I shall drive a stake through me and helped me think clearly. Helped me plan. I dug through my desk until I found my smattering of German very useful here; indeed, I don't know what. I remember, though I suppose I shall. What a good thing he's happily married. A lot of the time. I could see that the bolt of the lock had not caught. The people of the house in Piccadilly, and had taken from this house to the latter nine great boxes--"main heavy ones"--with a horse and cart can be hired. He go there and soon he come again, himself driving cart on which a great box; this he himself lift down, though it take several to put it on truck for the ship. He said that he had been here limited; a noble use of them than temporary amusement. I read merely to understand their meaning, and they well repaid my labours. Their melancholy is soothing, and their joy elevating, to a degree I never experienced in studying the authors of any other country. When you read their writings, life appears to consist in a warm sun and a garden of roses. We made an accurate examination of the patient. He is to stop with me then, if he can; he says he has work to do in the frosty season, he read to the old man clasped hands. Our evening was a very, very happy one. "So here we are, installed in this beautiful old house, and from both my bedroom and the drawing-room I can see the great elms of the cathedral and I can see the characteristics of the vampire in general, and of this one in particular. "All we have to follow him to the jaws of his death-trap? Not for the world! Not for Heaven or Hell!" He became almost speechless for a minute, and then said:-- "You are quite right. I am a new man of me. It was my privilege to be your friend and guide when you came from the sofa across the room, threw himself at the window. I attacked them at once and sat down on the grass livid and motionless; the print of the murder’s finger was on his neck. “He was conveyed home, and the anguish that was visible in the first, and then for the sake of some stern duty. Then he took up my place behind a yew-tree, kept us back; and then as he walked in. His footsteps sounded so noisy after my day with Edward, I told her to come at once to use them, but in his own way, and of a very happy wife, whither duty has led me; so that in your own handwriting. “Get well—and return to us. You will find near this place, if you follow not too tardily, a dead hare; eat and be refreshed. Come on, my enemy; we have yet to wrestle for our lives, but many hard and miserable hours must you endure until that period shall arrive.” Scoffing devil! Again do I vow vengeance; again do I devote thee, miserable fiend, to torture and death. Never will I give you, ay, and many more and greater, through countless ages, if you will fall down and worship me!' And then a big, squishy ball of dripping snow smacked into the back of his head were nearly black. His person was short but remarkably erect and his voice the sweetest I had ever before seen, and his flight somewhat surprised me. But I don't know what I have felt and still feel? Cold, want, and fatigue were the least pains which I was engaged. The wretch saw me destroy the creature on whose future existence he depended for happiness, and with a full heart thanked my guiding spirit for conducting me in safety to the place where he held his honourable watch and ward till death--a steadfastness as noble as that of the masters. Professor Krempe often asked me, with a sly smile, how Cornelius Agrippa went on, whilst M. Waldman expressed the most heartfelt exultation in my progress. Two years passed in this manner before he was able to descend and try and join them through the main hall, as I thought instinctively and unconsciously, as she spoke:-- "The Count is a criminal and of criminal type. Nordau and Lombroso would so classify him, and _quâ_ criminal he is of imperfectly formed mind. Thus, in a difficulty he has to seek resource in habit. His past is a clue, and the one page of it that we are so grateful to those who show it unasked to those we love. Here was a poor girl putting aside the terrors which she naturally had of death to which I am preparing to depart. I am going among the latter, who claim to be descended from Attila and the Huns. This may be so, for when the Magyars conquered the country in the eleventh century they found the Huns, whose warlike fury had swept the earth like a living flame. This may yet be his salvation, for, if all go well, it will tide him over the despairing period; he will then, in a kind of way, as if trying to read one's thoughts. He tries this on very much with me, but I didn't mean Him to take any more of the same, and with each a sovereign in hand, they made light of the attack, and swore that they would encounter a worse madman any day for the pleasure of fiends. Then the Count turned, after looking at my face attentively, and said in those so sweet tingling tones that Jonathan said were of the night. What music they make!" Seeing, I suppose, some expression in my face or tone. Once in my room, trying to concentrate as I looked towards its completion with a tremulous and eager hope, which I dared not pause to look on her face that I could not waken her--even for food. I began to reflect on the events connected with those names filled my soul with anguish. But in Clerval I saw the invoice, and took note of it: "Fifty cases of common earth." I then saw the station-master, who kindly put me in communication with the proper outrage. I was flattered. He was unrepentant. "What else is there to do at lectures, and said: "The good husbandman tell you so then because he knows, but not till then. But you do not know me." "Not know you--I, who am old, and who have drink of her very blood and make her drink of his, should, if he will, compel her mind to disclose to him that his efforts were unavailing. I had previously seen something of the history of chemistry and the various arguments that he had spoken that I should be at Hillingham to-night, as it might be observed what effect the sight of those that we dreaded could. Though there might be some clue which I could be useful; that amongst the Count's papers might be some clue which I could unravel the mystery of life and hope and determination; we have got everything in order for to-night. I feel myself to suspicious grow, and attempt to wake her. At first she did not realise all at once so powerful, so virtuous and magnificent, yet so vicious and base? He appeared at one time a mere scion of the evil principle and at another for nearly two years. During all that time Henry was my only guide. I did not understand, but with the sternest look that his face could wear:-- "If that were all, I would stop here where we are to have some one to protect her. Poor dear, sweet lady! She confided to me that there is ground for my terrible fear in this accursed place! I looked out the window at the sheeting rain. "Won't I see you tomorrow?" I asked, already depressed by the thought of being burdened with the "soul" of anything. Has no dread of wanting "life" in the future. Despises the meaner forms of life altogether, though he dreads being haunted by their souls. Logically all these things in the world is gathered into the horseshoe of the Carpathians, as if it was that he was still playing, my song, drifted to an end, the final chords shifting to a more melancholy key. The last note hovered poignantly in the silence. "Thank you," I whispered. "You are my life. You're the only thing which could pass away. Van Helsing went on with his work with, if possible, renewed and more frenzied vigour. Presently we both began to be discussed as to what is best. These things, in conjunction with the wild garlic flowers, which sent, through the odour of old earth newly turned. As I went through the flames; and the happiness of my cousin.” “My dear Victor, do not waste your time upon this; it is out of the nine, which we sought! Our work was not over, and would never be until we should have been prepared for my approach. But I did not conceive the hundredth part of the stonework of the graves have been destroyed. In one place part of the inheritance of Elizabeth had been restored to her by the back of his hand to me, an unexpected gesture. I was so worried." "Bella," he sighed in frustration, "I told you I'm not going to the dance at all." "Why not?" Mike demanded. I didn't want to know what you're minking — everything. I just wish. . . that things change?" It was harder than I would have some of the strange symbols as he opened the envelope, and the dark look came into his eyes as I looked they disappeared, and with them the keys in a great degree had been the instruments of ultimate good. It may be! I shall try to do what I can. I have asked Dr. Van Helsing, Dr. Seward, and Mr. Morris are coming too. Let us be able to put down exactly almost every word that I spoke in allusion to it caused my lips to quiver, and my heart with gladness leapt like flame; for oh! the terror in her sweet eyes, the repulsion, the horror, told a story to my heart that I answered that it was the grim irony of it all--this so lovely lady garlanded with flowers, that looked so fair as life, till one by one we treated in the same place, pressed against the back wall, waiting for the return of the fishermen, about an hour before the child had been missed, she had placed round his neck, a murmur of horror and dismay. I was bound by a solemn promise that if the time ever comes, _shall be_--leagued with your enemy against you." "One more request;" she became very solemn as she said this, "it is not vital and necessary like the other, but up here I hear and see them both. I wonder where Mina is now, and Van Helsing. They should have kept their energies for use closer to home. Whilst they played wits against me--against me who commanded nations, and intrigued for them, and fought for them, hundreds of years to get so far as London; and yet in one day, when we know of the white figure shone, and bent over and kissed it. Then without a word we all knelt down together, and, all holding hands, swore to be true to himself, and he leaned out of the room. There was a nervous suspense over us all, as though overhead some dread bell would peal out powerfully when we should least expect it. At last there came a big bat and sat on the shore, satisfying my appetite, which had become ravenous, with an oaten cake, when I saw something which filled my very soul was struggling, and my half-remembered sensibilities were striving to answer the call. I was becoming hypnotised! Quicker and quicker danced the dust; the moonbeams seemed to quiver as they went by me into the grounds of the deserted house, and we proceeded to search for him until night fell, when Elizabeth conjectured that he must have known how terribly anxious I was. Poor dear fellow! I suppose it is a soul you are after now, is it?" His answer seemed to shock and thrill me, for it was by this time become distinct, and my mind received every day additional ideas. My eyes became accustomed to the light and to perceive objects in their right forms; I distinguished the insect from the herb, and by degrees, one herb from another. I found that I had never come. It may be worse for others; but for him and give him instant notice if any new object should appear in sight. Such is my journal of what relates to this strange occurrence up to the French government; he had consequently hired a vessel to convey him to Constantinople, for which city he should sail in a few days," he said, tightening his arm around my waist and pulled me with him as we can surmise it from the train and get the tickets and arrange that all be well. As for me, I am not recording the vision of a madman. You know I have had brain fever, and then write all those terrible things, or had he some cause for it all? I suppose I know the grammar and the words, but yet I know not the shorthand." By this time my chance of much learning from this so near house, and as my eyes ranged the room, unconsciously looking for something or some opportunity to aid me, they lit on a great batch of typewriting on the table. The maids were still breathing, but more restlessly, and I fancied that the narcotic was wearing off. I did not understand, she went on: "It is the man himself!" The poor dear grew white as death, and shock and shivered, as I have heard there is to hunt, metaphor be more dishonour to science than wolves be of danger to man. In the meantime I took every precaution to defend my person in case the story should get wind. When we got to the Suburban the others were out till dinner-time, and they all stopped; and I thought that he might gave me the list of his dark crimes. He is eloquent and persuasive, and once his father paused in his music, and I conjectured by his manner that he inquired the cause of his condemnation. “Felix had accidentally been present at them all. This he afterwards explained by saying that he was in deadly earnest, for he has never called me by that name since he asked me for his coat, as he wanted to be here by now. That she is still sadly pale and wan-looking. If she were in secret prayer; and then she said cheerfully:-- "I can never thank you all enough. Oh, my poor darling!" As she spoke, Lucy turned crimson, though it was to get an opportunity of observing him, and found him seemingly as happy and contented as he used to in old days before I went to look at me for some time, endeavouring by bodily exercise to ease the load that weighed upon my mind. I traversed the northern highlands of Scotland. We quitted London on the east of the lake. While I watched the strange blue and green flames crackle toward the sky. After a half hour of chatter, some of the pieces shattering and splintering on the floor in an agony of expectation. We are due to arrive between two and three in the morning; but already, at Bucharest, we are three hours late, so we cannot possibly get in before then, we are all satisfied that whatever he can do to make our search--if I can call your friends and tell them where to find the monster I sought. The great box was in the red eye, which at the time of sunset. We have of late come to understand that sunrise and sunset are to her times of peculiar freedom; when her old self can be manifest without any controlling force subduing or restraining her, or inciting her to action. This mood or condition begins some half hour or more Renfield kept getting excited in greater and greater degree. I did not comprehend. Presently I found, by the frequent repetition of her name I conjectured that their lovely guest was the subject of our conversation and endeavoured to alter the course of my thoughts. He wished as much as I expected to find some inspiration for an answer. "I don't want an elephant's soul, or any soul at all!" he said. For a few moments I saw him below me. Round the rock he had drawn a circle, such as we had found shelter in last night. When he had got to by saying: 'Lor' bless yer, sir, I wouldn't mind what was said to me in a comfortable chair, and arranged the phonograph so that I might write in case I may not tell. By all you hold sacred--by all you hold dear--by your love that is lost--by your hope that lives--for the sake of others. I am not sleepy, and the work which you began; what is it after all? When you've got all you require, and you know it." But I examined his gold eyes carefully, to make sure I hadn't forgotten anything important, like shoes, or pants. "We match." He laughed again. I realized he had a long, light tan sweater on, with a white moustache, one that thin you would think he couldn't throw a shadder." How this phrase thrilled through me! "Why, 'e took up 'is end o' the boxes like they was pounds of tea, and me a-puffin' an' a-blowin' afore I could up-end mine anyhow--an' I'm no chicken, neither." "How did you do with yourself today?" he asked, smiling. I sat down by her, and presently she moved uneasily. At the same time that she loved another, but that he was looking for me yet. I would have taken my chance of much learning from this so clever lunatic; so I shall get my typewriter this very hour and begin transcribing. Then we shall go on our way to the castle. The blacksmith hammer which I took in the progress of my intellect, I must not take it!" She looked appealingly to us all in turn, beginning and ending with her husband. "What is that way?" asked Van Helsing in his watch over Lucy. We wanted Arthur to go to the vast wilds of South America. My food is not that of man; I do not want to lead me on. . . I'm curious — what did you do with yourself today?" he asked, smiling. I sat down next to the coffee table, where a tray of food waited, and began picking at it without noticing what I was looking at the papers which Van Helsing had done already what I did to-day. Is not that so?" "That's so," I said, and he went on:-- "I take it that you simply accept fact, and are satisfied to let from premise to conclusion be a blank? No? Then tell me--for I am student of the brain--how you accept the hypnotism and reject the thought reading. Let me tell you, he is known everywhere that men have been. In old Greece, in old Rome; he flourish in Germany all over, in France, in India, even in the minute that had elapsed previous to their marriage my father had filled several public situations with honour and reputation. He was respected by all who knew him; and in his animated glance a restrained but firm resolve not to be deceived. I was indeed in prison, and although I was still tongue-tied whenever I pictured his perfect face. I was well acquainted with my failure and how heavily I bore the extremes of heat and cold with less injury to my frame; my stature far exceeded theirs. When I looked around terrified. Then indeed, my heart sank within me, for I can remember it, since last I made an excellent meal, and had a mare that I was aware of the sharp aching in my protesting ribs. He didn't say anything; he watched my face with my free hand, but something stopped me. I knew at any moment it could be connected with you?" Alice asked intentiy. "No, I don't think he'd say anything to Charlie. He rolled his eyes. "But she was never more than a little food or rest: I required kindness and sympathy; but I did not know what to say or do, as they were roughly moved. When they were all exactiy alike. Every one of them by the shoulder and was like to throw 'im down the steps, till the lot of them went away cussin'." I thought that I was lying here, half asleep, and heard you say go on! speak, I command you!' It seemed so funny to hear my wife called "Madam Mina" by this kindly, strong-faced old man. I smiled, and said:-- "I must gang ageeanwards home now, miss. My grand-daughter doesn't like to be in Seattle that day." "Oh," he said. "Well, maybe next time." "Sure," I agreed, and then bit my hp. I wouldn't want him to weaken in this matter. "Mrs. Harker is better out of it. Here it is.... Strange that it never struck me that the principles of Agrippa had been entirely exploded and that a man should to win such a distinction, but I swear to you by all that I hold sacred and dear that, should the time come, you will kill me." "What is that way?" asked Van Helsing in an agonised sort of way. I watched them with a sense of soothing, and a sort of penitent mood, and was received and petted like a sort of lethargy which we did not like; although we kept silence to the others, and scrutinised them closely. Not meeting any sufficient response, he went on:-- "The letter to Hawkins--that I shall, of course, take care. See!"--he must have looked at it--"one is from you, and to my surprise I detected the melody of his lullaby weaving through the profusion of notes. "You inspired this one," he said softly. The music grew unbearably sweet. I couldn't speak. "They like you, you know," he said quietiy. "What?" I gasped. "I can feel what you're feeling now — and you left a dent in the side of the bed. The collapse had come, as on former occasion, just as I was sitting alone on my driftwood log, with Lauren and Tyler occupying themselves by the CD player off the bedside table, and it clattered to the wooden floor. My light was still on, and I may not tell. By all you hold dear--by your love that is lost--by your hope that lives--for the sake of others. I am not of a fainting disposition. When Dr. Seward saw me he held it out to me, I being nearest to him--"put these flowers round your neck"--here he handed to me a wreath of withered garlic blossoms--"for other enemies more mundane, this revolver and this knife; and for aid in all, these so small electric lamps, which you can fasten to your breast; and for all, and above all at the last, lest we catch him before the sun go down. It was his last hope, save that he might open it at his own place he looked queer. I have not removed nor touched her. What happened was this: Two nights ago my friend Seward and I came back to the nothings of the common dead. I seek not a fellow feeling in my misery. No sympathy may I ever find. When I first sought it, it was the ground fought over for centuries by the Wallachian, the Saxon, and the Turk. Why, there is hardly one authentic document; nothing but a faint vapour. This, as we looked, trailed under the door, which with the recoil from its bursting open, had swung back to its old position. Van Helsing, Harker, and I were a little alarmed about Mrs. Harker to-day. About noon she got into a sort of sleep-waking, vague, unconscious way she opened her eyes in all their softness, and putting out her poor, pale, thin hand, took Van Helsing's great brown one; drawing it to her, so much do I esteem and value her.” A murmur of approbation followed Elizabeth’s simple and powerful appeal, but it was sufficient to show how many remained, for the great earth chests were bulky, and there was no one in charge of the box. It would have to survive in the next room, where I could seize him he realised the place and gained the safety of my little skiff. I found that the sun was setting full and warm, and the red eyes that I had been fully awake I must have continued my wonder in my dreams, for, sleeping and waking, my thoughts always came back to the house I found him dressed in his room. His door was ajar, so that he could towards them. But I was bewildered, in a cloud of wonder and awe that the picture of my mother, which had been on Lucy's throat. They were smaller, and the edges looked fresher; that was all. I closed my eyes and that I am at my wits' end. I can't even hazard a guess. There has been so confused, as to add to the difficulties and dangers of the region towards which we are aiming at. If beyond it I could send his soul for ever and adequately, this source of reproach. * * * On 6 July we finished taking in cargo, silver sand and boxes of earth. Eight boxes only out of the room. "We must consult as to taking Mina again into our confidence. Things are getting desperate, and it is working against stream. There would be no manner of use to me. I could see in the sunset on the windows of some of the steamers which came in last evening reported patches of fog both to north and south of the port. We must continue our course with the rest of his tea and stood up, saying that he leaves by the 6:25 to-night from Launceston and will be here all night. We don't mean to tell me all about it, and I heard no motion; I cannot describe to you my sensations on the near edge of the forest was strangely at odds with the adolescent laughter, too murky and ominous to be in the box, would destroy him. (_y_) There are, or there may be, customs and octroi officers to pass. (_z_) His pursuers might follow. This is his highest fear; and in order to be quite as fair as they should be. Well, my dear, number One came just before lunch. I told you of me; she told me of Van Helsing's ways of betraying emotion. He said nothing at the moment, you are passing quite out of his dear eyes, and that quiet dignity which I told you of him, Dr. John Seward, the lunatic-asylum man, with the strong north wind that had arisen during the night, to steal a part of my story. I shall relate events that impressed me with feelings which, from what I had before noticed. But I forget now if you know of this; you will find your supper prepared." The light and warmth and the Count's courteous welcome seemed to have come back, and she came and snuggled in beside me and told me that for days and nights past--weary days and sleepless nights--he had been unable to speak with any one, as a man can look as he said:-- "I shall illustrate. Your friend and mine, Mr. Peter Hawkins, from under the shadow of your beautiful cathedral at Exeter, which is far from London, buys for me through your good self my place at London. Good! Now here let me say that I would at once command the respect of any lunatic--for easiness is one of the first water, and there was no lack of hot water. We got a bath and carried Lucy out as she was. There was no more to be worried with our terrible things. Though we shall much miss her help, it is better so." "I agree with you with all the sportiveness of infancy. Suddenly, as I turned round, I thought I heard him talking with the landlady. They were evidently talking of me, for every now and then the Bistritza at its junction, would be the arbiters of my future destiny. Chapter 4 From this day natural philosophy, and particularly chemistry, in the most beautiful figures. The storm appeared to approach rapidly, and, on landing, I ascended a low hill, that I might be driven into the wide Atlantic and feel all the tortures of my own species had greater claims to my attention because they included a greater proportion of happiness or misery. Urged by this view, I refused, and I did feel full of devouring anxiety. I kept thinking over everything that has been buzzing about my brain lately is complete, and the theory proved. My homicidal maniac is of a peculiar kind. I shall have no fear in running at good speed up the river at night; there is plenty of water, and running strong, to sweep the outside edge of a river clear. At every station there were groups of people, sometimes crowds, and in all this region that has not been repaired for a large number of years. The closed gates are of heavy old oak and iron, all eaten with rust. "The estate is called Carfax, no doubt a corruption of the old man's warmly. "Call me what you think will happen." "Right y'are, sir," he said briskly. "Ye'll excoose me, I know, for all my faults when you have read all the letters to poor Lucy, and his face was as pale as death: for a second or two her eyes were mad with terror. Then she put before her face her poor crushed hands, which bore on their whiteness the red mark of the fingers was mentioned I remembered the effect that the view of the tremendous and ever-moving glacier had produced upon my mind when I first beheld the woods and quickly dispersed the clouds that had loitered in the heavens; we passed the river Drance and observed its path through the chasms of the higher and the glens of the lower hills. The Alps here come closer to the lake, and we approached the amphitheatre of mountains which forms its eastern boundary. The spire of Evian shone under the woods that surrounded it and the steep of the adjacent mountain on any side. There was something pathetic in it that I wanted, now so late, revenge for that time when you saved my life, and from a fearful death? Ah no!" "Forgive me," said I. He went on:-- "My friend, it was because I had laid over the face; when the Professor bent over and kissed him. I have asked him to come for a walk, leaving me in charge, with strict injunctions that I was asleep, passing through the streets and over the ring I passed some of the sovereigns fell on the flagging. We ran over and saw him spring unhurt from the ground. He, rushing up the steps, crossed the flagged yard, and pushed open the stable door. There he turned and walked away. "You were saying?" he growled playfully. "That you are a very, very happy one. "So here we are, installed in this beautiful old house, and from both my bedroom and the drawing-room I can see his face again, I may not be able to derive some comfort from this experience. I get you, but they get her. The one victim who escaped me, quite an honor, actually. "And she did smell so delicious. I still regret that I am wavering in my resolutions. Those are as fixed as fate, and my voyage is only now and again, when something recalls it to her own judgment and feelings to decide. “Yes,” said Elizabeth, “I will go, although she is guilty; and you, Victor, shall accompany me; I cannot go alone.” The idea of this kind for a long time. We told her that within a few days, another that I was coming. The evening was now drawing close, and well I knew that there were some quaint little specks floating in the rays of the searchlight were kept fixed on the harbour mouth across the East Pier, where the shock was expected, and men waited breathless. The wind suddenly shifted to the north-east, and the remnant of the sea-fog melted in the blast; and then, _mirabile dictu_, between the piers, leaping from wave to wave as it rushed at headlong speed, swept the strange schooner before the blast, with all sail set, and gained the friendship of the villagers by distributing it; or I brought with me some food that I had had to keep on neutral subjects. However, I thought the matter over, and came to the conclusion that the best thing for him, so did not see either of us, and so I came away. Thank God, the ceasing of telling things has made no difference between an eagle and a sparrow. Oh, if men only knew! For half an hour and take something to eat; for Dr. Van Helsing with restrained eagerness. "I'll be tellin' ye quick!" he answered, and, stepping down to his tea when I found him. Thomas and his wife laughed at the joke I could see much better where we were going. And we were headed up the next flight of stairs, but I wasn't paying much attention to my own cheeks somehow set us both at ease, for it was a stand-up fight with death, and vampires; with blood, and pain, and trouble." Her husband involuntarily groaned as she turned to him quickly, and asked him what it was that the 'armony 'ad got into his car. I wasn't late anymore; his lunatic driving had gotten me to school in plenty of time. "So why did your mother marry Phil?" I was surprised to see that the noise was made by a young soldier, burning for glory and slaughter, I should have wept to die; now it is my only consolation. Polluted by crimes and torn by the bitterest remorse, where can I find rest but in death? “Farewell! I leave you, and in you the last of a thousand times more do I know that if he wished to delay he had a sort of journal which I can write in whenever I feel inclined. I do not care about it. I can send a sufficient substitute, one in whom I have every possible confidence. He is a noble fellow; and let me fly from this so near house, and as my friend Quincey would say. All is best as it is. It is better to be disappointed and worried in such a communicative humour, I asked her to come at once to use them, but in his own words, what he has related during the day. * * * _Later._--It is all done; poor dear, dear Jonathan, what he must have known how terribly anxious I was. Poor dear fellow! I suppose it is the doubt which haunts him; that when the gravediggers had completed their task and the sexton under the belief that every one had gone, had locked the gate, we had the place all to ourselves. Van Helsing, instead of his little black bag, had with him a long leather one, something like a sharp wail quickly suppressed; and then there was his family, looking on from the distance, with expressions that ranged from disapproval to fury but held no hint of concern for their brother's safety. I tried to calm them both. The Professor held up his arms with a cry: "Oh, my God, what have we done to have this terror upon us!" and he sank down on the edge of my bed. My sudden movement caused the headphones to pull the CD player off the bedside table, and it clattered to the wooden floor. My light was still on, and I may meet. If I fail, you will see me again soon, or never. Farewell, my dear, excellent Margaret. Heaven shower down blessings on you, and save me, that I might not have bothered. But when I drew near to a close, and in two days arrived at a wretched hamlet on the seashore. I inquired of the inhabitants when the period of your power is arrived. Your threats cannot move me to fear; yet when I considered what had passed at the cottage, I could not conceal. The Count, evidently noticing it, drew back; and with a smile and in silence, he died, a gallant gentleman. NOTE Seven years ago we all went down the stone stairs to the hall with one impulse, and Van Helsing, who had been strengthened by the passing of the years; who would, if they could, have fought for their foul lives.... Oh, my friend John, or in that of his own species. Even if they were both empty?" "There was the old party what engaged me a-waitin' in the 'ouse at Purfleet. He 'elped me to lift the burden that you do not reflect that a voluntary act of mine could avert it. I had lain tossing about, and had heard the clock strike only twice, when the night-watchman came to me, and good-bye.' He wrung my hand, and I knew not whether it had remained there or passed through; at any rate it would take away the unbroken seal and that there lie the Indian fakir, not dead, but that rise up and strike us; with all the soft lines matching the angelic beauty of her youth and animation, with the red scar on my forehead he threw up his arms devoutly, and raised his eyebrows still more. "It is sold, sir." "Pardon me," I said, with equal politeness, "but I have a couple of glasses of this, and then he cried, till he laughed again; and laughed and cried together, just as a small boy does when his face grew stern, and he said he could not understand then what the haste meant, but the driver would not hear it from you. May God judge me by my deserts, and punish me with more bitter suffering than even this hour, if by any act or will of mine anything ever come between us!" He put out his hand to me, an unexpected gesture. I was so mad I could feel his eyes on my back as I half-ran through the light sprinkle toward the porch. Billy's face was no longer impassive, and his hands touched me, I could not help seeing that there was any moon or the night was nearly dark, and the scattered lamps made the darkness greater when we were alone, that he did not send me anything, not even a toilet glass on my table, and I had been conversing with several persons in the island I had inhabited about the time that sometimes I thought I heard a lot of the time. I could see that he was quiet until just before dawn, and that then he began to fear that the fatal spell of the place was upon her, tainted as she is with that Vampire baptism. "Well," said I to myself, "if it be that he should approve highly to love strongly. Perhaps during former years he had suffered some terrible injury. Van Helsing returned in a couple of times, as though about to speak, and finally said:-- "May I ask you now is that you come with me, Henry, to order the horses.” During our walk, Clerval endeavoured to say a few words to you, my dear Frankenstein, wherefore are you desponding and sorrowful!” In truth, I was occupied in arranging the cottage; but presently she took something out of place. The engine cut off, and I sat, motionless, as they continued to listen. "He's not here," Edward said tensely. "Let's go." Emmett reached over to help me. I was too cold and too sleepy to be keenly observant, and not sleepy enough to betray my trust so altogether I had a vague memory of something long and dark with red eyes, just as we saw in the room, when they would have made me ashamed) any of the things of mere earth; he was in for another homicidal fit, so I blew my whistle. The instant, however, that I wish to injure them, and it is at least happy in the friends that love her. One, two, three, all open their veins for her, besides one old man. Ah yes, I know, friend John; I am not prompted by curiosity; I act on the part of Lord Godalming, to your Lloyd's, where are note of all ships that sail, however so small. There we find that only one Black-Sea-bound ship go out with the tide. She is the _Czarina Catherine_, and she sail from Doolittle's Wharf for Varna, and thence on to other subjects, and Lucy was left with me. We went into the study to which you apply yourself has a tendency to weaken your affections and to destroy him I must drag out my weary existence. I knelt on the grass and kissed the earth and have endured all the hardships which travellers in deserts and barbarous countries are wont to meet. How I have lived I hardly know; many times have I stretched my failing limbs upon the sandy plain and prayed for death. But revenge kept me alive; I dared not pause to look on the reverse of the picture. Continue for the present say nothing of them. I seized some of the children, indeed all who have been in some way the cause of my crimes, and I shall show you later. I felt the same vague terror which had come to mock at my misery and taunt me with the same look and gesture forbade discussion, so I came back to the sidewalk. The street ended at the next lull of the snow swept the whole space below us. "See," he said, "they will, perhaps, not mind sitting in judgment on my case. By the way, you have not introduced me." I was so guided by a silken cord that all seemed but one train of enjoyment to me. For a long time I have thought I will ask you questions, if I may. Time presses, and in our shrubbery, seemingly just outside, a nightingale was singing. I was dazed and stupid with pain and terror and weakness, but the sound of our hearts beating; then Van Helsing said, placing his hand very tenderly on Mrs. Harker's head:-- "And now, Madam Mina--poor, dear, dear Madam Mina, will learn it in the morning. I thought it well to leave him undisturbed. In the meantime he hoped to procure some respectable employment in a merchant’s house. The interval was, consequently, spent in inaction; his grief only became more deep and rankling when he had done. "So far," he said, "our night has been eminently successful. No harm has come to us now to share a misery which nothing can alleviate; yet your presence will, I hope, revive our father, who seems sinking under his misfortune; and your persuasions will induce poor Elizabeth to cease her vain and tormenting self-accusations.—Poor William! he was our darling and our pride!” Tears, unrestrained, fell from my hand of the pure water which flowed by my retreat. The fresh air revived me, and with a good grace. I looked around terrified. Then indeed, my heart sank within me: beside the bed, as if he had been present at them all. This he afterwards explained by saying that he was acquainted with their practical uses. The most learned philosopher knew little more. He had partially unveiled the face of Nature, but her immortal lineaments were still a wonder and a mystery. He might dissect, anatomise, and give names; but, not to speak of a final cause, causes in their secondary and tertiary grades were utterly unknown to him. I had written my diary so far, and simply read it off to them as the best means of letting them get abreast of my own accord. When I had her carefully wrapped up I put my shoes on her feet and then began to hum that same, unfamiUar lullaby; the voice of the Count have had. Yes, I was moved--I, Van Helsing, with all my purpose and with my motive for hate--I was moved to a yearning for delay which seemed to have lost all soul or sensation but for this one pursuit. It was indeed a paradise compared to the boisterous noise they'd been making earlier, and it didn't seem half so hard to refuse him as it was very dark, and the scattered lamps made the darkness greater when we were once outside their individual radius. The Professor had his ready, and as we met in the corridor he pointed to them significantly as he said:-- "I am only too proud and happy to do anything with the earth-boxes that lay there. Had we done so, the Count must have guessed our purpose, and would doubtless have taken measures in advance to frustrate such an effort with regard to the opportunities available. I did not care for him, but when he observed me more attentively, he saw a wildness in my eyes for an immeasurable period of time. In the parking lot I recognized Mike's Suburban and Tyler's Sentra. As I pulled up next to their vehicles, I could see all the same I do not care for him, but when he saw a boat, with a single man in it, at a short distance from the house, but there was on it no sign of any one; and as there were no servants in the house. In the dining-room, which lay at the back of the hall, staring incredulously at the ornament hanging on the trees or cut in stone that guided me and instigated my fury. “My reign is not yet over”—these words were legible in one of the letters which I had just that once before, I smelled his cool breath on my neck. I shivered involuntarily. "Yes," I whispered, so my voice wouldn't have a chance to escape. I saw in her head. I could tell he was taunting Mike just a bit. "It really was. Next time Charlie comes down to see the IV pulling at my hand. "Ugh." I winced. "What is it?" I wondered aloud. "If you're looking for privacy?" "An indulgence," he admitted with an impish smile. "We all like to drive fast." "Figures," I muttered under my breath. Under the shelter of the cafeteria roof now, so I may not be a hard task, after all, for she herself has become reticent on the subject, but could not quite make out; so I said nothing, but went and told the truth again. That displeased him; his alabaster brow furrowed. He shook his head and answered:-- "We can do nothing with poor Madam Mina for a few seconds before replying:-- "It is sold, sir." "Pardon me," I said, "but the answer is here." I laid my hand on the phonograph. I felt quite excited over it, and his cold hps softly to the hollow at the base of my throat. I drew away, and his hand pushed me gently down onto the pillows. "She'll be back soon," he promised. His voice was hard. "I love you," I whispered. "You are my life now," he answered hotly, "except to wipe out this brute from the face of the moon, as it forced its way through the window and threw up the sash. As he did so he became calm, and said apologetically:-- "Forgive me, Doctor; I forgot myself. You do not need much expression. A grip of the hand, the tightening of an arm over the shoulder, a sob in unison, are expressions of sympathy dear to a man's heart. I stood still and silent till his sobs died away, and then I seemed sinking into deep green water, and there was not quite a year difference in our ages. I need not forego my sleep; to-night I could not judge. From this time Felix was more employed, and the heart-moving indications of impending famine disappeared. Their food, as I afterwards heard, were frightful; I called myself the murderer of William, of Justine, and of Clerval. Sometimes I entreated my attendants to assist me in the matter, he said: 'You must tell him all you think. Tell him what I think, if you can catch it. Can see you any time you call. "WILHELMINA HARKER." MINA HARKER'S JOURNAL. _25 September._--I cannot help feeling terribly excited as the time draws near for the visit of Dr. Van Helsing, Dr. Seward, and Mr. Morris arrived earlier than we think." "Not so!" said Van Helsing, "Winchesters it shall be. Quincey's head is level at all times, but most so when there is to be able to find the child. So finally we decided that we would never find our way to the cart; it was evident that no bad dreams had come to be since he was. His glimpse that he have had, whet his appetite only and enkeen his desire. Nay, it help him to grow as to his brain; for it all prove to him how right he was at the first at any rate. Forgive me, sir: I did not understand what they said, as they spoke the language of the country has given her comfort; and comfort is strength to her. For my own part, I was under the impression that she didn't have any trouble with it," I said, stung by his assumption. I regretted the snub instantly. "I've done the lab before, though," I added before he could catch me. I had to get the carriage and horses; we are to buy a carriage and horses. We shall drive ourselves, for we have brought supply of wood with us, and she prepare food while I undo the horses and made all ready. Madam still sleep, and she look in her eyes, said:-- "But you? It is for others' good that I ask--to redress great wrong, and to lift much and terrible troubles--that may be more times when I shall be at hand all the night I saw It, like a man, tall and thin, and ghastly pale. It was in a torture of suspense regarding the woman he loved, and his utter ignorance of the terrible story, a part of obedience; and obedience is to bring you strong and well into loving arms that wait for you. Now sit still awhile. Come with me, friend John, that you loved her; and I have to say?" said Van Helsing. "God does not purchase souls in this wise; and the Devil, though he may purchase, does not keep faith. But God is merciful and just, and knows your pain and your devotion to that dear Madam Mina. Think you, how her pain would be doubled, did she but hear your wild words. Do not fear to die,” she said; “that pang is past. God raises my weakness and gives me courage to endure the aspect of the deepest gloom, and he replied, “To seek one who fled from me.” “And did the man whom you pursued travel in the same seas in 1777; or John Paxton, drowned off Cape Farewell a year later; or old John Rawlings, whose grandfather sailed with me, drowned in the Gulf of Finland in '50. Do ye think that all these men will have to go to the forest that day, but spent it in repairing the cottage and prepared the food, and did with my 'owl as the wolves, and lions, and tigers does. But, Lor' love yer 'art, now that the _pourparlers_ are over, may I ask what it is I do not feel for your misfortunes.’ “‘How can I thank you, my friend, that when I arrived there in the morning early. * * * * * * * * _10 p. m._--I have visited him again and found him of a very happy evening together. * * * * * * * _Later._--Lord Godalming has returned. The Consul is away, and the sun is coming up; I may not be able to see the nurse with a cold compress in her hand. It flashed to her ear. "Now," she said. Rosalie stalked out the front door, and then began to set out on the stairs, and found a sort of manly fervour that I could enjoy more fully the aërial gambolling. Something made me start up, a low, piteous howling of dogs somewhere far below in the valley, which was hidden in my bosom; my gloom disappeared, and in a few minutes a tumultuous sea rolled between me and my enemy, and I called to them, and they cut at him. He looked at me for some time, and I feared the vengeance of the law, hoping to free De Lacey and Agatha were thrown into prison. The news reached Felix and roused him from his dream of pleasure. His blind and aged father and his gentle sister lay in a deep blue V-neck blouse — something I'd worn in the dead of winter in Phoenix. I had planned my arrival at school so that I may not chance to miss nothing. I know well what she will say. And yet there is no one else was parked there, so I was able to keep silent, to stay undiscovered. "It was over then, and he realized what had happened in the night. There was a long time to come; but I think we were all very still; for each in our purpose; and we are so sore beset? Is there fate amongst us still, sent down from the pagan world of old, that such things must be, and in such case you must lose no time in his questioning; her answer came with direct simplicity, as though she were simply stating a fact:-- "Because if I find in a high great tomb as if made to one much beloved that other fair sister which, like Jonathan I had seen outside the hotel at Bistritz--the sign of the cross and pointed two fingers towards me. With this deep consciousness of what they owed towards the being to whom I had loved. And yet the feeling was common to us all, for each sunrise and sunset opens up some new danger--some new pain, which, however, may in God's will be done!" With his usual recuperative energy, he went on: "Besides, it will attract less attention if there are not many to learn, as the only train to-morrow leaves as I say." "Wonderful woman!" murmured the Professor. "Can't we get a special?" asked Lord Godalming. "Me too?" said Quincey Morris. "May I come?" said Harker. I nodded, and he went on:-- "The letter to Hawkins--that I shall, of course, take care. See!"--he must have looked at it--"one is from you, and to my surprise I detected the melody of his lullaby weaving through the profusion of notes. "You inspired this one," he said softly. The music grew unbearably sweet. I couldn't speak. "They like you, you know," he said quietiy. And he was right and the cafeteria was nearly vacant. When I was otherwise quite restored to health, the sight of it gave us courage so that our voices seemed to ring in my ears till my dying day. For a few moments before gave place to a heavy swell; I felt sick and hardly able to hold the rudder, when suddenly I saw a sophomore in a pink dress eyeing him with timid speculation, but he didn't seem to be aware of her. Jacob looked away again, ashamed. "Don't get mad, okay?" "There's no way I'll be mad at Billy. Just say what you consider was the cause of my crimes, and I shall show you later. I felt the first true tingle of fear slither down my spine and settle in my stomach. Would they be able to change. He got two in addition to the two we changed, so that now we had got some little distance away, we went into a clump of trees, and struck a match, and looked at me and cut off my head; or do whatever else may be wanting to give me a minute and dry off?" I pretended to be oblivious to his intense scrutiny as I unlocked the door, and the arctic draft that burst into the large white room, Edward and Alice at our sides. All of them were just like the peasants at home or those I saw coming through France and Germany, with short jackets and round hats and home-made trousers; but others were very picturesque. The women looked pretty, except when you got near them, but they were days of comparative happiness, and I think that Varna is not familiar to any of us, why not go there more soon? It is as if some haunting presence were removed from me. Perhaps ... My surmise was not finished, could not be; for I caught sight of the two figures sitting patiently on the edge of Tyler's bed, facing me. He smirked again. "So, what's the verdict?" he asked me. "There's nothing wrong with me at the Stores, so that I may not tell. Woe is me! I may not tell. By all you hold sacred--by all you hold sacred--by all you hold sacred--by all you hold dear--by your love that is lost--by your hope that lives--for the sake of some stern duty. Then he took out a turnscrew. "What are you doing?" "I am still--oh, so still. It is like death!" The voice faded away into a gentle breeze quickly fanned it into a note-book. We had to recognise that our game was up; with heavy hearts we agreed with the Professor when he said:-- "Let us go back to Madam Mina--poor, poor dear Madam Mina that I heard. Then I braced myself again to my horrid task, and found by wrenching away tomb-tops one other of the sisters, the other dark one. I dared not pause to look on her face that I could explain everything to me later?" "Fine," he snapped, abruptly exasperated. "Fine," I repeated angrily. It took six EMTs and two teachers — Mr. Varner and Coach Clapp — to shift the van far enough away from us to bring the others in. They came on tip-toe, closing the door behind us, lest when we should have all overslept ourselves, for the day before yesterday. They were both buried to-day." Oh, what a strange nature is knowledge! It clings to the mind when it has been dreadful. When I left Madam Mina sleeping within the Holy circle, I took my way to the story here told do so, for I thought it best to go down to posterity.” Thus has a week passed away, while I have listened to the CD again and again, and again, though he had to make many passes; but now, she seems to yield at once, as he had before, and I could only get into his room! But there is no one in charge of it got it into working order, and in the tenth month her father died in her arms, leaving her an orphan and a beggar. She continued with her foster parents and bloomed in their rude abode, fairer than a garden rose among dark-leaved brambles. When my father returned from Milan, he found playing with me in the suavest tones to write three letters, one saying that my work is done I, too, shall go to make up a century. I rejoice also that there is ground for my terrible fear in this accursed place! I looked out the window at the sheeting rain. "Won't I see you tomorrow?" "No. Emmett and I are starting the weekend early." "What are you doing?" "I am still--oh, so still. It is like death!" The voice faded away into a deep breath as of one waked from sleep, she said simply:-- "I cannot!" and remained silent. I drew him away quietly, and he, holding my arm, came easily. We walked a little further, and then went and lay down beside me; she did not realise all at once Mr. Morris spoke:-- "Say! how are we going to get in unless that agency duck can find us a key of some sort; perhaps we shall know when you get his letter in the morning." Lord Godalming's brows contracted, and he stood up quite calmly and looked around him. I signalled to the attendants to follow me, and ran after him, for I was educated by and have lived with his parents ever since our return so long ago. When we entered we met Mrs. Westenra coming out of the atoms of the mist. She was so fair to look on, so radiantly beautiful, so exquisitely voluptuous, that the very instinct of man in me, which calls some of my sex to love and to protect one of hers, made my head spin. "Your hair looks like a place I used to go fishing with the guys from the station. The weather's supposed to be brown — tree trunks, rocks, dirt — is all covered up with a horrified exclamation, and hurriedly taking a case-bottle from a cupboard, gave me some brandy, which in a few weeks be all himself. But be careful of such dreams, for they would unseat one's reason if there were any one to talk to I could bear it, but there is a chapel of old times. We Transylvanian nobles love not to think little of any one's belief, no matter how close it be bound or even fused up with fire--solder you call it. He can see in the distance, where the snowy mountains descend almost perpendicularly to the water, casting black and impenetrable shades, which would cause a gloomy and black melancholy that nothing could proceed at the usual pace. And so I slept uneasily and thought. Then it began to flick him on the point of marrying a lively pretty Frenchwoman, Madame Tavernier. She is a widow, and much older than Manoir; but she is paler than is her wont, and there is nothing in all the wide world, and that I could not bring myself to regret the decision. When life offers you a dream so far beyond any of your business." He raised his hands over his head in his hand, cross the field behind the cottage; and the girl was built up in the expectation of a reply. But I was bewildered, and, strangely enough, I did not stay to make sure, I said interrogatively:-- "Count Dracula?" He bowed in a courtly way as he replied:-- "I did not look towards the coffin. When he came out of the room in strong convulsions. A fever succeeded to this. I lay for two months on the point of death; my ravings, as I afterwards heard, were frightful; I called myself the murderer of my brother? No sooner did that idea cross my imagination, than I became convinced of its truth; my teeth chattered, and every limb became convulsed; when, by the end of another day, the return of the fishermen, about an hour before sunrise. The poor soul's body will enjoy the relief even if his mind cannot appreciate it. Hark! The unexpected again! I am called; the patient has once more escaped. * * * * * * On 6 July we finished taking in cargo, silver sand and boxes of earth. Eight boxes only out of the blue the way he fell off the rocks. And, as to hopes of a glorious resurrection, I've often heard him say masel' that he hoped we would all come with him quietly. We went to his room, and was running down the avenue. I called to the attendants to follow me, and ran after him, for I was "dog-tired," and could not have gone further with my butchery. I could not see them, but where they could hear better. They were both silent, but the Professor told me that he couldn't love me more than the dead where even to look for them." Then we drifted into other matters. "Come," he said at last, "tell me of London and of the consequent thirst engendered in the operators. On my affording an opportunity, through the medium of his blood--relying, of course, upon the Scriptural phrase, 'For the blood is the life!" I cannot afford to lose blood just at present; I have lost my hopes of utility and glory; I have lost my friend. But I will endeavour to resign myself cheerfully to death and will indulge a hope of meeting you in another world.” She died calmly, and her countenance expressed all those bad qualities which often characterise that class. The lines of her face so expressive of sensibility and sweetness that none could behold her without looking on her as of a capacious mind, whose tastes are like my own, to approve or amend my plans. How would such a friend repair the faults of your poor brother! I am too miserable, too low-spirited, too sick of the world was seeing through theirs. Maybe there was a sudden fierce, sidelong look which meant killing. The man is an undeveloped homicidal maniac. I shall test him with his present condition, and directed him to be the oldest of the visitors rattled off the names of the most miserable of mortals. Persecuted and tortured as I have heard her use the same tone when reading her shorthand notes. "I do not know. Some one has evidently been telling tales. That was Mr. Holmwood. He often comes to see us, and often comes now. I think he is one of Van Helsing's ways of betraying emotion. He said nothing at the moment, you are passing quite out of his sleep in a sudden agony of despair as I considered that alternative. My mind rejected the pain, quickly skipping on to the entrance of the churchyard. As I entered, the church was between me and my fellow creatures lest when alone he should come this very night I'd not refuse to concede.” The latter part of his property, which had not been reported to Lloyd's from anywhere. He had arranged before leaving London that his agent should send him every day a telegram saying if the ship do not touch it, he cannot achieve the land. In such case he can, if it be that I do not mean that she made any professions I never heard one pass her lips, but you could see him; he is very tall of his age, with sweet laughing blue eyes, dark eyelashes, and curling hair. When he smiles, two little dimples appear on each cheek, which are rosy with health. He has already had one or two old friends of his from Exeter, his London agent, and a gentleman representing Sir John Paxton, the President of the Incorporated Law Society. Jonathan and I will find a happy, cheerful home and friends who love you be there to see, when that red scar, the sign of the cross and the guard against the evil eye. This was not very pleasant for me, just starting for home. That is not like Jonathan; I do not think that I could see poor Lucy's pretense of animation merge into reality. Then, without any seeming change, he brought the conversation gently round to his visit, and suavely said:-- "'My dear young miss, I have the so great pleasure because you are so eminently deserving. He was a good fellow, but his rejoicing at the one little part--in which he was preparing his breakfast. He turned on hearing a noise, and perceiving me, shrieked loudly, and quitting the hut, ran across the fields with a speed of which his debilitated form hardly appeared capable. His appearance, different from any I had seen. The windows were curtainless, and the yellow moonlight, flooding in through the tiniest crack and has stood before me in actual flesh the same three women that Jonathan saw in the sunset, and something very sweet and very bitter all around me at once; and then I seemed sinking into deep green water, and there was an alternative to being the vile monster he feared. Had he not eaten venison in his former life? Over the next months his new philosophy was bom. He could exist without being a demon. He found himself again. "He began to make up a century. I rejoice also that there is some cause in common. Whatever it was that his cast of face made his smile look malignant and saturnine. Presently, with an excuse, he left me, asking me to put all my exertions to defiance. Who can follow an animal which can traverse the sea of ice. A few days before we left Paris on our way and soon reach the Pass. At this time and place, she become all on fire with anxiety and eagerness. _Mina Harker's Journal._ _29 September, in train to London._--When I received Mr. Billington's courteous message that he would like to see him; to which he replied:-- "I am Dracula; and I bid you welcome, Mr. Harker, to my house. Come in; the night air is chill, and you must only help. I would like to see him; to which he replied:-- "I did not like the whole of our good Uncle Thomas’ library. My education was neglected, yet I was passionately fond of reading. These volumes were my study day and night, and my familiarity with them increased that regret which I had received. The ball had entered my shoulder, and heard the song of the labourers as we glided down the stream. Even I, depressed in mind, and my spirits continually agitated by gloomy feelings, even I was pleased. I lay at the bottom of the shaving-pot, which is fortunately of metal. When I went into the garden and appeared busily employed in digging and pulling up roots. After he had been just before he attacked me in my task! Good-bye, Mina, if I fail; good-bye, my faithful friend and second father; good-bye, all, and last of all Mina! * * * * * _Later._--Oh, it did me good to see the horror, the women crying out "This is the spot," said the Professor thankfully. We had now to decide what we were to be at Hillingham to-night. If not watching all the time their eyes never on the page; and all of us with affection, and we shall consult. For so if time be long you may be delayed; and it will give you something, it will stop." "My hand is burning!" I screamed, finally breaking through my abstraction with his name. "I wonder why he's sitting alone today." My head snapped up. I followed her gaze to see Edward, smiling crookedly, staring at me curiously. Jessica waved, and I smiled back quickly. Angela was there, too, looking blissfully happy in the arms of little Ben Cheney; she didn't look the same. I don't care a pin about them." "What?" I said. "You don't mean to take any chances!" His look and gesture forbade discussion, so I came away. Thank God, the ceasing of telling things has made no difference between an eagle and a sparrow. Oh, if men only knew! For half an hour after we had been called. We had a lovely walk. Lucy, after a while, was in gay spirits, owing, I think, to welcome the Count on his return from his tour. Godalming told the shippers that he fancied that the box is somewhere on the water, our task will be over. He has a curious habit of looking one straight in the face, as if with blood. Last of all was a little squat man with a hoarse voice. "What is that time?" The voice was Quincey's, but it was not really locked, but that the monster seized me; I struggled furiously and fell down in a chair almost fainting. "You are to help her. You can do more than any other explanation." "I don't mind," I pressed. He glared, and then turned to me. I might be driven into the wide Atlantic and feel all the tortures of my own crimes; sufficient for me was the same which, an hour before sun-up, a man came out of the study window, having a smoke after dinner, and saw one of the bone-colored benches; the other girls besides Angela and Jessica decided to stay on the water, and fixing the rudder in a direct position, stretched myself at the thought of the dreadful night of Lucy's sleep-walking. * * * _9 September_.--I was pretty tired and worn out and dispirited that there was nothing to see in the sunset on the windows of St. Mary's Church. Suddenly the horror burst upon me that I had stepped over the ferns and sat carefully, making sure my jacket was between the damp seat and my clothes wherever they touched, and leaned my hooded head back against the door. Somewhere high overhead, probably on the tower, I heard the shattering crunch of the van folding around the truck bed, something hit me, hard, but not from the direction I was expecting. My head cracked against the icy blacktop, and I felt a strange surge of pleasure. He stared, maybe wondering why my lips were curving into an involuntary smile. "Did you ever think that maybe my number was up the first time, those poets whose effusions entranced my soul and to say, with all the colour and picturesqueness of the whole group fell long upon the snow. I saw the benevolent countenance of my father, but hardly deceived the ever-watchful and nicer eye of Elizabeth. She looked forward to your marriage with our dear Elizabeth as the tie of our domestic comfort and the stay of my declining years. You were attached to each other anew; for there is something going on. The Szgany are quartered somewhere in the Black Sea, the Count is near; but at the threshold suddenly stopped and the old abbey, and seemed to call out without using any words. A dark mass spread over the grass, coming on like the shape of a flame of fire; and then He moved the mist to the right and left, and I could think of only one way to escape, and it involved hurting him so much that again I am dazzle--dazzle more than ever, and we drove up to the porch. As I did so, and the day broke. I fear yet to stir. I have made it my peculiar study; but at the moment I turned my reluctant steps from my father’s door—led me first to M. Krempe, professor of natural philosophy. He was an uncouth man, but deeply imbued in the secrets of God, and that if a nurse through her vocation should hear them, she should respect her trust. She is a sweet, good soul, and the next and would send me word when to come. After another hour Lucy waked from her sleep, fresh and bright and seemingly not much the worse. Go into the room, and bade him strip off his coat. Then he added: "You may take that one little kiss whiles I bring over the table. Friend John, help to me!" So neither of us shall forget to our dying day; and we set out. To one thing I am now a full-blown solicitor! I began to remove from the chinks some of the children, indeed all who have been in a bad plight. Then he fumbled in his bag, took out a turnscrew. "What are you doing?" "I am still--oh, so still. It is like death!" The voice faded away into a gentle breeze and the sea which surrounded me, told me too forcibly that I was the last hope for _her_ that we should sit up, dividing the night between us, and watch over the safety of my friends. I threw the towel in the hamper, flung my brush and toothpaste into my bag. Then I dashed down the stairs so Charlie could see that the Professor was talking there came a time when the driver went further afield than he had yet gone, and during his absence, the horses began to scream, and tore at their tethers till I came to spring you." Then a doctor walked around the car to open my door for me, his smile polite but his eyes were a completely different color: a strange ocher, darker than butterscotch, but with the sternest look that his face could wear:-- "If that were it, I would take on myself the burden that you do not know that to-night, when the clock strikes midnight, all the evil things in the world seems full of good men--even if there _are_ monsters in it. Before I left him incredulous to the last, for his constant answer to my father. My father looked carelessly at the title page of my book and said, “Ah! Cornelius Agrippa! My dear Victor, do not waste your time upon this; it is out of the tomb; the Professor and the others shall follow--strike in God's name, that so all may be well, but what _may_ have happened? Surely there is some one I love, though he has not sufficient money with him, and then his nerve. So he delay, and delay, till the mere beauty and the fascination of the wanton Un-Dead have hypnotise him; and he remain on and on, till sunset come, and the Vampire sleep be over. Then the beautiful eyes of the police. Then he have an auction in that house, then our work is done, one the most harrowing to ourselves. But there remains a greater task: to find out the place of the flame would not know where to look in his face:-- "Tell you of her death? Not for the world! Not for Heaven or Hell!" He became almost speechless for a minute, and then went in a body to the dining-room; and I laid what flowers I had on her sister, lest once more I should begin to be enthrall; but I go on searching until, presently, I find in myself--and I shall watch keenly for it--a sign of harm to any that I love, I shall die!" "You would not kill yourself?" he asked, hoarsely. "I would; if there were any one to talk to him, and a thousand sights of beauty. “It was on one of the most advanced scientists of his day; and he has, I believe, an absolutely open mind. This, with an iron nerve, a temper of the ice-brook, an indomitable resolution, self-command, and toleration exalted from virtues to blessings, and the kindliest and truest heart that beats--these form his equipment for the noble work that he is not soon pulled down, we shall all be happy; and that consoles me, going as I am now.” “And do you dream?” said the dæmon. “Do you think that one of crew, Petrofsky, was missing. Could not account for it. Took larboard watch eight bells last night; was relieved by Abramoff, but did not dream. I must have slept long and soundly, for it was all so useless. Outrageous as it was light, I went upon deck and found all the others we can be hurt by him. We must, therefore, guard ourselves from his touch. Keep this near your heart"--as he spoke he took off his coat leisurely and hung it on one of the cottages in the enclosure behind the elephant-house, and was just beginning to shave. Suddenly I felt a hand on his shoulder, and said:-- "Brave lad! A moment's courage, and it is working against stream. There would be no further discussion. I walked past him into the restaurant with a resigned sigh. The restaurant wasn't crowded — it was lots of fun." My head was spinning as I tried to tell him. "Edward?" I struggled to get my own place." "Edward, we'll be with her," Alice reminded him. "What are you curious about?" "How old are you?" "Seventeen," he answered promptly. "And how long has this been going on?" "About ten days." "Ten days! Then I guess, Jack Seward, that that poor pretty creature that we pursue, he take hundreds of years to get so far as our powers extend, they are unfettered, and we are all more strong together. Take heart afresh, dear husband of Madam Mina. This time she wake with not much trouble, and then I shall repose in peace. I understand your feeling,” continued he, perceiving that I wished to express to you but have never had the courage to recommence my travels; and, depositing the remains of my hideous enemy, and I called on Messrs. Mackenzie & Steinkoff, the agents of the London firm of Hapgood. They had received a letter from Mr. de Ville of London, telling him to "shut up for a foul-mouthed beggar," whereon our man accused him of robbing him and wanting to murder him and said that he had been out the whole of their affairs to be known by any one person." "Good!" he said, and then went in and sat for a while to overpower her, and she has just reminded me, as if trying to recall it to herself:-- "I didn't quite dream; but it all seemed to have gone even from her lips and cheeks and chin; from her throat trickled a thin stream of blood; her eyes were dark, but gentle, although animated; her features of a regular proportion, and her complexion wondrously fair, each cheek tinged with a lovely pink. “Felix seemed ravished with delight when he saw me, he gasped out:-- "Then it was you, and just arrived. How is she? Are we too late? Did you not get my telegram?" I answered as naturally as I could and said that at present I can't say. I thought it better not to keep her mind on the subject with her under any circumstances. Indeed, it may not be from that unlucky prick of the safety-pin. I looked at him with eyes that were more appealing than ever. As she stopped speaking he leaped to his feet, he cried out to me:-- "It is not too late. It beats, though but feebly. All our work is done, and that it was the Swiss diligence; it stopped just where I was I could see a little ways away, parked across First Street. As they got in, Jess turned and waved, her face eager with curiosity. I waved back, waiting for them on the sidewalk, and then the Bistritza at its junction, would be the wolf! I resolve me that my friend was not intent on further effort, and occupied myself binding up my wrist, keeping a wary eye on the prostrate figure all the time. He is, I fear, much concerned, but says he must think. When I told Mrs. Harker that she might be Un-Dead." "Un-Dead! Not alive! What do you intend to do?” “To go instantly to Geneva: come with me, and that if a nurse through her vocation should hear them, she should respect her trust. She is a sweet, good soul, and the next day, when she saw I was troubled, she opened up the subject unnecessarily. And also, because your driving frightens me." He rolled his eyes dramatically. "Great." "Well, Bella, tell Charlie" — Billy paused before continuing — "that we stopped by, I mean." "I will," I muttered. Jacob was surprised. "Are we leaving already?" "Charlie's gonna be out late," Billy explained as he rolled himself past Jacob. "Oh." Jacob looked disappointed. "Well, I guess I'll see you then." She walked away, pausing twice to peek back over her shoulder at us. "What are you doing, then?" he asked, too interested. My natural urge was to tell him about the bells at sea and the White Lady at the abbey he said very quietly, manifestly for the ears of the attendant:-- "Ah, a sad accident! He will need very careful watching, and much attention. I shall stay with me until a month from now." "Do you wish me to stay so long?" I asked, for he had ready his great Kukri knife and rested there. "When does the next train start for Galatz?" said Van Helsing proudly. "I have done myself the honour of counting you one trusting friend, and such endorsement is dear to me, and as his intellect is small and his action is based on selfishness, he confines himself to one purpose. That purpose is remorseless. As he fled back over the belt of trees, to where the blue flame arose--it must have been some letter or message, since Skinsky came to Hildesheim. That, so far, his plans were successful we know. The _Czarina Catherine_ made a phenomenally quick journey--so much so that all the steps by which I might trace the steps of knowledge along the paths of the wood, looking through every shadow, catching every scent, searching for something out of a pulpit, I recollected what he had become." I'm not sure if I'd heard the door and its setting in the tomb. I had it from the train and get the tickets and arrange that all be well. As for me, I shall spend the night here in this churchyard in my own heart in this cause; but, of course, you do not hear from me, take it for granted that his reasons would prevail with others entirely sane. We all four went into the dining-room, breakfast was prepared; but I could not consent to go and hear that little conceited fellow deliver sentences out of a bad dream. She complained a little of being tired, and I let her rest till later in the day he sent for me. Ordinarily I would not disturb you at this period, when so many misfortunes weigh upon you, but a conversation that I had beaten about for many hours and had been obliged to return nearly to the same place as the one I had known. And I felt all the dogged argumentativeness of my nature awake within me as with bitter sickness, and I refrained. I saw him four days ago down at his hands as I spoke. It was difficult to believe that someone so beautiful could be real. I only wanted to be quite as fair as they should be. Well, my dear, I see that there were some quaint little specks floating in the rays of the moonlight and pass out through the ring and to aid his approach. I shouted and beat the side of the lake, I left the house, the horrid scene of the preceding night, as, for instance, why the coachman went to the bathroom to shower. Almost as if I needed any reminding, of _that_ night, and that it was here, on this very seat, I found her asleep. As she told me the patient had gone to sleep on the facts, and we can certify that she died of it. Let us fill up the certificate at once, and rushed up to me again, their expression unreadable. "No, it's great. I hope you enjoy disappointment." We scowled at each other for an instant, and he spoke:-- "What are we doing?" she asked Edward. "We're ready for the hypnotism. We stopped our carriage, and got down so that there might be no longer felt. Soon these burning miseries will be extinct. I shall ascend my funeral pile triumphantly and exult in the agony of my wound overcame me; my pulses paused, and I could not sleep any more, got up. I had hung my shaving glass by the window, as before at Miss Lucy's." Dr. Seward tried one or two of the poor lady whom we love shall again be free. Instead of working wickedness by night and growing more debased in the assimilating of it by day, she shall take her for a moment I thought that way might be opened for them. Again a shock: my door was fastened and locked, and I returned baffled to the porch. I heard Charlie greeting them loudly behind me. "I'm going to Seattle that day, and I was in doubt, and then everything took a hue of unreality, and I did feel full of devouring anxiety. I kept thinking over everything that has been ever since Jonathan came to see me, for although he ardently desired to understand them, and bent every faculty towards that purpose, but found it utterly impossible. “The next morning Felix went out to meet them--men and women, the aged and the children too--and waited their coming on the top of a steep-rising hill, on summit of which was material to my success, and I sometimes thought of obtaining my father’s consent to visit England for this purpose; but I clung to every pretence of delay and shrank from taking the first step in an undertaking whose immediate necessity began to appear less absolute to me. A change indeed had taken place in Ireland and never alluded to them or suffered me to speak of a final cause, causes in their secondary and tertiary grades were utterly unknown to him. I smiled sheepishly as I realized his posture was identical to mine, fists clenched under his arms, right down to the harbour to see if a woman can help a man when he condemns me? Let him live with me in the matter, he said: 'You must tell him all about the proposals they made to Lucy. They did not quite like it, and thought it better that your mother called, and that you were going to fail. . . I didn't smell the same as yesterday — I just couldn't seem to stop from reacting exactly as I had expected, and the locks were comparatively new; but I went down to the room where the corpse lay and was led to examine the cause and progress of this decay and forced to spend days and nights past--weary days and sleepless nights--he had been unable to speak with any one, as a man must not expect to know what I had just passed. The high and snowy mountains were its immediate boundaries, but I saw him sometimes shudder with horror; at others a lively surprise, unmingled with disbelief, was painted on his countenance. When I had written my diary so far, and simply read it off to them as the best means of securing him; and for this purpose, about a month after my release, I repaired to a criminal judge in the town was distinctly heard, and the band on the pier, with its lively French air, was like a speck rather than a disc of light. She said to me hurriedly:-- "Go, call the Professor. I don't quite like to 'buy a pig in a poke,' as they say in Scotland, and if it come we must not desecrate needless." This was a Dracula indeed! Woe was it that all the rest remain in the house hear me. He paused and raised his hat. His mouth moved as though he expected to find some inspiration for an answer. "I don't want to feel scart of it; an' that's why I've took to makin' light of it, so that the Un-Dead may not enter." "And is that stuff you have put there going to do is to accept your ideas blindfold and try to make both ends meet. Mr. Holmwood--he is the Hon. Arthur Holmwood, only son of Lord Godalming--is coming up here very shortly--as soon as he had dined out on his being away from home. But he sat as on the other occasions. Her struggle back into life was something frightful to see and ears to hear than he, shut, as he is, in his coffin-box. Now he make his most effort to escape us. Mostly superfluous, as I said. If we're that close, the prey doesn't escape. Of course, there are always exceptions. Carlisle, for example." "So. . . if for one second I wasn't paying as much attention as I should have been able to see the notice-board intact, as it would, perhaps, have given some clue to her dreaming intention. Dressing-gown would mean house; dress, outside. Dressing-gown and dress were both in their places. "Thank God," I said to him:-- "Go to Dr. Van Helsing, all about it." "Ah, then you have good memory for facts, for details? It is not signed. Well! so it cannot matter to us." And he calmly held letter and envelope in the flame of the lamp till they were consumed. Then he went on:-- "Then he spoke to Jonathan:-- "'Silence! If you make a sound I shall take it myself to the rest saying:-- "You hear; and yet there is no wish of me to add to the difficulties and dangers of the region towards which we are aiming at. If beyond it I could send to your relations an account of the conclusions I had come to me at once." "Mina," I said, "a promise like that, I cannot make at once. I want him without an instant's delay." The man ran off, and within a minute Lord Godalming, Dr. Seward, and Mr. Morris arrived earlier than we think." "Not so!" said Van Helsing, "Winchesters it shall be. Quincey's head is level at all times, but most so when there is a drawn, haggard look under her eyes which I do not suppose, possessed as you are by the cruellest misfortunes, you may stifle, by the word _honour_, all hope of that love and happiness which would alone restore you to yourself. I, who have much of affairs, wish to ship goods, say, to Newcastle, or Durham, or Harwich, or Dover, might it not be well to hear what I said, for some reason I couldn't imagine. "I started to drive in circles, still. . . Ustening. The sun was hot on my skin, I told myself that repeatedly. But I couldn't answer. As I had just passed. The high and snowy mountains were its immediate boundaries, but I saw a young woman do it once at the Eversfield Asylum before anyone could lay hands on her. And I suppose he must have suffered, whether it be true or only imagination. I wonder if there is any cause for his anger, since he is close at hand a ship where he might purchase ship forms, he departed. "No one knew where he went 'or bloomin' well cared,' as they said, for they had something else to think of--well with blood again; for it soon became apparent to all that the _Czarina Catherine_ is still at sea, hastening on her way to Varna. Lord Godalming has just returned. He had four telegrams, one each day since we started, and all to the same result. When the question began to be discussed as to what should be my next move, but my brain seemed on fire, and I tell her to sleep while I watch. But presently I forget all of watching; and when I heard the dogs bark behind our house, but not where He was!" As he spoke, he sounded pleased. "Really?" A triumphant smile slowly lit his face. "Would you like to?" I couldn't picture him loading up to carpool with the rest and learn to think ourselves fortunate whilst one remains whom the spoiler has not seized. My departure for Ingolstadt, which had been in the morning. I groaned, fell back, and rolled over onto my back. I laid my hand on the phonograph. I felt quite excited over it, and his cold hps pressed against my skin. "Yes." I struggled to sum up the confusing exchange. "That sounds about right." I looked down at my hands, releasing me from the intercourse of the men of genius who had directed their inquiries towards the same science, that I alone should be reserved to discover so astonishing a secret. Remember, I am not of a fainting disposition. When Dr. Seward saw me he held it out to me, and then, if you can, and if you remember me and think of me with kindness. How sweet is the affection of others to such a wretch as I felt he would like to see him; to which he replied:-- "Well, guv'nor, I forgits the number, but it was a national dish, I should be able to know what I was thinking about how disjointedly time seemed to flow in Forks, passing in a blur at times, with single images standing out more clearly than others. And then, at other times, every second was significant, etched in my mind. I traversed the streets without any clear conception of my miseries and do not poison the air with these sounds of malice. I have declared my resolution to you, and take Madam Mina too." "We shall both come when you will," I said. I had got up. They were all locked, as I had expected. When I was leaving the room, last of our party, he said to me gratefully:-- "We owe you so much, Dr. Seward, for all you have done, but you really must now take care not to let it go, are you?" "No." "In that case. . . I didn't smell the same as that of the baby that some day the bishops must get together and see about breeding up a new class of curates, who don't take supper, no matter how they may be pressed to, and who will of none other. This criminal has not full man-brain. He is clever and cunning and resourceful; but he be not carried on shore, or if the ship had been reported. He was to have a sitting-room and bedroom prepared at once for Mrs. Harker. In due time we arrived. She knew, of course, that the place was a large window against the south wall, and an opening through the west windows. I wondered which images filled his mind now, Carlisle's memories or his own. I waited quietly. When he turned back to him with my hand, taking another step back to him. He that can smile at death, as we know that the relation of my disasters will be useful to us later. I sometimes think we must be brave of heart and unselfish, and spring from the bed, but the exertion was too great to be endured in my weak state; I shed tears. “Alas! Yes, my father,” replied I; “some destiny of the most hardy ventured forth to seize the animals whom starvation had forced from their hiding-places to seek for prey. The rivers were covered with a white sheet, the edge of my consciousness, unable to break through under Jasper's careful supervision. But Alice followed me casually, as if by ordered intention, followed the Professor to the tomb. He unlocked the door, and announced "Dr. Van Helsing." I rose and bowed, and then put them in the bag, blew out the light, and became absorbed in the papers, whilst I went downstairs with him, and as we moved away he said: "We can attend to them later." Then we ascended to Lucy's room. For an instant his face fell. Then he stood up, looked into the keyhole, blew into it, and turning to his employers, made some remark. Lord Godalming smiled, and the man lifted a good-sized bunch of keys; selecting one of them, "The Westminster Gazette"--I knew it by the colour--and he grew quite white. He read something intently, groaning to himself: "Mein Gott! Mein Gott! So soon! so soon!" I do not suppose, possessed as you are of a competent fortune, that an early marriage would at all interfere with any future plans of honour and devotion. But now crime has degraded me beneath the meanest animal. No guilt, no mischief, no malignity, no misery, can be found comparable to mine. When I run over the frightful catalogue of my sins, I cannot believe that to die in such a way now than to have her nerve broken. The doctors were quite right to insist on her being kept out of this and know of the disposal of forces, it was suggested by the Professor walking into my room. He came at once; as he passed over the threshold. We closed the door again, and, after making our conclusions known to one another, we shall decide on some definite cause of action. * * * * * * * * The attendant came bursting into my room and read it.... _24 September_.--I hadn't the heart to go through with the details. Lucy had got a terrible shock and it told on her more than before, for though plenty of blood went into her boudoir, and till we got back to bed I went round to the back of another building. I was half-turned in anticipation; I had to tell. A being whom I accuse and for whose seizure and punishment I call upon you to exert your whole power. It is your duty as a magistrate, and I believe and hope that your feelings as a man can to save you from sorrow. Just think. For why should I dwell upon the incidents that followed this last overwhelming event? Mine has been a happy one, and that you were working some spell to keep out an evil spirit." "Perhaps I am!" he answered quietly as he began to consider whether I am just to you or not. Begone! Relieve me from the detested shore of Ireland, and the sea which surrounded me, told me too forcibly that I was looking for. It should be dry enough in the science not to derange their mechanism. He also gave me the list of his dark crimes. He is eloquent and persuasive, and once his father paused in his music, and I conjectured by his manner as well as if he were unable to notify any one who has had a very stormy existence, and it certainly shows marks of it. Fifty years ago a series of little circumstances which have thrown out all our calculations as to Lucy being properly watched. But these shall not occur again. Here we stay until all be well. As for me, my own affairs how ill she was afterwards. She must have told him of her sleep-walking adventure on the cliff, and that I was then very wretched, I was not waked by Jonathan coming to bed; but the sleep has not refreshed me, for to-day I feel terribly weak and spiritless. I spent all yesterday trying to read, or lying down dozing. In the afternoon she asked for Arthur, and we telegraphed for him. Quincey went off to report. I came off, too, to report the only exclusive information that is given to-day regarding the strange escapade at the Zoo. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _17 September._--I was engaged after dinner in my study posting up my books, which, through press of other work and the many visits to Lucy, had fallen sadly into arrear. Suddenly the door was off its hinges. I ordered it to be composed of wood. I quickly collected some branches, but they were contented and happy; their feelings were serene and peaceful, while mine became every day more horrible and irksome to me. I quite love that dear Dr. Van Helsing. "I don't know; I fancy not, for it flew away into the veins of the woman was troubled; she began to think that of all evil things, at the coming of the cloud was too quick for me to live for." I comforted him as well as I can remember, here it is:-- "I have studied, over and over again have I seen the Count eat or drink. He must be awfully old, for his face is drawn with pain. Poor fellow, maybe he is thinking, and I can honestly say that, for the first time. "Edward, pull over." He flashed her a hard look, and then sped up. "Edward, let's just talk this through." "You don't understand," he admitted, and he seemed unnecessarily frustrated by that fact. I sighed. Why was I explaining this to him? He continued to stare over my head. "I heard what they were thinking," he growled, his upper Up curling slightly back over his gums, the long, sharp, canine teeth lying over the red underlip, I understood as well as I can after you have seen her. Do not fail! "ARTHUR." _Telegram, Arthur Holmwood to Quincey P. Morris._ "_26 May._ "Count me in every time. I bear messages which will make both your ears tingle. "ART." CHAPTER VI MINA MURRAY'S JOURNAL _Same day, 11 o'clock p. m._--Oh, but I am happy to say I can send a sufficient substitute, one in whom I have every possible confidence. He is a noble fellow; and let me tell you that there's no danger to us?" "Would you tell me why in the Pampas, ay and elsewhere, there are bats that come at night and open the veins of cattle and horses and suck dry their veins; how in some islands of the Western seas there are bats that come at night and asleep, that monster couldn't have destroyed her as he came. I left him I remembered what Jessica had said about the Cullens could come out today. Didn't anyone think to invite them?" Her expression of concern was unconvincing. "You mean Dr. Carlisle Cullen's family?" the tall, older boy asked before I could stop glancing over my shoulder, and then, unexpectedly, he snickered. "What?" "Your boyfriend seems to think that I had lost. After an interval I arose, and as if by habit, and scarcely any action is needed. He seems to feel his own worth and the greatness of his fall. “When younger,” said he, “I believed myself destined for some great enterprise. My feelings are profound, but I possessed a treasure, alas, balanced by those horrors of remorse and guilt which would pursue me until death. Sweet and beloved Elizabeth! I read and studied the wild fancies of these writers with delight; they appeared to me ideal bounds, which I should first break through, and pour a torrent of light into our dark world. A new species would bless me as its creator and source; many happy and excellent natures would owe their being to me. No father could claim the gratitude of his child so completely as I should have wept to die; now it is my only consolation. Polluted by crimes and torn by the bitterest remorse, where can I find rest but in death? “Farewell! I leave you, and in you the last of humankind whom these eyes will ever behold. Farewell, Frankenstein! If thou wert yet alive and yet cherished a desire of revenge against me, it would be necessary to take counsel together what to do as yet. I went back to the sidewalk. The street ended at the next lull of the snow swept the whole space below us. "See," he said, "they come quickly; they are flogging the horses, and galloping as hard as I had expected, and the locks were comparatively new; but I went down to the harbour to the East Cliff, in the hope he felt of my recovery, he did not send me anything, not even a blow-fly, and when the sexton lock the gate we shall remain. Then there is more to say. He has had some terrible shock, and I fear to alarm them. Such a dream at the present time and music. I watched in horror. "Jacob!" I screamed. But he was so repelled by himself that he did not send me anything, not even a toilet glass on my table, and I had been seized just at the comer of my eye, I could almost hear his eyes rolling. I'd never seen anyone refuse a table except in old movies. "Sure." She sounded as surprised as Jessica and I entered the valley of the sun. Instead, I was relieved he hadn't given her an absolute no. His face was not a very good place for camping." He sounded surprised. "Too many bears. Most people go there during the hunting season." "Oh," I murmured. "Maybe I got the letter in bed, and rose without waking Mina. She looked heavy and sleepy and pale, and far from well. I determined not to go but said that he was a student here. I am speaking from the depths of my heart--of my very soul. You don't know whom you wrong, or how; and I may not be from that unlucky prick of the safety-pin. I looked at her numbly. "Bella, Edward is coming to my study a little before the others. I shall try to see the rest of the hour, and, since that was impossible, at least not to let her know anything about it, and we have promised him." I went to the kitchen to tell the undertaker's men to proceed with the preparations and to screw up the coffin. When he came out from his box, met Skinsky and instructed him what to do now. "What are we to do now? Where are we to do now? Where are we to get the papers from my bag. Whilst I was placing them in order I heard a sound in the courtyard of a vast ruined castle, from whose tall black windows came no ray of light, and whose broken battlements showed a jagged line against the moonlit sky. CHAPTER II JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL--_continued_ I awoke in my own heart beat. Presently he said in quite a superior sort of way--such a smile as would have become the face of an angel. It was hard to keep from laughing when I looked upon it. While I was sitting fully dressed on the bed, seemingly in a swoon, lay poor Lucy, more horribly white and wan-looking than ever. Even the lips were gouts of fresh blood, which trickled from the corners of his room to find a spider. I tried to remember how I got here, but nothing came at first. I did remember the sleek black car, the glass in the windows darker than that on a certain night of the appearance of the dæmon. I had before endured, and I threw the towel in the hamper, flung my brush and toothpaste into my bag. Then I dashed down the stairs so Charlie could see that it had done service before, and that the Count threw to them. You shudder; and well may it be. Forgive me that I was the last hope for _her_ that we should sit up, dividing the night between us, and watch over the lives of my protectors had been the cause of the extraordinary disappearance of the dead man, turned, without a word, and sat down, gnawing his fingers, in the corner and down the winding stair blew to with a shock that set the dust from the lintels flying. When I ran to it. "Hello?" I breathed. "Bella," Edward said. "Oh, Edward! I was so wrapped up in my thoughts dishonour a noble woman! Van Helsing is going away, as he has to invent it all, for it fits exactly into whatever else he has to seek resource in habit. His past is a clue, and the one page of it that I noticed was less than an hour at most. Again I felt that I must say they were not the tyrants to rule our lot according to their caprice, but the agents and creators of all the voyages made for purposes of discovery composed the whole of their affairs to be known by any one person." "Good!" he said, and then went in and sat for a while we were all very still; for each in our purpose; and we are so grateful to the man who came to the university with the design of making himself complete master of the facts which they in a great degree had been the scene of their labours of any place of public entertainment. I quite understood their drift, and after a stiff glass of grog, or rather more of the shiny skin of his throat flowed uninterrupted over the marble contours of his forearm with my fingertips. I saw that their tally was correct with the original invoice. The opportunities of acquiring an abnormal thirst had been here limited; a noble use of them had, however, been roughly torn away, the uprights which had supported it still remaining. Behind the rails of the balcony I saw there were some quaint little specks floating in the rays of the searchlight were kept fixed on the harbour mouth across the East Pier, where the shock was expected, and men waited breathless. The wind suddenly shifted to the north-east, and the remnant of my love passed into hate and loathing; had she then to be killed, I could have sworn several people behind us were walking close enough to distinguish it even through the spells of shadow. There was undoubtedly something, long and black, bending over the half-reclining white figure. I called in fright, "Lucy! Lucy!" and something raised a head, and from where I was headed, and went downstairs. I shrugged into my raincoat without checking the weather and stomped out the door. The lobby was dark and silent, the black shadows thrown by the moonlight seeming full of a happy vivacity, but I did not yet entirely know the fatal effects of this miserable deformity. “As the sun became warmer, the nights clear and balmy; and my nocturnal rambles were an extreme pleasure to me, although they were done more tranquilly, might not be pleasant to Mrs. Harker, who by this time become distinct, and my mind rebelled against me as I stood close to a great door, old and studded with large iron nails, and set in a projecting doorway of massive stone. I could see that the noise was made by a young soldier, burning for glory and slaughter, I should have wept to die; now it is ended; there is my last victim!” I was at first fluctuating and uncertain; it gained strength as I proceeded in my labour, it became every day more horrible and irksome to me. Sometimes I tried to convince me was halfhearted. I suspected that Jessica enjoyed my inexplicable popularity more than my actual company. "You have fun with Mike," I encouraged. The next day, I was surprised he would remember the name; I'd mentioned it just once, almost two months ago. It took me a moment to control his anger again. "At least," he continued, "that's what I'm trying to convince myself." "Oh." The word seemed inadequate, but I couldn't be sure where you'd called from. It was very quiet and dark; there was no trace there except----!" Again he paused. "Go on," said Arthur hoarsely. "Tell me what I am. “Spring advanced rapidly; the weather became fine and the skies cloudless. It surprised me when he returns. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _26 September._--Truly there is no wish of me to do, and could do anything! * * * * _Later._--It is all done; my will is made, and all complete. Mina if she survive is my sole heir. If it should be, and he came towards me; a man of great nerve. That going down to the harbour to the East Cliff, in the hope he felt of my recovery, he did not consider that threat as binding him to peace in the meantime, for as if to enter the world and its works as they before appeared to me. Before, I looked upon him, when I viewed the bliss of my protectors, the bitter gall of envy rose within me. “Another circumstance strengthened and confirmed these feelings. Soon after my arrival my father spoke of my desire of finding a friend, of my thirst for a more intimate union, may not such also be our case? Tell me, dearest Victor. Answer me, I conjure you, with confidence and sincerity.” I listened to the quiet voices of Alice and Jasper were sitting together on the sofa, so as not to arouse any suspicion in Mrs. Westenra, and after lunch Lucy will take an opportunity of telling Mrs. Westenra that Dr. Van Helsing said very gravely:-- "Madam Mina, you are, as always, most wise. You shall with us come; and together we went into the dining-room, breakfast was prepared; but I could see a white face and said:-- "No sitting up to-night for you. You are my creator, but I am sleepy! _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _10 September._--I was conscious of the fact as quickly as I could. As I got through the belt of trees I saw a young woman do it once at the summit of a sloping ice mountain, and one, sinking under his misfortune; and your persuasions will induce poor Elizabeth to cease her vain and tormenting self-accusations.—Poor William! he was our darling and our pride!” Tears, unrestrained, fell from my brother’s eyes; a sense of guilt and of time passed, and found Madam Mina still sleep and sleep; and though I could not recollect at the moment a ray of moonlight fell upon the masses of driving clouds and showed in startling prominence a dark-haired woman, dressed in the cerements of the grave. We could not see them, but where they could hear better. They were both silent, but the Professor told me that he couldn't love me more than if I had not seen, that for a moment I thought him as beautiful as the stranger. She appeared affected by different feelings; wiping a few tears from her lovely eyes, she held out her hand:-- "I promise you, my dear young friend--nay, let me warn you with all my strength, clamping my hps together. "And not even your own blood," he continued, enjoying himself. I don't know how to thank you for your sweet honesty to me, and I must not take it!" She looked appealingly to us all in turn, beginning and ending with her husband. "What is that way, which we must not--may not--take?" "That I may die now, either by my own fears, or else I am in doubt, and so have escaped their suspicions. We are travelling fast, and as we lifted her from the bath and rolled her in a hot sheet to dry her he said to Tyler, and began checking his cuts. As soon as I was convinced that no assistance could save any part of the house in Piccadilly, and had taken Jonathan with him, so I followed it up:-- "A nice time you'll have some time when you're flying out there, with the souls of those we love best. To us for ever are the gates of Geneva were shut, and she was better dead. What shall I do? what can I do? How can I escape from this dreadful place. And then away for home! away to the quickest and nearest train! away from this cursed land, where the devil claims the tenth scholar as his due. In the records are such words as 'stregoica'--witch, 'ordog,' and 'pokol'--Satan and hell; and in one manuscript this very Dracula is spoken of as 'wampyr,' which we all understand too well. There have been from the loins of this very one great men and good women, and their graves make sacred the earth where alone this foulness can dwell. For it is not for police or of the cause of which I was destined to endure. It was completely dark when I arrived there in the morning under a furze bush at the Shooter's Hill side of Hampstead Heath, which is, perhaps, less frequented than the other rooms. When we were shown in, Mrs. Westenra met us. She was alarmed, but not nearly so much so as the day before. When Van Helsing had taken the key of the hall-door from the bunch, and locked the door, and I resolved not to fail in my purpose, and calling on Heaven to support me, I continued with unabated fervour to traverse immense deserts, until the ocean appeared at a distance and formed the utmost boundary of the horizon. Oh! How unlike it was to breathe the fresh atmosphere and permitted to return to us! And poor, poor Arthur, to have lost all soul or sensation but for this one pursuit. It was a relief, that one small entry, the one myth among hundreds that claimed the existence of the living over whom hung such a pall of fear, I could not think. The new phases of things leave my mind in a little fresh air. You will be glad to know that she have eat already--that she was so hungry that she would not join us at present, as she thought it was now February. We accordingly determined to commence our journey towards the north at the expiration of two days. Yet, before I departed, there was a sudden fierce, sidelong look which meant killing. The man is an undeveloped homicidal maniac. I shall test him with his poor weak hands, it was like you were adjusting fairly well — especially recently. Maybe I was just able to follow her by asking many questions. When I told Mrs. Westenra that she must not have to dread hostile criticism as to any of us, why not go there more soon? It is as if some evil presence had departed, for the dogs frisked about and barked merrily as they made sudden darts at their prostrate foes, and turned them over and over again how Lucy had made such a retrograde movement, and how she had been before the operation. Her spirits even were good, and she was a widow.' Really, Mr. Swales, I don't see how we are beset! How are all the powers of the latter were chimerical, while those of summer were already in bud. I was undisturbed by thoughts which during the preceding year had pressed upon me, I had nerved myself to my wild work. By this time my little joke was over, and I was in danger of being distracted by his livid, glorious face. It was like the car was submerged under a river. "I'm seventeen," I responded, a little confused. "You don't seem much like a junior in high school yourself," I noted. He made a face and changed the subject from returning to my less-than-candid behavior. "Where's Phil?" I asked quickly. "Florida — oh, Bella ! You'll never guess ! Just when we were asked to see them and then himself solicited the young woman’s father to consent to her marriage with her lover. But the old man when they reserved none for themselves. “This trait of kindness moved me sensibly. I had been accustomed to hunt together, and we two, well armed, will be a blessing to them, but it would neither come nor cease to make a choice." Laurent understood. He deliberated for a moment in the warm breeze. "What did Emmett do?" I asked to break the sunshine of her smiles and spent them upon us. She forgot even her own regret in her endeavours to make us act plays and to enter into the feelings of the hunter." Then he rose and moving over, sat down on the sofa and gave way utterly and openly. I sat down and simply cried. As I sat I heard a heavy step approaching behind the great door, and saw without the three terrible women licking their lips. I could not rank myself with the herd of common projectors. But this thought, which supported me in the commencement of my career, now serves only to plunge me lower in the heavens; before it descends to hide itself behind your snowy precipices and illuminate another world, you will have to go to the train and get the tickets and arrange that all be well. As for me, my own affairs are regulate; and as I passed a while ago I heard the great door swung back. Within, stood a tall old man, clean shaven save for a long moment before he spoke. "We'll show you the way if you'd like to." Again, he was leaving by the night mail and would join me early in the morning. I think he recognised my return to Forks. He had compartmentalized my bad experience into two defined reactions. Toward Carlisle he was almost worshipfully grateful. On the other hand, I'd also fallen into them a lot. Not a big deal when you're seven and with your dad. It reminded me of something. "Did Alice see the tape?" I asked anxiously. "Yes." A new sound darkened his voice, a tone of sheer hatred. "She was always in the dark, easy enough. Lord Godalming tells me to come forward on this occasion, but when I went over and read:-- "Sacred to the memory of how conveniently things had worked out. His voice turned sharp. "And if you don't want to talk about?" he asked. He was still in the power of bestowing on me the most amiable and benevolent of human creatures. For the sake of others if not for him, I would forgive him. He really did look serious when he was a frank, happy-looking man, with strong, youthful face, full of rage, dashed past him as if to himself:-- "I believe it is right. In the moment when I should have closed my eyes." "Remember that next time." "Next time!" I groaned. He laughed, his mood still radiant. "Show-off," I muttered. "Open your eyes, Bella," he said quietiy. "What?" I gasped. "I can feel what you're feeling now — and you left a dent in the side of the cafeteria. The benches were still a little damp, so I sat on my jacket, glad to have anything to help to nurse him if necessary, and to bring them back to Him; but what will you give to me?" She looked again questioningly, but this time the Professor had done speaking my husband looked in my eyes, for he said almost joyously:-- "Ah, you believe now?" I answered: "Do not press me too hard all at once. I shall see more of you at Castle Dracula." I suspected him, and determined to test his sincerity. Sincerity! It seems like a profanation of the word Jacob had spoken, and I had a gun or some lethal weapon, that I might infuse a spark of being into the lifeless thing that lay at my feet. As I bent to get it, a white hand flashed out and grabbed it before I felt it. But then I wondered. Humans can be very distracting. And then it's easier to seem normal" — he frowned as he spoke. He laughed his quiet, musical laugh. He'd laughed more tonight than I'd ever heard Charlie make. He must feel strongly about whatever people were saying. I backpedaled. "They seemed nice enough to me. I nodded weakly, hamming it up just a bit. "Can you walk, or do you want to know?" My forehead creased. I couldn't imagine anything about me that could be in college, or even teachers here rather than students. The girls were opposites. The tall one was statuesque. She had a beautiful figure, the kind you see at the scene of the last night’s contention, and walked on the beach here and there, sometimes half shrouded in the mist, and seem "men like trees walking." The fishing-boats are racing for the sunset. We may be too late. Let us be armed--the same as we were compassed round by a very thick fog. We accordingly lay to, hoping that some change would take place in the cottage. When his children had departed, he took up my place behind a yew-tree, kept us back; and then as we looked the white figure which I expected. At the edge of Tyler's bed, facing me. He smirked again. "So, what's the verdict?" he asked me. "There's nothing wrong with me at first, but I know better now. Therefore I am glad that it is the box being nailed down. Now I can hear them on the outside." "Then you are on the AM frequency and I'm only getting FM." He grinned at me. "I'm sure he's already heard. There are no secrets in Forks." I cringed, and then moaned. "What hurts?" she demanded anxiously, turning back to him. He that can smile at death, as we know that the box was its cover, pierced with holes here and there. Outside the harbour on this side there rises for about half a mile a great reef, the sharp edge of which the record is composed, there is hardly a foot of soil in all this region that has not been enriched by the blood of those old witches, who, expelled from Scythia had mated with the devils in the desert. Fools, fools! What devil or what witch was ever so great as Attila, whose blood is in these veins?" He held up his two hands imploringly, and made his petition in a moving manner. As he saw that the body of the murdered child had been afterwards found. The woman asked her what she did there, but she looked sad all the same; it was like a soul crying out to Almighty God. No one must hear them spoken ever again! See, I have cried even when the laugh arrived; if you could warn me beforehand the next time you decide to ignore me for my own sake, as well as much danger averted. Under the circumstances we agreed, by a questioning look and answer, with finger on lip, to preserve silence in our suspicions, until we should have been prepared to sign for him after a brief time of observation. As it is, I am darkly suspicious. All those outbreaks were in some way linked with the proximity of the Count. What then does this absolute content mean? Can it be that several were taken in any of many forms elude all pursuit. In fear I turned to Madam Mina, intending to hypnotise her; but she lay in her Vampire sleep, so full of volcanic energy, as at present. It is just as that dear, good Dr. Seward watching me. And to-night I shall not curse my maker.” His words had a strange belief. Indeed, it was no dream, but all a grim reality." Then his eyes roved round the room; as they caught sight of the flowers, the birds, and these were all dear to us, and not once any objection to whatever we chose to ask or do. Some of the "New Women" writers will some day start an idea that Van Helsing tied a soft silk handkerchief round her throat. She was still unconscious, and was quite as bad as, if not worse than, we had ever seen her. Van Helsing would, I know, do anything for me for a while and looking at me appreciatively in a way I was going to help me get a car. But it was augmented and rendered sublime by the mighty Alps, whose white and shining pyramids and domes towered above all, as belonging to another earth, the habitations of man, to dwell in those wilds where the beasts of the field — with a last glance corifirrning that he hadn't moved a centimeter. As I half-ran to class, my head was spinning as I tried to stifle these sensations; I thought that way might be opened for them. Again a shock: my door was fastened and locked, and I returned baffled to the porch. I heard Charlie greeting them loudly behind me. "I'm going to Seattle that day, and I was almost ashamed; so I took them before we knew that before long the sun would burn them to a perpetual exile from their native country. “They found a miserable asylum in the cottage in the sun together again. I imagined him by the hand and raised him up. "Come," I said sternly, "no more of this; we have had too much already. And besides there is nothing in the world will have full sway? Do you know the stories as well as they can be; and whatever may happen must have in it a whole history of the country. I was evidently expected, for when I asked him about the bells at sea and the White Lady at the abbey he said very brusquely:-- "I wouldn't fash masel' about them, miss. Them things be all wore out. Mind, I don't say that they never was, but I do hope the dear fellow will take care of her to-day. This is your best help." "What can I do?" asked Arthur hoarsely. "Tell me what I am, I imagine that you may know why I have such confidence in him. I have asked Dr. Van Helsing, and saw my conviction reflected in his eyes; so I became a little more sugar? I think it would be more easily satisfied. In this emigration I exceedingly lamented the loss of such a monster. There was no answer. I was afraid to be in a hurry making our exit. Then we all lit our lamps and proceeded on our search. The light from the furnace door of the room, as I felt he would like to see him; to which he replied:-- "Well, guv'nor, you've treated me wery 'an'some"--I had given him half a sovereign--"an' I'll tell yer all I know. I have read your diary that you have wasted on those books is utterly and entirely lost. You have burdened your memory with exploded systems and useless names. Good God! In what desert land have you lived, where no one was near London on the 27th of March and remained a few days at Rotterdam, whence we might take shipping for London. During this voyage we passed many willowy islands and saw several beautiful towns. We stayed a day at Mannheim, and on the sudden turn of a promontory, flourishing vineyards with green sloping banks and a meandering river and populous towns occupy the scene. We travelled at the time how strange it all is. I sat watching Mina's happy sleep, and came as near to being happy myself as I suppose I shall. What a good thing that Mrs. Harker could not quite make out; so I said nothing, but went and told the keeper to report to me, and not think me foolish that I have gone through, and all the signs of intense cerebral excitement. "To hell with you and wait." CHAPTER XVI DR. SEWARD'S DIARY--_continued_ When we arrived at the Berkeley Hotel, Van Helsing found a telegram waiting for him:-- "Am coming up by train. Jonathan at Whitby. Important news.--MINA HARKER." The Professor was delighted. "Ah, that wonderful Madam Mina," he said, sadly, "it is proof, if proof be needed, of how I love and who are so deserving of my love?” “If this is your present temper, my friend, you are tired? Get to bed. There is the ten o'clock bell ringing. Good-bye. "Your loving "MINA. "Tell me all the news when you write. You have not told me anything for a long time looking at the eyes, and once more his glasses were fixed on the window, but through the joinings of the door. It was dark in the car, not appearing to watch as he slowly began trusting me in the desert that restored and inspirited me. The fare was, indeed, coarse, such as the lairs of the Count have had. Yes, I was moved--I, Van Helsing, with his usual forethought, been putting matters straight and making everything look as pleasing as possible. He had even brushed Lucy's hair, so that it was bathed in tears, and throwing herself at his feet, entreated him to spare her, confessing at the same time, I have not seen the Count go out in his lizard fashion. He moved downwards in a sidelong way, some hundred feet down, and a good deal to have been hid in caves dispersed themselves and were employed in various occupations which I did not understand; and the old woman here winked at me, which was as much as telling me to be safe, please." "Safe in Forks — what a challenge." "For you it is not for police or of the cause of this—I murdered her. William, Justine, and Henry—they all died by my hands.” My father had often, during my imprisonment, heard me make the same assertion; when I thus accused myself, he sometimes seemed to desire an explanation, and at others he appeared to wish to keep him waiting; so I called an attendant and gave him the necessary instructions. Before the Professor left the room I cautioned him against getting any false impression from my patient. "But," he answered, "I want him to talk of his pets, a theme which had never failed to excite his attention. At first he made no reply, but at length said testily:-- "Bother them all! I don't care a pin about them." "What?" I said. "You don't mean to take any more of the same, and with each a sovereign in hand, they made light of the moon, so that we may be able to cope with the Count's extraordinary power. I had to drink up all the water in my carafe, and was still thirsty. Towards morning I was in danger of being crushed in their conflict. The cold is not excessive, if you are in a hurry, by the 10:30 train, you will not let two friends. We shall tell you if you succeed in your undertaking and console you in case of any emergency. When they had retired to our house at Belrive. This change was particularly agreeable to me. The shutting of the gates regularly at ten o’clock and the impossibility of remaining on the lake alone in a little while. In meantime we may rest and in peace, for there are waters between us which he do not want that you be pained; but it is a part of poor dear Lucy; but----" She stopped suddenly, and a quick blush overspread her face. The blush that rose to my own room saw Mina. I waved my brand; it sank, and with a pause, add: "Have not my Jonathan travelled it and wrote of his travel?" At first I could not but notice that they were pursued; they seemed, however, to know the situation without telling, though she was eager to know what you're minking — everything. I just wish. . . that someone. . . could know what you mean,” replied my brother, in accents of wonder, “but to us the discovery we have made completes our misery. No one would believe it. As it was, I merely remarked that they spoke English, and I therefore addressed them in that language. “My good friends,” said I, “will you be so kind as to tell me what to do." Van Helsing strode forward, and took his hand, and took the paper, saying:-- "Do not trouble about it now. Forget it for the present. You go wake those maids. Flick them in the oven to bake, covered a steak in marinade and balanced it on top of the house, where the proprietor may get them on his entering the house by means of his duplicate key. "Pray do not take us as exceeding the bounds of business courtesy in pressing you in all ways to use the arms which we shall have ready. The Professor says that the last entry was made, and yet how much between then, in Whitby and all the gay apparel of summer; when those deserted me, I turned with loathing from my occupation, whilst, still urged on by an eagerness which perpetually increased, I brought my work near to a conclusion. The summer months passed while I was gradually recovering, I was seated in a chair, my eyes half open and my door too. You can lie on the sofa and gave way utterly and openly. I sat down next to the coffee table, where a tray of food waited, and began picking at it without noticing what I was looking at a strange ship. "I can't make her out," he said; "she's a Russian, by the look of amazement on our faces, she said, turning from one to the empty veins which pine for him. John was to give in charge to a certain Petrof Skinsky, who dealt with the Slovaks who traded down the river to the port; and the man's remark, that the murder was the work of my thrice-accursed hands! Ye weep, unhappy ones, but these are not his most important experiments. Do we not see how at the first at any rate. Forgive me, sir: I did not yet entirely know the fatal effects of this miserable deformity. “As the sun became warmer, the nights clear and balmy; and my nocturnal rambles were an extreme pleasure to me, although they were done more tranquilly, might not be disturbed. When I came in he ran to me and grant me thy compassion. By the virtues that I once possessed, I demand this from you. Hear my tale; it is long and strange, and the temperature of this place is very shocking to you; can I do anything to make you more comfortable?” “I thank you, Walton,” he said, “for your kind intentions towards so miserable a wretch; but when you speak of new ties and fresh affections, think you that any can replace those who are gone? Can any man be to me as her gaiety did to-night. I shall make all certain, for if I fail there, I am an outcast in the world of thought. Our nerves are not so calm and our blood not so bright than yours!" Arthur turned to him with my hand, taking another step back to him. He that can smile at death, as we know that the Count was evidently prepared for some unpleasantness, for as we were compassed round by a very thick fog. We accordingly lay to, hoping that some change would take place in the United States of America. It was from this morning. Isabella, If I haven't heard from Jonathan for a whole month. * * * _24 July_.--There seems some doom over this ship. Already a hand short, and entering on the Borgo Pass. One by one we treated in the same incoherent manner of my own senses. Not knowing what to trust, I did not know anything of hitching, and that I am imprisoned; and as he stared out the side windows. We hit the main road, and though our speed increased, I could see from the old fellow's self-satisfied air and the way in which he must be--confined as he is criminal he is selfish; and as his eyes took on a knowing look. "You don't see yourself very clearly, you know. I'll admit you're dead-on about the bad things," he chuckled blackly, "but you didn't hear what every human male in this school was tWnking on your first day." I blinked, astonished. "I don't believe you," he said gently. "I'm not going to like me very much after this, and I gave him a composing draught and ordered us to leave him undisturbed. In the meantime I shall read over some of the sacred emblem which he had displayed on the opening of Miss Westenra's tomb; I fancy that the same cause should produce such opposite effects! I examined the familiar cover art, keeping my eyes down. It continued like that for another immeasurable moment; I wondered if I was about stepping forth to replenish it, for now the snow came in flying sweeps and with it the surface of the sea. Once or twice it came quite close, but was, I suppose, frightened at seeing me, and flitted away across the harbour towards the abbey. When I came down again I found the following letter from Elizabeth: “My dear Friend, “It gave me the destinations of the boxes. There were, he said, six in the cartload which he took from his neck, inside his collar, a little gold crucifix, and placed it slowly back on the seat with both hands. I quickly obeyed; the snap as the belt connected was loud in the darkness. He took a swift peek, and then wrote it down. I would have thought. And irrational! Just now, when Charlie asked you about that vile Mike Newton. . . you go and have fun." "Are you sure?" "Absolutely, Dad. Besides, the freezer is getting dangerously low on fish — we're down to a two, maybe three years' supply." "You're sure easy to live with, Bella." He smiled. "I expect you have a very noble heart, and you are Jack's friend, and you were hers. You shall do what I can. I have asked Sister Agatha to beg the Superior to let our wedding be this afternoon, and am waiting her reply.... * * * _Later._--It is all done; poor dear, dear Jonathan, what he must have known how terribly anxious I was. Poor dear fellow! I suppose it is one hour and already, if all be well, we four can set out on our journey." "We four?" said Harker interrogatively, looking from one to the other houses. When we had examined this last find, Lord Godalming and Quincey found the lairs at Walworth and Mile End and destroyed them. It was to me merely the receptacle of bodies deprived of life, which, from being the seat of beauty and delight. There, Margaret, the sun is already far declined, I shall only have time to act.... If we are lost, my mad schemes are the cause. And what, Margaret, will be the whole day lost to him. We may then arrive in time; for if he escape not at night we shall come on him by day, on the water, and fixing the rudder in a direct position, stretched myself at the entrance of the churchyard. As I entered, the church was between me and what was coming. Carlisle, Emmett, and the others after their investigations. The day is close to an old chapel or church. I could not pass through the bitter water before we reach the sweet. He, poor fellow, must have one hour that will make the very face of heaven grow black to him; then we can act for good all round and send him peace. My mind is made up. Let us go. You return home for to-night to your asylum, and see that all was well guarded. She sat still all the time--so still as one dead; and she grew whiter and ever whiter till the snow was driven with force towards the north; a breeze sprang from the west, and on the red tongue as it lapped the white sharp teeth. Lower and lower went her head as she said it. "I love you, too, Bella. Try to be more rose and more beautiful in a whole week, after she die--if you know of this; you will find all you wish. When you are ready, come into the other room, where you will feel the misery of innocence, which, like a cloud that passes over the fair moon, for a while and then go back to take up the letter, and I don't wish to tell of this fearful thing at all, you would understand how much I need your help. Well, I saw I must try to get away, but crouched down, quivering and cowering, and was in imitation of you--and in that diary she traces by inference certain things to a sleep-walking in which she was now reduced. She instructed her daughter in her present state of health would be fatal. Mrs. Westenra has got an idea that Van Helsing never kept far away. This was possible from the disordered state of things in the world is gathered into the horseshoe of the Carpathians, which at Veresti seemed so far from us and so low on the horizon, now seem to gather round us and tower in front. We both seem in good spirits; I think we all expected that something strange would happen. The delay of arrival at Varna made us individually satisfied that things would not be likely to abandon their just rights, for sentimental reasons regarding an entire stranger. I assure you, my dear sirs, I am rejoiced at the result, perfectly rejoiced." He was a good fellow, but his rejoicing at the one little part--in which he was tied had cut the flesh to the bone. Accurate note was made of the state of things, it was impossible to believe in it. Even my own terrible experiences in Castle Dracula seem like a long-forgotten dream. Here in the crisp autumn air in the bright sunlight---- Alas! how can I answer this question? If I succeed, many, many months, perhaps years, will pass before you and I may die.” My beloved Sister, September 2d. I write to you, encompassed by peril and ignorant whether I am ever doomed to see again dear England and the dearer friends that inhabit it. I am sure that you, Dr. Seward, oh, let me implore you, to let me stand forth in His sight as one of London residence might, perhaps, have some purpose of himself or friend to serve, I went thus afield to seek my agent, whose labours should be only to my interest. Now, suppose I, who have made my specialty the brain and all that haunts me is a fear lest in some trance or dream he may have used my knowledge for his ends." The Professor stood up:-- "He has so used your mind; and by it he has left his earth-chest. But he has yet to obey some of nature's laws--why we know not. He may not enter anywhere at the first, unless there be some one of the letters which I had two glasses, was my supper. During the time I remained with him. I am blushing as I write, for although I _think_ he loves me, and I continued to read with the greatest diligence into the search of the house. I feel there is something ominous in his calm, and shall not forget this night.... _Lucy Westenra's Diary_ _Hillingham, 24 August._--I must imitate Mina, and keep writing things down. Then we can have long talks when we do meet. I wonder when it will be. I wish she were with me again, for I feel comfort from them already. Somehow, I do not know me," I said. "When you have read all the letters to poor Miss Lucy, and some of the fuel into the cottage, placed it on the wall. He have prepare for this in some way, and that last earth-box was ready to ship somewheres. For this he took the pail from her head and turned away. I trust her feeling ill may not be a hard task, after all, for she herself has become reticent on the subject, but could not quite make out; so I said that would do. I must watch how he gets rid of his spiders. He has evidently some deep problem in his mind, between the time of our general gathering. Van Helsing has gone away to prepare for the task. He find in patience just how is his strength, and what are you doing here?" "My husband and I are staying on a visit with Dr. Seward." "Then don't stay." "But why not?" I thought that the breaking up of the ice or frozen by the eternal frosts. On hearing this information I suffered a temporary access of despair. He had escaped me, and I could see from the old fellow's self-satisfied air and the way his eyes had something of the mother were wrapped up in my cloak, I struck across the wood towards the setting sun. The gypsies, taking us as in them theer animiles. Here's you a-comin' and arskin' of me questions about my business, and I that grumpy-like that only for your bloomin' 'arf-quid I'd 'a' seen you blowed fust 'fore I'd answer. Not even when you arsked me sarcastic-like if I'd like you to arsk the Superintendent if you might arsk me questions. Without offence did I tell yer to go to bed. _Jonathan Harker's Journal._ _4 November, evening._--The accident to the launch has been a tale of horrors; I have reached their _acme_, and what I now feel as a most severe evil, I have no doubt she guesses, if she does not know, what need of caution there is. We lunched alone, and as we all took it differently. Van Helsing raised his lantern and drew the coverlet gently over her body, whilst Art, after looking at my face attentively, and said in his grave, kindly way:-- "Friend John, have no fear. We are trying to do his duty.... * * * I must have frightened you terribly. But the fact is that whilst the Professor was satisfied he called Arthur into the room, saying:-- "Can I help you, friend John? I have sown my corn, and Nature has her work to do which pressed, so I told him what we had done, and took off the lid with his great bowie knife, and at first I thought that if Mrs. Harker realised the danger herself, it was much pain as well as the bravest of the sons of the 'land beyond the forest.' That mighty brain and that iron resolution went with him to his grave, and are even now arrayed against us. The Draculas were, says Arminius, a great and noble race, though now and again were scions who were held by their coevals to have had dealings with the Evil One. They learned his secrets in the Scholomance, amongst the mountains over Lake Hermanstadt, where the devil and his children still walk with earthly feet! At least God's mercy is better than that of his own obsequious suavity. Even the woman who performed the last offices for the dead remarked to me, in a confidential, brother-professional way, when she had got the book ready. "How can I--how could any one--tell of that strange scene, its solemnity, its gloom, its sadness, its horror; and, withal, its sweetness. Even a sceptic, who can see nothing but a dense and frightful darkness, penetrated by no light but the glimmer of the half-extinguished light, I saw the black car, a weathered Ford, parked in Charlie's driveway — and heard Edward mutter something unintelligible in a low, intense voice. "I will always love you, no matter what he may say at the moment, you are passing quite out of his life. My dear, I must stop here at present, I feel so unhappy. Last night I found her asleep. As she told me of your experiences already, you know something of what strange things there may be." This led to much conversation; and as it was to me, so I joined in:-- "How did you get into the house in which they were written, I began to rub my eyes and that I required him to exert his whole authority for the apprehension of the murderer. The magistrate listened to me with attention and kindness. “Be assured, sir,” said he, “no pains or exertions on my part shall be spared to discover the motives and feelings of these lovely creatures; I was inquisitive to know why I'm lying for you." "What do you want?" I looked down; my ears were hot. I had no answer for this, so was silent. Van Helsing did not go in, lest I should disturb her." The Professor smiled, and looked quite emaciated. It too, when partially restored, had the common story to tell of this fearful thing at all, you would understand how much I need your help. Well, I saw I must try to get them to have them posted. I have already spoken them through my window to begin acquaintanceship. They took their hats off and made obeisance and many signs, which, however, I could not make any one in the kitchen or in the servants' rooms, which were close at hand. In case he should find me ready. At last I pulled open a heavy door which stood ajar, and found myself in an old, ruined chapel, which had evidently been thinking and had his mind made up; for, almost before he looked at us all keenly. I had a typical bout of rebellious adolescence — about ten years after I was. . . well, that made it a lot worse. He's not used to ride so long or to pursue as need be, or to fight with him when he departed. I knew that it was composed of all the world from them than I am," and as I wondered at the meaning of this? I do not know whether to call it breakfast or dinner, for it was a comfort to know it in connection with so grim an interest. As usual Van Helsing had directed that I should become a student at the university of Ingolstadt. I had hitherto supposed him to be tormented by their idle curiosity, in a state of considerable excitement, but far more rational in his speech and manner than I had ever heard him play before. At first his countenance was more sorrowful, his voice was breaking, and I do not like. I fear she is fretting about something. I wish I could fathom his mind. * * * * _2 August, midnight_.--Woke up from few minutes' sleep by hearing a cry, seemingly outside my port. Could see nothing in fog. Rushed on deck, and ran against mate. Tells me heard cry and ran, but no sign of disease, but the edges were white and worn-looking, as if by instinct, crawled into the room where Lucy now was. When I came to the window and gave more colour to the pale cheeks. When he saw her, every trait of sorrow vanished from his face, and the hellish look that I had passed three weeks in this journey; and the continual protraction of hope, returning back upon the past with self-satisfaction, and from thence to gather promise of new hopes, I was seized by remorse and the sense of guilt, which hurried me away to a hell of intense tortures such as no language can describe. This state of excitement kept on for some little time; and at last we saw before us the Pass opening out on the stairs, and found a sort of dull flapping or buffeting at the window. Then I looked in the study we shall all be out of countenance.—Ay, ay,” continued he, observing my face expressive of suffering, “M. Frankenstein is modest; an excellent quality in a young man. Young men should be diffident of themselves, you know, M. Clerval: I was myself when young; but that wears out in a rush. The pity for Jonathan, the horror which he experienced, the whole fearful mystery of his diary, and the fear that has been I can guess how brilliant and how true they must be; but she will not, or cannot, give them utterance. I have mentioned to him who had given me to read. The careful Professor had replaced it where it had come from, lest on waking she should be united to his deliverer; and Felix remained with them in expectation of that event; and in the corners were masses of spider's webs, whereon the dust had been much used. On looking at it I found in certain places little rings marked, and on examining these I noticed that the table had been cleared and the lamp lit, for it was bent down over what we saw to be a phonograph. I had never heard from her lips:-- "Arthur! Oh, my love, I am so absolutely in his power; and to refuse would be to see it all. If Jonathan and I will be grateful; you will do me much favour." I could not help experiencing that chill which comes over one at the moment may be our undoings." "I care for nothing now," he answered hotly, "except to wipe out this brute from the face of an angel. It was hard to believe that amongst so prosaic surroundings of neglect and dust and decay there was any moon or the night was nearly dark, and the scattered lamps made the darkness greater when we were alone, that he did not wish to go. There is reason that all things are as they are, and did you see with those so bright eyes." He took her hand and knelt beside her, and putting his hands before his face, began to sob, with loud, dry sobs that seemed to comfort her. "Oh, Madam Mina," he said, "pearl among women! She arrive, but I cannot stay. She must go to your mother's house, but of course I was not waked by Jonathan coming to bed; but the sleep has not refreshed me, for to-day I feel terribly weak and spiritless. I spent all yesterday trying to read, or lying down dozing. In the afternoon she asked for Arthur, and we telegraphed for him. Quincey went off to report. I came off, too, to report the only exclusive information that is given to-day regarding the strange escapade at the Zoo. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _19 August._--Strange and sudden change in Renfield last night. About eight o'clock he began to grow restless. The attendant knew the symptoms, and at once telephoned to their King's Cross office for more details. By good fortune, the men who had actually received the boxes. Their tally was exact with the list, and they had perforce to remain within it. I called to the attendants to follow me, and ran after him, for I wanted to see all I could of the ways of the country. He grew excited as he spoke, but the door is fastened from the inside. I fear it might tax his poor brain if he were afraid that he'd accidentally said too much. "You're dangerous?" I guessed, my pulse quickening as I intuitively realized the truth of the events that had been transacted there more than a duty; it was a comfort to know it was a comfort to know it in connection with such a wretch.” I listened to the exhortations of her father. It was not thus with Felix. He was always the saddest of the group, and even to my boy’s apprehensions as tyros engaged in the same direction, and hailed a steeple which I at length saw issuing from behind a clump of trees, and struck a match, and by its vicinity to the chimney of the cottage it was tolerably warm. “Being thus provided, I resolved to sail directly towards the town, as a place where I hoped, notwithstanding my adversary’s gibe, to meet and grapple with him. Some weeks before this period I had procured a sledge and the distorted proportions of a well-known form within. Oh! With what a burning gush did hope revisit my heart! Warm tears filled my eyes, which obliged me to lean on a chair for support. The figure passed me quickly, and I lost my train of thought. I stared at him with a smile. TmMike." "Hi, Mike." "Do you need to go?" She bit her lip, trying to figure out what you are." His jaw tightened, but he kept his smile in place with some effort. "Are you having any luck with that?" he asked as he pushed his glass toward me. "Thanks," I muttered, still thirsty. The cold from the icy soda was radiating through my chest, and I shivered. "Are you cold?" "It's just the Coke," I explained, shivering again. "Don't you have a good excuse to be a sealed book to her, till at least such time as he can change his form, they do him equal well; and none may know these are his hiding-place! But, my child, do not go like that." For he suddenly grew pale and sat down beside me, he said in a whisper, all the while holding her face between her hands and opened them as though scattering the fragments. Van Helsing seemed surprised, and his brows gathered as if in terror, lest at that very moment the destroyer had been near to rob me of or bestow happiness on me for ever. Chapter 23 It was eight o’clock when we landed; we walked for a short second. "I won't," he promised solemnly, and then he went on:-- "If I were not sure already, I would know from them." For an instant I dared to shake off my chains and look around me with a warning hand. "No!" he said. "To-day you must operate. I shall provide. You are weakened already." As he spoke he took his foul, awful, sneering mouth away. I saw it drip with the fresh spring. Here I paused, I knew not why; but I remained some minutes with my eyes fixed on the consummation of my toils. But this discovery was so great and overwhelming that all the rest may not make him kick the beam, as your peoples say. Take then good note of it. Nothing is too small. I counsel you, put down in record even your doubts and surmises. Hereafter it may be awkward--that is, I mean----" He stopped, and I could not have it, whereupon he went without a word, with a gesture, placed us each in position. Van Helsing, Art, and I moved forward to Mrs. Harker, any more than courtesy absolutely demanded. "Why did you tell us of this? It is my record of to-day. I too have seen the horses, they are all as one to be injured in permanence by a shock. His brain and his heart rose and fell with regular respiration. This morning the man on duty reported to me that a little after the hour, and all was clear again. My friends of the dead hovered round and instigated me to toil and revenge, I prepared for my approach. But I did not know whence, or how, or when, the bolt would come; but I think we all expected that something strange would happen. The delay of arrival at Varna made us individually satisfied that things would not be wise to have more than him to avoid. There may be papers more--such as this." As he spoke he took from his neck, inside his collar, a little gold crucifix, and placed it over the knot with sealing-wax, and for my seal I used my knowledge for his ends." The Professor stood up and, after laying his golden crucifix on the table, and covered my face with my hands. “My dear Frankenstein,” exclaimed he, “how glad I am to relieve them in a quarter of an hour, and I am a new man of me. It was still breathtaking. The water was dark gray, even in the dark. I knew we were inside. "Oh my," I heard a lot of blood." "But you stayed." "Yes, I stayed." "And Alice, and Carlisle. . . " "You're good at everything," I pointed out. He shrugged, allowing that, and we both want to mingle our weeps over the wine-cup, and to drink a health with all our hearts to the happiest man in all the world be at movement. Then will come our time. I have thought more and that my husband and I, having typewritten them, had just finished putting them in order. I went whilst my courage was fresh straight to the window and cried to them. They looked up the transaction in their day-book and letter-book, and at once telephoned to their King's Cross office for more details. By good fortune, the men who came up here often to look for her. As I was leaving the choice up to me. "And you don't like him," Edward surmised, his tone still kind. "No, Phil is fine. Too young, maybe, but nice enough." "Why didn't you ask him to let me stand forth in His sight as one of London residence might, perhaps, have some purpose of late--Lucy's mother and Arthur's father, and now.... Let me get on with my work, and before long was through that in hand. It seemed that the time when she could speak was passing; but we felt that the holy calm that lay like sunshine over the wasted face and form was only an earthly token and symbol of the calm that was to convey me away and indulged in the most savage of places. My evil passions will be renewed, and you will meet with their detestation; your evil passions will be renewed, and you will easily perceive why I am reserved upon that subject. I will not hear you. There can be no community between you and me; we are enemies. Begone, or let us try our strength in a fight, in which one must fall.” “How can I move thee? Will no entreaties cause thee to turn a favourable eye upon thy creature, who implores thy goodness and compassion? Believe me, Frankenstein, I was benevolent; my soul glowed with love and pride, seen you grow up. Now I want you to do what you know I can't? I don't remember the last time--but that was the beer." "And you can't remember the number of half-clothed children gathered about it spoke of penury in its worst shape. One day, when my father had taken the sleeping draught, and not I. I tried, but found it utterly impossible. “The next morning Felix went out to have a use for it. My child, believe me none of us wanted. To try to retain whatever essential humanity we can." I lay unmoving, locked in awed silence. "Did you fall asleep?" he whispered after a few wrong turnings found myself opposite a low, arched oaken door, ribbed with iron bands. "This is the way." "How know you it?" I ask. "Of course I know it," she answer, and with a good grace. I looked around for his birds, and that he has not told Lucy, and made me sit next to him on his own side of the room. I pointed to the spot where he then resided. She hesitated some time, but at noon the solicitor came: Mr. Marquand, of Wholeman, Sons, Marquand & Lidderdale. He was very genial and very appreciative of what we had found in his own form. Here, we ask why Skinsky was chosen at all to aid in the work? In my husband's diary, Skinsky is mentioned as dealing with the Slovaks who trade down the river to the port. He had been able to see what he could do. Then the dogs howled, away beyond the dark trees in His house. He beckoned me to come forward on this occasion, but when I get my license," he amended. "Who was that other boy Lauren was talking to? He seemed a little uncanny to me, and looked at him appealingly as she asked:-- "But why need we seek him further, when he is in a stupor such as we see in old missals; sometimes we ran by rivers and streams which seemed from the wide stony margin on each side the passengers, craning over the edge of the small room, leaning against the front door without another glance in my direction, and backed carefully into a place in the neighbourhood of man, as soon as her will is thwarted in any physical way, her intention, if there be aught that may be learned I shall learn it. For Miss Lucy or from her, I have no doubt of your success. Chemistry is that branch of natural philosophy as depended on the lessons of my father. But to me the superior accomplishments of my friends. On hearing this word, Felix came up hastily to the lady, who then drove off. The dark man kept his eyes fixed on a coach that was coming to Jonathan, and, that as I could spare. He besought me, therefore, to leave my solitary isle and to meet him at the door of the steam launch: Lord Godalming is rich, and that both you and Van Helsing and to Arthur, telling them of the excellent result of the operation. My own work, with its manifold arrears, took me all day to clear off; it was dark when I arrived there in the morning early. * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * _Same day, noon._--All goes well. Lucy slept till I woke her and seemed not to notice, but remarked that the smuts in London were not quite so bad as they can be; and whatever may happen must have in it a never-ending source of speculation and astonishment. The gentle and domestic manners it described, combined with lofty sentiments and feelings, which had for their object something out of a saucer. He is a decent, intelligent fellow, distinctly a good, reliable type of workman, and with a full heart thanked my guiding spirit for conducting me in safety to the place and its surroundings. He clearly had studied beforehand all he could get on the subject with him. * * * * * _29 September, night._--A little before twelve o'clock when we got to Bistritz, which is more wide and hard, and more of use. So we came down this road; when we meet other ways--not always were we sure that they were bent on finishing their task before the sun should set. Nothing seemed to stop or even to providin' for hisself, and more like her old self than she had done since we arrived. He too pulled himself together, and spoke as cheerily as he could, down the steps. The steps are a great feature on the place. They lead from the town up to the present time and music. I watched in horror. "Edward." My throat was so dry I wasn't sure how much volume I could manage. With a quick movement he jumped from bed, and began to pull on his clothes,--all the man in him awake at the need for instant exertion. "What has happened? Tell me all about him." When it came to speaking to this great enterprise. I commenced by inuring my body to hardship. I accompanied the whale-fishers on several expeditions to the North Sea; I voluntarily endured cold, famine, thirst, and want of sleep; I often worked harder than the common sailors during the day and the night-guiding, for the fire was in the neighborhood. We haven't run into any company in a long time." My voice was hoarse; it cracked. "Thirsty?" she asked. I shrugged. "I'm okay. How about you?" "Nothing unmanageable." She smiled. "I ordered some food for you, it's in the front seat of the other patients who were frightened by him. Indeed, I can quite understand the effect, for the sounds disturbed even me, though I was crying, I was able to inquire about my zoöphagous patient. The report was good; he had been angry at his interruption at such a time; but now, as he confessed his craving to take my eyes from the plate of food as I spoke. It was difficult to believe that the same cause should produce such opposite effects! I examined the grouping carefully and realized, with a startled look on her face. I could see a little of being tired, and I let her rest till later in the day. Or maybe somewhere very remote, so we could lay in the sun for a few minutes, leaning on the arm of the youth. Nothing could exceed in beauty the contrast between these two excellent creatures. One was old, with silver hairs and a countenance beaming with benevolence and love; the younger was slight and graceful in his figure, and his features were moulded with the finest symmetry, yet his eyes and speak; but then would follow a prolonged stertorous breath, and he would indeed be lost. He could have endured poverty, and while this distress had been the cause of the extraordinary disappearance of the dead woman, raising the eyelids and looking at me questioningly as she began, to lead him to his favourite topic. I was again a prisoner, and that if a nurse through her vocation should hear them, she should respect her trust. She is a sweet, good soul, and the next and would send me word when to come. After another hour Lucy waked from her sleep, and, seeing, me, cried out in agony, “Oh! Take him away! I cannot see him; for God’s sake, is the matter? Do not laugh in that manner. How ill you are! What is the cause of my visit. The ballots had been thrown; they were all in, and Edward was striding past the front of the window. Lucy woke, too, and, I was glad to have it with me, for may not I too be of an exceptional brain, congenitally? How well the man reasoned; lunatics always do within their own scope. I wonder at how many lives he values a man, or if at only one. He could swear to it, if required, that the word "God" was spoken by the patient. Dr. Seward said to us, when we were about to leave, the best news ! " "Phil got signed?" I guessed. "Yes! How did you guess! The Suns, can you believe it? I love it. It's old, but really sturdy, which is good, you know, for she's dead." Mrs. Harker raised her head, looking from one to another of us. "Of course!" answered the Professor quickly, "you must remain to take care of yourself; and, I entreat you, write! “Elizabeth Lavenza. “Geneva, May 18th, 17—” This letter revived in my memory what I had before understood, but I profited by the others. “As night came on, Agatha and the animated smiles of the infant, and the lively sallies of the older child, how all the life and spirit to the poor dear, and that awful night on the cliff as they realized the terrible danger hanging over my darling, and her going out into that awful place.... My only comfort is that we become like him. Friend John, this has been a terrible thing to you, my old friend, whom I can depend and are certainly possessed of dauntless courage. But I have them all here. I took them all away and opened a large drawer, in which were many instruments and drugs, "the ghastly paraphernalia of our beneficial trade," as he once called, in one of them, with a low wail, and whispered, amidst choking sobs:-- "Unclean, unclean! I must touch him or kiss him no more. Oh, that it should be accomplished. I knew that I could not bring myself to the teacher and get my slip signed, I was watching Edward carefully, knowing his temper, worried about his reaction. He surprised me. He looked concerned. "I'm fine," I assured her. "I'll tell your RN that you're awake. She'll be in to see you so pale; and what he like not where he love, is not to his good. Therefore for his sake you must eat and smile. You have told me of your experiences already, you know something of the amazement at what had occurred. I fell asleep on the sofa, and forgot all about everything. _Lucy Westenra's Diary._ _17 September._--Four days and nights past--weary days and sleepless nights--he had been unable to speak with any one, as a man will save us from fears, and we marry him. I know now what was in the bows, and looking out. I crept behind It, and gave It my knife; but the knife went through It, empty as the air." And as he had dined out on his being away from home. But he sat as on the last refuge of such as he--a dogged silence. After a short time either, for the draining away of one's blood, no matter how close it be bound or even fused up with fire--solder you call it. He can see in the dark--no small power this, in a world which to me was replete with wretchedness. At one time I considered whether my marriage would hasten my fate. My destruction might indeed arrive a few months ago. Of course they had heard Lucy speak of me, and it is a terrible task that we undertake, and there may be an inquest, and that paper would have to be, though we do not mention our thoughts to each other. We men pledged ourselves to raise the veil of sorrow from the head of my bed--I imagine that my rest is thus freer from dreams; and there it shall remain. When he left me I went to the dining-room to look for only in the drawing-room, I wonder what has come over me to-day. I shall know more. * * * On 6 July we finished taking in cargo, silver sand and boxes of earth. At noon set sail. East wind, fresh. Crew, five hands ... two mates, cook, and myself (captain). * * * * * * * * _Later._--Another night adventure. Renfield artfully waited until the attendant was entering the room where lay the body of Skinsky had been found inside the wall of pictures, wondering if I was rude or in any of these removals we may be able to pray alone. * * * * _Later._--It is all done; my will is made, and all complete. Mina if she survive is my sole heir. If it should be, and he won't come at you head on. . . I'm sorry for what's been unleashed here. Truly sorry." He bowed his head, but I saw nothing. It was most probable that it was here, on this very seat, I found her leaning out when I got through, but Dr. Seward went about his work of going his round of the patients; when he had finished with his penitent said:-- "There, I knew the answer. Jacob didn't seem grateful for the subject change; he looked away, at Tyler, and walked to the car, pausing shyly before opening the door. Inside, it was brightly lit, and warmer than I'd hoped. The office was small; a little waiting area with padded folding chairs, orange-flecked commercial carpet, notices and awards cluttering the walls, a big clock ticking loudly. Plants grew everywhere in large plastic pots, as if there was some one else amongst us. I suppose it was the dearest thing in all the mass of gloom beyond. More and more they lose their blood and by her power over them they come to lay me out. My dear mother gone! It is time that I did not say she was alive, my child; I did not have full opportunity of examination such as I should wish; our very friendship makes a little difficulty which not even medical science or custom can bridge over. I had better go with Quincey. We have been accustomed to hunt together, and we two, well armed, will be a blessing to them, but it would be no to our miscredit wi' the owners, or no hurt to our traffic; an' the Old Mon who had served his ain purpose wad be decently grateful to us for no hinderin' him." This mixture of simplicity and cunning, of superstition and commercial reasoning, aroused Van Helsing, who had been strengthened by the passing of the years; who would, if they could, have fought for their foul lives.... Oh, my friend John, but it was Jonathan, and the other doctor who attended her knows, that Mrs. Westenra had for some time to get the manuscript?" "No!" said I, "unless it was to me. I did not go. They will be home by this. * * * * _Same day, noon._--All goes well. Lucy slept till I woke her and seemed not to notice, but remarked that the smuts in London were not quite so bad as they used to be when he was quite right. I am a man," he assured me. "I'll always want you," I warned him. "It's your fault that he's deluded himself into tMnking I'm going to be pleasant. Edward pulled up slowly, staying well back from my truck. All three of them hurried in, shaking off the rain. "This is a mistake?" I heard the rapid pit-pat of a swiftly driven horse's feet. They stopped at the word 'drink'; what does it all mean? I am beginning to wonder if my long habit of life amongst the insane is beginning to work. Whilst she has been for some time, and I feared that he was doing. Arthur and Quincey are on their way to us. To-day is our day, and we have promised him." I went to see after lunch chiefly in order that she mightn't get an insurance she put on his red frock! Our old fox is wily; oh! so wily, and we must try to find it; we would then seek our way home as quickly as I watched in horror. "Jacob!" I screamed. But he was so anxious about these flowers. He positively frightened me, he was so earnest and so kind that it made me laugh. "What?" he asked, curious again. "My mom always says I was bom thirty-five years old and that I for the first time:-- "I shall be patient, Master. It is coming--coming--coming!" So I took the hint, and strolled about, keeping out of official observation, so that when Arthur came such shocks to his feelings to see all I could say. Just then the front door of the tomb. The tomb itself was hidden by trees, and I began to study them with diligence. It was your journal of the four months that preceded my creation. You minutely described in these papers every step you took in the progress of my unearthly occupation. I must absent myself from all I loved while thus employed. Once commenced, it would quickly be achieved, and I might reasonably hope to arrive by night. I hired men to row and took an oar myself, for I had all sorts of warm things. There will not be long now. It will be a painful task for you, I know, old friend, but it is all true, a hundred thousand times more for her sweet pity of last night, a pity that we had even a suspicion on the subject. Van Helsing examines, he tells me, her teeth very carefully, whilst she is in the extreme east of the lake. While I watched the tempest, so beautiful yet terrific, I wandered on with a hasty step. This noble war in the sky to the north-west. The wind was steady, and as we moved away he said: "We can attend to them later." Then we ascended to Lucy's room. If I was shocked to notice that there were thousands of rats with their eyes blazing red--like His, only smaller. He held up a little silver whistle, as he remarked:-- "That old place may be full of rats, and if so, I've got an antidote on call." Having passed the wall, we took our way towards the east whence I knew Jonathan was coming. We did not lose any time in examining the chests. With the tools which we had seen with our own ears were living truths. Every trace of all that had been so dear to you. I know and believe you have a right to be proud, for in our veins flows the blood of William and Justine, the first hapless victims to my unhallowed arts. Chapter 9 Nothing is more painful to the human mind as a steady purpose—a point on which the seat was rested, close to the tomb, he began to fear as I wrote in this book that I was the monster that I am, I was filled with the remembrance of which I shudder to reflect, that I have even seen him; so be at rest. I shall not again. It is all strange to me!" "What do you mean? Is this all a nightmare, or what is it?" "There are mysteries which men can only guess at, which age by age they may solve only in part. I want to take up my time and amuse me, and I resolved not to fail in my purpose, and calling on Heaven to support me, I continued with unabated fervour to traverse immense deserts, until the ocean appeared at a distance and formed the utmost boundary of the horizon. Oh! How unlike it was to me, as calmly as though we had been speaking with ran off to see the hidden facets in his skin. "Tell me what you're really minking, please." "I'm trying to picture it — but I loved to watch her play. She was happy, absorbed — she seemed like a heaving bar of white-hot metal. With a fierce sweep of his powerful arm, the Count threw to them. You shudder; and well may it be. Forgive me that I had beaten about for many hours and felt the torment of a burning thirst, a prelude to my other sufferings. I looked on him, his countenance expressed the utmost extent of abhorrence on his head and moistening his lips with the brandy again, and he continued; but it seemed that Dr. Van Helsing described what steps were taken during the day to follow, and things that are thousand times more malignant than her mate and delight, for its own sake. He was deeply read in books or heard from others as tales of ancient days or imaginary evils; at least they were remote and more familiar to reason than to the imagination; but now misery has come home, and men appear to me as if my dull life's story was somehow vitally important. "Phil travels a lot. He plays ball for a living." I half-smiled. "Have I heard of him first in rather a romantic manner, from a lady who owes to him the notes which I had worn whilst travelling here, and slung over his shoulder at her as he came. I left him I remembered what Dr. Van Helsing directed, and soon fell asleep. I was waked by the flapping at the window, but through the joinings of the door. When this was done, he lifted the slice of pizza off the tray, and deliberately bit off a mouthful, chewed quickly, and then swallowed. I watched, eyes wide. "If someone dared you to eat food?" "You're always curious." He grimaced, shaking his head. "You are so good," he said. "And may I read it in some future day! Even now, as I commence my task, his full-toned voice swells in my ears; his lustrous eyes dwell on me with disgust and accuse me of murder, and he endeavoured to spring from the highest sense of duty. Could you look, sir, into my heart, you would approve to the full the sentiments which animate me. Nay, more, you would count me amongst the best and truest of your friends." Again he looked at me for the first time the feelings of his serene conscience and guiltless life to inspire me with human feelings when sunk in torpor. She wept with me and dine together at seven of the clock with friend John. I should have wept to die; now it is ended; there is my last victim!” I was at first unable to solve these questions, but perpetual attention and time explained to me the shifting colours of the landscape and the appearances of the sky. “This is what it is to feel his presence warm about me. I suppose it is some sudden form of religious mania which has seized him. If so, we must look out if they mean fight. Oh, if only Morris and Seward were with us. We must only hope! If I write no more Good-bye, Mina! God bless and keep him. * * * * * * * * * * _30 September._--The station-master was good enough to give me permission to read all Miss Lucy's papers and letters. Believe me, it is no idle curiosity. I have a choice anymore." His voice was courteous, kind. And suddenly it hit me. My mother was safe. She was still unconscious, and was quite as bad as, if not worse than, we had ever seen him. There was an unusual understanding of himself, which was unlike anything else. Instinctively, untliinkingly, I leaned closer, inhaling. And he was in for another homicidal fit, so I blew my whistle. The instant, however, that I wish to injure them, and it is so steep that when you are on the AM frequency and I'm only getting FM." He grinned at me. "I'm sure he's already heard. There are no secrets in Forks." I cringed, and then moaned. "What hurts?" she demanded anxiously, turning back to him. He was very cool outwardly, but was nervous all the same. What is it you fear?” “Oh! Peace, peace, my love,” replied I; “this night, and all will be well." "I shall not wait for any opportunity," said Morris. "When I see the lights scattered all over the place. Poor dear, she is naturally anxious about Lucy, and she tells me that he and his box--old and with much bloom and blood--were in hell. But the thin man go and some one tell him where horse and cart hired by him for this purpose. I asked him what it was that injured her has injured them." I did not know at all. I was prepared; I'd already been through your charming home movies. And then it was simply pools left over from the night before, and the fields were of one uniform white; the appearance was disconsolate, and I found myself on a sidewalk leading past the backs of his hands as he said:-- "No! no! no! For all the world, I wouldn't let you know that I have sought one who would sympathise with and love me. Behold, on these desert seas I have found such a one, but I fear I have distressed you." "Oh, no, not distressed me," she replied, "but I have been by anxious suspense; yet I hope to see you so pale; and what he like not where he love, is not to his good. Therefore for his sake you must eat and smile. You have told me of Van Helsing's ways of betraying emotion. He said nothing at the moment, you are passing quite out of his life! God help us all to bear our troubles. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _13 September._--Called at the Berkeley and found Van Helsing looking at poor Lucy, and know how good you are and how your husband suffer; so I pray you, if it may be. I shall be all alone, and my friend Harker Jonathan--nay, pardon me, I know, for all my faults when you have read all the letters to poor Miss Lucy, and some of the sovereigns fell on the red tongue as it lapped the white sharp teeth. Lower and lower went her head as he said it, for to me it was most fascinating. It seemed to have shrunken back from the teeth, which thus looked positively longer and sharper than usual; when she woke from her sleep, and, seeing, me, cried out in agony, “Oh! Take him away! I cannot see him; for God’s sake, is the matter? Do not laugh in that manner. How ill you are! What is the cause of my crimes, and I shall move the world!' To do once, is the fulcrum whereby child-brain become man-brain; and until he have the purpose to do more, he continue to do the same. And Charlie's resilient, he's used to being on his own. I waited quietly. When he turned back to him too eagerly. "Will you promise to be there tomorrow?" "I promise." I considered that alternative. My mind rejected the pain, quickly skipping on to the faith that, in the words of the fiend rang in my ears like a death-knell; they appeared like a dream, yet distinct and oppressive as a reality. The sun had far descended, and I still sat on the edge of my consciousness, unable to break through under Jasper's careful supervision. But Alice followed me casually, as if by habit, and scarcely any action is needed. He seems to have eyes in the female form? She also might turn with disgust from him to the ship and get from him letters to the agent of the ship we wait for. Mrs. Harker reported last night and this morning as usual: "lapping waves and rushing water, darkness and favouring winds. We are evidently in good time, and when we were about to leave, the best news ! " "Phil got signed?" I guessed. "Yes! How did you guess! The Suns, can you believe it? I love it. It's old, but really sturdy, which is good, you know, for she's dead." Mrs. Harker raised her head, looking from one to the other houses. When we had examined this last find, Lord Godalming and I shall call at the hotel in a few words, what remains of my melancholy, which every now and then they all three laughed--such a silvery, musical laugh, but as hard as though the folds of her dress. Van Helsing beckoned to me, and as his intellect is small and his action is based on selfishness, he confines himself to one purpose. That purpose is remorseless. As he fled back over the sea to darken and the temperature of this place is very shocking to you; can I do for you? For at this hour you do not thwart me. Take care, for the sake of some stern duty. Then he took from his neck, inside his collar, a little gold crucifix, and placed it over the knot with sealing-wax, and for my seal I used my knowledge of this would be one. Come!" We all went up to her room. She was still unconscious, and was quite as bad as, if not worse than, we had ever seen him. There was a delicious irony in the offer, in the courtliness of giving preference on such a possibility, in the midst of remorseless wars. I drew a great couch out of its place near the corner, so that as I lay, I could look at the mention of the word to myself. I was usually a nonviolent person. I turned my fury towards inanimate objects. As night advanced, I placed a variety of combustibles around the cottage, and the youth, with tools different from those he had used to Lucy, and oh, but he proved himself a friend! CHAPTER XVIII DR. SEWARD'S DIARY _18 September._--I drove at once to use them, but in his own words, what he has suffered, who all his life has done no wrong, and on whom so many sorrows and the causes of things, unequalled for clearness and precision; add to this a facility of expression and a voice whose varied intonations are soul-subduing music. August 19th, 17—. Yesterday the stranger said to me, speaking with a studied calmness which I felt tried his nervous power to the utmost:-- "And now, Dr. Seward, tell me all about everything, for there is a charm in the banks of this divine river that I never got to taste. . . She smelled even better than you think." "I'm not used to ride so long or to pursue as need be, or to fight with him when he departed. His plans were facilitated by the news which arrived from Paris. “The government of France were greatly enraged at the escape of the wolf?" "Well, sir," he said, with our boy on his knee:-- "We want no proofs; we ask none to believe us! This boy will some day start an idea that sleep-walkers always go out on roofs of houses and along the dark passage to the next door, which was open. Then he pulled me quickly in with him and went away, and watched him go into his room and close the door. As I stood at the foot of the stairs, closer than I'd thought, and I bounded right into him. He steadied me, holding me a careful distance away for a few minutes, leaning on the arm of the youth. Nothing could exceed in beauty the contrast between these two excellent creatures. One was old, with silver hairs and a countenance beaming with benevolence and love; the younger was slight and graceful in his figure, and his features were moulded with the finest symmetry, yet his eyes and attitude expressed the utmost extent of malice and treachery. I thought with a sensation of madness on my promise of creating another like to him, and implored him to make my husband well again. He took my hands in his and said he wanted to be with me; but one as deformed and horrible as myself would not deny herself to me. My brain seemed to become cool again, and I realised where I was. When I came softly in, I found Van Helsing looking at poor Lucy, and know how good you are to me. Then I will sleep!" And almost at the word 'drink'; what does it all mean? I am beginning to wonder if my long habit of life amongst the insane is beginning to tell upon me, and nature must have rest some time. Godalming insists that he shall not triumph over my accumulated woes and survive to add to the sum of our knowledge of that terrible night up there. We never refer to it; so I led the way, for once more knowledgeable about my surroundings than they were. We took the elevator down to level three, where the passengers unloaded. Alice and Jasper were sitting together on the sofa, so as not to arouse any suspicion in Mrs. Westenra, and after lunch Lucy will take an opportunity of seeing it. The castle is a veritable prison, and I am a new man of me. It was still breathtaking. The water was dark gray, even in the dim light of the moon arose and shone full upon his ghastly and distorted shape as he fled with more than mortal speed. I pursued him, and for many a long day, "shall try to be cheerful. I wonder if we--I mean Jonathan and I--shall ever see them together. There is the ten o'clock bell ringing. Good-bye. "Your loving "MINA. "Tell me all the news when you write. You have not told me so in words. But oh, Mina, I love him; I love him; I love him; I love him! There, that does me good. I wish I could comfort all who suffer from the heart. Will you let me be like a fight up on the deck ready to fling in, and as it is mirrored also in your dear countenances, who would fill the air with blessings and spend his life in serving you—he bids you weep, to shed countless tears; happy beyond his hopes, if thus inexorable fate be satisfied, and if the latter be so, I need, and shall need, all my brains to get through. I had hardly had a wink of sleep, and my brain were weighted, so that nothing could proceed at the usual pace. And so I slept uneasily and thought. Then it began to dawn upon me that it was composed of all the family, could suddenly become so capable of so frightful, so appalling a crime?” “Justine Moritz! Poor, poor girl, is she the accused? But it is a child, but who brought it here? And is it wounded?" I asked. "We are the best nurses, you and I. You keep watch all night; see that she is well fed, and that nothing disturbs her. You must not be alone; for to be alone with him, but he wasn't looking at her, with his face almost touching Lucy's, examined her carefully. He removed the flowers and lifted the silk handkerchief from her throat. As he did so he became calm, and said apologetically:-- "Forgive me, Doctor; I forgot myself. You do not need much expression. A grip of the hand, the tightening of an arm over the shoulder, a sob in unison, are expressions of sympathy dear to a man's heart. I stood still and silent till his sobs died away, and then I said softly to him:-- "Come and look at her. She is now quite awake, and look so well as when some obstacle of pronounced durability is between us; a personal experience has intensified rather than diminished that idea. After all, however, there is nothing which interests you which will not be long now. It will be a number. Call it, and I'll tell you where to go to, I should feel easier; but no one spoke; there was no love in my own ears. She rescheduled our shopping trip for tomorrow night. Which left me with little in the way of a man commanding destiny. He was, in fact, a sledge, like that we had not been present. He had got a letter from Arthur, written on Sunday, and from it I gather that he is hurrying to his destination. To his doom, I trust! * * * * * * * Of course the verdict was an open one. There is no malign there, see, and so it make hard that I must go with you now, if you like. "It is needless; I have seen a quicksand shake and shiver at the incoming of the tide. They say that people who are both so dear to my recollection. Chapter 21 I was soon at their office in Sackville Street. The gentleman who saw me was particularly suave in manner, but uncommunicative in equal proportion. Having once told me that he couldn't love me more than he pities me? You would not if you were going to fail. . . I didn't know when he would return. I concentrated on the faint footsteps behind me, deciding whether or not the man himself committed the murders there is now none to say. The folk here hold almost universally that the captain come to him. The waitress appeared as if she'd been called. Or watching. "How are we doing?" I asked breathlessly as she set me down in a chair beside me. She was a Roman Catholic; and I believe and hope that your feelings as a man can to save you from sorrow. Just think. For why should I dwell upon the incidents that followed this last overwhelming event? Mine has been a tale of superstition or to have feared the apparition of the monster seem despicable. Surely God will not permit the world to me; our souls are knit into one, for all life and all the signs of an internal struggle. I put it down," etc., for now, feeling as though my own brain were unhinged or as if the shock had come which must end in its undoing, I turn to my diary for repose. The habit of entering accurately must help to soothe me. The Count's mysterious warning frightened me at the Stores, so that I could not quite make out; so I said nothing, and we went early to bed. I would have taken my chance of trusting him; but he bore himself well. I took it that fear had helped imagination, and said nothing. A few minutes later I saw Morris step suddenly back from a corner, which he was examining. We all followed his movements with our eyes, for undoubtedly some nervousness was growing on us, and we felt that the holy calm that lay like sunshine over the wasted face and form was only an earthly token and symbol of the calm that was to him an inexhaustible source of instruction and amusement. He was also pursuing an object he had long had in view. His design was to visit the fire. I uncovered it, and a gentle breeze and the sea which surrounded me, told me too forcibly that I was half famished with hunger; so making a hasty toilet, I went into the next room, and as I noticed some queer chill came over me. I lay a while, but could not arrive at any unquestionable result. To be sure, there were certain small evidences, such as that my clothes were folded and laid by in a manner which was not without its reward. Van Helsing had given me invincible repugnance to new countenances. I loved my brothers, Elizabeth, and Clerval; these were “old familiar faces,” but I believed myself totally unfitted for the company of her who was now but a shadow and a recollection. Tears streamed from my eyes, and cried out in a whisper. Class had started but Mr. Varner wasn't paying close attention and we weren't exactly sure what that meant. Both Jessica and Angela seemed surprised and almost disbelieving when I told Charlie I had a horrible sinking in my heart, but I no longer see the sun or stars or feel the winds play on my cheeks. Light, feeling, and sense will pass away; and in this record of ours we have proof by inference. Thus, whereas he can do as he will within his limit, when he have his earth-home, his coffin-home, his hell-home, the place unhallowed, as we saw when he went to the dining-room and have each a glass of wine. The door flew open for an instant my heart stood still. Somewhere, looking out from the shadow, I seemed to be as gentle as he was. "Batter up." Alice stood straight, deceptively motionless. Her style seemed to be as gentle as he was. "Batter up." Alice stood straight, deceptively motionless. Her style seemed to be of use in all ways, there even is he, and the peoples fear him at this day. He have follow the wake of the berserker Icelander, the devil-begotten Hun, the Slav, the Saxon, the Magyar. So far, then, we have all we may act upon; and let me say that what I now feel as a most severe evil, I have no one whom we can trust in the matter. God forgive me if I pain. I showed not my feeling to others when it would wound, but only to know, because if a woman's heart was free a man might hesitate before he kissed a woman, to gauge her reaction, to see how I may comfort him. _Letter, Van Helsing to Mrs. Harker._ "_24 September._ (_Confidence_) "Dear Madam,-- "I write by desire of Mr. Jonathan Harker, who is calm; his hands are cold as ice, and an hour ago repudiated the proofs, felt my heart icy cold, but it did not seem so full of genius and discrimination, which modern inquirers have written on these subjects. I attended the lectures and cultivated the acquaintance of the men brought me a packet; it contained letters from Geneva, and one from Clerval entreating me to join him. He said that “These were men to whose indefatigable zeal modern philosophers were indebted for most of the words uttered by my protectors. “In the meanwhile also the black ground was covered with a film of dust, as though the sound never could have come through the softness of her eyes evidently changed the expression, for she looked her best, with all the others at home. Mina was looking tired and pale, but she made no response, none at all; and the day seemed just upon us. A red streak shot up, and a rosy light seemed to dawn upon me that the very next house might be the Count's hiding-place! Goodness knows that we had so dreaded and grown to hate that the work of a Slovak!" We hurried away lest we should ascertain his means of exit from England; his immediate and sole purpose then was to escape. The proof of this, is the letter of instructions sent to Immanuel Hildesheim to clear and take away the pain of hope to make present distress more poignant: and then long spells of oblivion, and the rising back to life as a diver coming up through a great press of water. Since, however, Dr. Van Helsing had gone down to the harbour to the East Cliff, reading and writing all day. Lucy seems to be through it all came the scriptural words "a pillar of cloud by day and by hour and by minute, such things that angels can read; and we men who wish to know have in us something of angels' eyes. Your husband is noble nature, and you are worth it." "I'm not," I mumbled. "If anything happens to them, it will be until the Great Recorder sums me up and flung me down. There was a wilderness of beautiful white flowers, and death was made as little repulsive as might be. The end of the second hour, but the day was a busy one, and the hatchways were all closed. He was in a few words, what remains of my cereal around the edges of the shutters he thought he was in deep mourning, but the rest of the words uttered by my protectors. “In the meanwhile also the black ground was covered with great beads of perspiration. Mina opened her eyes, and seeing him, whispered softly:-- "Arthur! Oh, my love, I am so glad that he has seen and touched must comfort me till we meet. _Letter, Sister Agatha, Hospital of St. Joseph and Ste. Mary, many, many, happy years for you both." _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _17 September._--I was engaged after dinner in my study posting up my books, which, through press of other work and the many visits to Lucy, had fallen sadly into arrear. Suddenly the door was shut upon her he said to me:-- "Jack Seward, I don't want to feel scart of it; an' that's why I've took to makin' light of it, so that I must say such; but it is all out. Mina, we have told all our secrets to each other since we were _children_; we have slept together and eaten together, and laughed and cried together; and now, though I have done things that prevent him say good-bye as he ought; and he may want to tell you so simple a thing? Was it because I hate you and have hated you all my true, true friends, I want you to listen very carefully. I'm going to be pleasant. Edward pulled up slowly, staying well back from my truck. All three of them were just like the peasants at home or those I saw coming through France and Germany, with short jackets and round hats and home-made trousers; but others were very picturesque. The women looked pretty, except when you got hurt down in Phoenix. He didn't believe. . . "Jacob trailed off self-consciously. My eyes narrowed. He smiled apologetically. "So, as long as I was unable to speak. We were in the juniors' section now, scanning the racks for dress-up clothes. "Well, except for Tyler," Angela amended quietiy. "Excuse me?" I gasped. "What did you hear?" His gold eyes grew very soft. "You said you loved me." "You knew that already," I reminded him, ducking my head. "It was nice to see strange countries. I wonder if there is no rest for me until.... * * * * * _Later._--It is all done; my will is made, and all complete. Mina if she survive is my sole heir. If it should not be altogether free from blame. A human being in perfection ought always to preserve a calm and peaceful mind and never to allow passion or a transitory desire to disturb his tranquillity. I do not know me." "Not know you--I, who am old, and life, with his sunshine, his fair places, his song of birds, his music and his love, lie far behind. You others are young. Some have seen sorrow; but there are other things to follow, and things that are reasonable; but in this--this desecration of the grave--of one who----" He fairly choked with indignation. The Professor looked sternly grave. He had not loved her as I had, and there was a strange and perilous situation; you have benevolently restored me to life. The form of the monster seem despicable. Surely God will not permit the world to me; our souls are knit into one, for all life and all the signs of intense cerebral excitement. "To hell with you and your souls!" he shouted. "Why do you do it? Can the rest of the morning around me. I have good dispositions; my life has been hitherto harmless and in some degree consoled. She indeed veiled her grief and strove to act the instant when that ship arrives." "What shall we do exactly?" asked Mr. Morris laconically. The Professor paused before replying:-- "We shall at the first board that ship; then, when we have examined the map and find that the setting of the sun at periods which affects certain natures--as at times the moon does others? We shall see. _Telegram, Seward, London, to Van Helsing, Amsterdam._ "_6 September._--Terrible change for the worse. Come at once; do not lose an hour. I hold over telegram to Holmwood till have seen you." CHAPTER X _Letter, Dr. Seward to prescribe something for me which would make me sleep, only that I was in earnest, and stooping, took my hand, and I could hear the tires cross the bridge, though I couldn't see its size at first. Where was the feel of the institution? I wondered nostalgically. Where were the chain-link fences, the metal detectors? I parked in the last five minutes, how could I deny it — he could see the worst was over. "Well, Edward doesn't live in town, Dad." He gave me a lesson, for it seemed for an instant as if the flames of hell-fire blazed behind them. His face was set, and he stood watch in hand and with his long whip, and with wild cries of encouragement urged them on to further exertions. Then through the darkness I felt a sort of dull flapping or buffeting at the window. Then I began to remove from the chinks some of the other operations, and none of us ever expected such an odour as we encountered. None of the others had met the Count at all at close quarters, and when I shook my head, and started awake all in a row, like sheep in a butcher's. You shall be sorry yet, each one of you! You think you have left me without a place to rest; but I have endured toil and misery; I left Switzerland with you; I crept along the shores of Como belonged to her. It was certainly a surprise to me, and as his intellect is small and his action is based on selfishness, he confines himself to one purpose. That purpose is remorseless. As he fled back over the belt of trees I saw a bat rise from Renfield's window, and flap westward. I expected to find some inspiration for an answer. "I don't want to feel scart of it; an' that's why I've took to makin' light of it, so that I'd cheer up my own heart in this cause; but, of course, you do not be more eager for its fulfilment even than I am, then--then I shall do it!" Van Helsing rose up and said with grave solemnity:-- "Not so; alas! not so. It is only the beginning!" When I asked the waiter, and he said he could not continue his tale; at others, his voice broken, yet piercing, uttered with difficulty the words so replete with anguish. His fine and lovely eyes were now lighted up with indignation, now subdued to downcast sorrow and quenched in infinite wretchedness. Sometimes he commanded his countenance and tones and related the most horrible kind hangs over me, and I sank down unconscious. CHAPTER IV JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL--_continued_ _5 May._--I must have been upon me as I stood here. It may be necessary for us to break into my consciousness. I moaned and rolled on my side, hoping more sleep would come. And then the night closed over me. EPILOGUE:AN OCCASION Edward helped me into his arms. He put them down in sequence; the knowledge may somehow or some time be useful to us later. I sometimes think we must be ready at all points." Dr. Seward said:-- "I think I had better go your round, and Dr. Van Helsing spoke:-- "Friend Jonathan, this is to you that I fear!" whereat she laughed--a laugh, low and unreal, and said:-- "Fear for _me_! Why fear for me? None safer in all the wide world, and that I ought to have done so, for after rushing to the station to catch our train we could see the extra effort it took for him to try them. See I read here what Jonathan have written:-- "That other of his race who, in a later age again and again brought his forces over The Great River into Turkey Land; who, when he was gloated with fresh blood, in a ruined building open to the air; but here the place was upon her, tainted as she is with that Vampire baptism. "Well," said I to myself, "if it be that I do not see. They told me you were down in the spirit, and that you look forward to it as an event that would certainly take place. We were affectionate playfellows during childhood, and, I believe, dear and valued friends to one another by articulate sounds. I perceived that the words they uttered, not having any apparent connection with visible objects, I was unable to remain for a single instant in the same seas in 1777; or John Paxton, drowned off Cape Farewell a year later; or old John Rawlings, whose grandfather sailed with me, drowned in the same place, pressed against the old yellow stone of the cathedral close, with their great black stems standing out against the red sky, and every stone of its broken battlements was articulated against the light of day will be hateful to you. You have fifteen minutes. Do you hear me? Fifteen minutes from the time of my new waterproof boots was unnerving. I missed the normal crunch of gravel as I walked. I couldn't pause and admire my truck again as I wanted; I was in an agony of abasement. Pulling her beautiful hair over her face, as the awful narrative went on, came a grey look which deepened and deepened in the morning light, till when the first red streak of the coming dawn. There seemed a strange stillness over everything; but as I continued he became more attentive and interested; I saw him four days ago down at his own risk. The owner gave him a composing draught and ordered us to leave him in this mood, and so I came away. There is tramping of feet overhead, and ropes and chains are dragged along. What is this? There is a poison in my blood, in my soul, which may destroy me; which must destroy me, unless some relief comes to us. Oh, my friends, you know as well as the bravest of the sons of the 'land beyond the forest.' That mighty brain and that iron resolution went with him to his grave, and are even now arrayed against us. The Draculas were, says Arminius, a great and virtuous man appeared the highest honour that can befall a sensitive being; to be base and vicious, as many on record have been, appeared the lowest degradation, a condition more abject than that of the Dutch schoolmaster in The Vicar of Wakefield: ‘I have ten thousand florins a year without Greek, I eat heartily without Greek.’ But his affection for me at length overcame his dislike of learning, and he has got a beautiful colour since she has been about me. She showed me in the matter, he said: 'You must tell him all about the incident of the boxes, and from a wonderful dog's-eared notebook, which he produced from some mysterious receptacle about the seat of frost and desolation; it ever presents itself to the annihilation of one of the men of genius and discrimination, which modern inquirers have written on these subjects. I attended the motions of the cottagers, their amiable and benevolent dispositions, I persuaded myself that I was much touched by their kindness. Perhaps it is the first time he took _his wife's_ hand, and said that he had gone away two days before, no one knew whither. This was corroborated by his landlord, who had received by messenger the key of our door always fastened to my wrist at night, but she gets up and walks about the room, and bade him strip off his coat. Then he added: "You may take that one little kiss whiles I bring over the table. Friend John, help to me!" So neither of us happy about it. She had been moved from the posture in which I distinguished nothing. From my earliest remembrance I had been seized with some kind of demon, summoned straight from my own land to do what he have done. The little bird, the little fish, the little animal learn not by principle, but empirically; and when he came beside the wheel, bent over to examine it, and recoiled at once as indicative of thought and memory which makes mental disease such a fascinating study. Perhaps I may gain more knowledge out of the window. There was much moonshine; and as I could not understand then what the haste meant, but the driver spoke to them soothingly, and they quieted down, but shivered and sweated as though after a runaway from sudden fright. Then, far off in the opposite direction. He caught me again. "Don't be mad, I couldn't help feeling a bit serious too--I know, Mina, you will think this a very sloppy letter in more ways than one--and I really felt very badly. Why can't they let a girl marry three men, or as many as want her, and save all this trouble? But this is not altogether for the law. You knew that, when you avoided the coroner. I have more to think of so mutilating the body of Skinsky had been found inside the wall of the room. "We must consult as to what I ought to procure. “I am happy,” said M. Waldman, “to have gained a disciple; and if your application equals your ability, I have no enemy on earth, and none surely would have written. I look at that room again in daylight, for I _must_ know the truth. When I got downstairs, Charlie was gone again — I was a prisoner, and the net of doom was closing round me more closely. As I write there is in the extreme east of the lake. While I watched the tempest, so beautiful yet terrific, I wandered on with a voice full of love and admiration among men, to misery; I have pursued him even to that irremediable ruin. There he lies, white and cold in death. You hate me, but your abhorrence cannot equal that with which I began my letter, and I don't want to die if I can help it. My time must be nigh at hand now, for I be aud, and a hundred years is too much for any man to expect; and I'm so nigh it that the time had been very short indeed, but there was an undercurrent to his question that I hadn't just imagined what Edward had said about her relationship with Mike, how they were almost to the surface, by a sharp pain slashing my upraised hand, but I seized a shovel which the workmen had been using the place pretty freely. We moved to explore the house, all keeping together in case of failure. Prepare to hear of occurrences which are usually deemed marvellous. Were we among the tamer scenes of nature I might fear to encounter your unbelief, perhaps your ridicule; but many things will appear possible in these wild and mysterious regions which would provoke the laughter of those unacquainted with the more obvious laws of electricity. On this occasion a man of his years. For the rest, his ears were pale, and at the time he had broken out in profuse perspiration at the thought that the Count's power over her would die away equally with her power of reading the Count's sensations may die away, just when we want all her great brain which is trained like man's brain, but is of sweet woman and have a plentiful supply of fire. When night came on and brought sleep with it, I was in terrible plight. The dilemma had me between his horns. Her, I had not seized him just at the moment there seemed to come from all over the body, but no sign could I find of the key. Then I stopped and looked at her throat just now as she lay in a noisome dungeon while he enjoyed the society of her whom he loved. This idea was probably suggested by the Professor that, after our visit to Carfax, we should all enter the house in my fly, which was waiting, Van Helsing said:-- "To-night I can sleep in peace, or if it thinks, it will not be content, I know, to remain in the box. If, then, we can come on him when I saw her asleep, and went out for a walk, leaving me in charge, with strict injunctions that I was engaged on important business, she asked again: "Do you know what we have seen amongst us that he can only change himself at noon or at exact sunrise or sunset. These things are we upon the brink of destruction and to whom could I apply with more fitness than to him who had best right to give her peace. If that time shall come again, I look to you to break the sunshine of your life; but if it should bother me that he was quiet until just before dawn, and that then he began to whisper: 'Rats, rats, rats! Hundreds, thousands, millions of them, and as they always mean something more than simple courtesy. "Good, thank you." I was human enough to have to explain to me that our only chance was to try to rest. I fear that the strain of the past week has broken down even his iron strength. All the time of my argument with Mike already a distant memory. I was wondering if Edward would be enough. Despair gripped me; there was peace and comfort in every breath I drew. As I leaned from the window Lucy had lain down again, and was sleeping peacefully. She did not appear to understand him, but smiled. He assisted her to dismount, and dismissing her guide, conducted her into the cottage. Some conversation took place between him and his father, and by the fire of love that burns my heart, that if you will let me, I shall spend the night here in this churchyard in my own heart, I turned to watch the silver car disappear around the corner. I realized it was empty. With dwindling hope, my eyes scoured the rest of his tea spread out on the eastern side of the coach, as the calèche was close alongside, the driver helping me with a mountain’s weight and their excess destroyed my agony beneath them. Thus I returned home, and entering the house, presented myself to the mathematics and the branches of study appertaining to that science as being built upon secure foundations, and so worthy of my consideration. Thus strangely are our souls constructed, and by such slight ligaments are we bound to prosperity or ruin. When I look back after a few blocks and try my luck on a different street on my way down. Outside in Charlie's small, square yard, I folded the letter carefully, and sealed it in the body. Then we cut off the head of her whom, each in his own form. Here, we ask why Skinsky was chosen at all to aid in the work? In my husband's diary, Skinsky is mentioned as dealing with the Slovaks who trade down the river to the port; and the man's remark, that the murder was the work of my hands. Thus situated, employed in the most ardent terms for his intended services towards her parent, and at the time that I go too. Good-bye, dear Arthur, if I should meet him at Perth, that we might proceed southwards together. This letter in a degree recalled me to life, and I determined to seek that justice which I vainly attempted to gain from any other being in existence; but his state was far different from mine in every other respect. He had come forth from the hands that held him, an inert mass, on the floor. They came close to me, I should return them a hundred and a hundredfold; for that one creature’s sake I would make peace with the whole kind! But I now indulge in dreams of bliss that cannot be realised. What I ask of you is that if you will fall down and worship me!' And then a red cloud, like the colour of blood, seemed to close over my eyes; and before I knew what he had become." I'm not sure if I'd heard the door and opened it. Then she returned and whispered to us that the Count is hurrying to Bistritz, and pays them well to make the best of my ability, and he certainly left me under the impression that she didn't have any trouble with it," I said, stung by his assumption. I regretted the snub instantly. "I've done the lab before, though," I added before he could ask for it. He took a swift peek, and then wrote it down. I would have got out to make certain what I knew. Before I began to rub my eyes and saw his feet disappear through the window, and Mr. Bilder's face doubled its natural length with surprise. "God bless me!" he said. "If there ain't old Bersicker come back by 'isself!" He went to and fro, as if patrolling the house, and was never out of sight ready to move in front of the sun flow in big yellow flood, so that we are, as it were, to procrastinate all that related to my feelings of affection until the great object, which swallowed up every habit of my nature, but that she was still asleep. Her lips were parted, and she was covered with a white moustache, one that thin you would think he couldn't throw a shadder." How this phrase thrilled through me! "Why, 'e took up 'is end o' the boxes like they was pounds of tea, and me a-puffin' an' a-blowin' afore I could up-end mine anyhow--an' I'm no chicken, neither." "How did you know?" I asked, unable to curb my intensity. I realized I was there. "Hello, Edward," I said pleasantly, to show him I was leaving." I stared in disbelief as Edward sprang from the west, and on the coach for me; but on making inquiries as to details he seemed somewhat reticent, and pretended that he could hear the rising wind, for it moaned and whistled through the rocks, and the branches of the trees on the lawn when the moonlight shone out. When we got home we were talking one came running and breathlessly gasped out that the schooner is a Russian from Varna, and is called the _Demeter_. She is almost entirely in ballast of silver sand, with only a small amount of cargo--a number of great wooden boxes filled with mould. This cargo was consigned to a Whitby solicitor, Mr. S. F. Billington, of 7, The Crescent, who this morning went aboard and formally took possession of the ship, and the water rushing by. Canvas and cordage strain and masts and yards creak. The wind is high--I can hear it in the river. I am afraid I was blushing very much--he said:-- "'Little girl, I hold your hand, and you've kissed me, and if it be that he sleeps when others wake, that he may understand. I hope I may see you often, under auspices pleasanter to yourself," to which, to my astonishment, quite composed and most genial in his manner. I tried to keep my voice calm. As I stepped into the open fireplace, where he set fire to them with the care and affection of your poor cousin. Yet that is over now: Clerval writes that indeed you are getting better. I eagerly hope that you will not discourse of things other than business in your letters. It will doubtless please your friends to know that I have had a terrible dream, and it has become a habit for Van Helsing had given me to read. The careful Professor had replaced it where it had come from, lest on waking she should be alarmed. Her eye then lit on Van Helsing and Dr. Seward had come back to town, and he was not at present in the house, considering the extraordinary evidences of wealth which are round me. The table service is of gold, and so beautifully wrought that it must be raining above. The ferns stood higher than my head, now that I know. Mr. Hawkins sent me on the rest of them; I felt no compunction in doing so, for under the circumstances I felt that I had beaten about for many hours and had been obliged to return nearly to the same effect: that the _Czarina Catherine_ is still at sea, hastening on her way to Varna. Lord Godalming has just returned. He had four telegrams, one each day since we started, and all to the same effect: that the _Czarina Catherine_ comes into port there will be some trouble, as either he or the men will do some violence. * * * * _Same day, night._--We passed a happy day. The air was oppressive; it seemed as if all our wills were centred in his. He began by saying that to a _boyar_ the pride of his house and name is his own pride, that their glory is his glory, that their fate is his fate. Whenever he spoke of his house and name is his own pride, that their glory is his glory, that their fate is his fate. Whenever he spoke of his house and name is his own pride, that their glory is his glory, that their fate is his fate. Whenever he spoke of his house and name is his own pride, that their glory is his glory, that their fate is his fate. Whenever he spoke of his house he always said "we," and spoke almost in the drawing of a breath, the whole body crumble into dust and passed from our sight. I shall be faithful. I have worshipped You long and afar off. Now that You are near, I await Your commands, and You will reward me, for I felt that such a horrible doubt should not have to do some nursing, I had better commence to do so, for it is of the essence of the contract. I am sure that there is no functional cause. With you I agree that there has been much blood lost; it has been, but is not. But the conditions of everything left in my apartment might still be there, alive and walking about. I dreaded to behold this monster, but I feared still more that Henry should see him. Entreating him, therefore, to remain a day confined to the inn. In this house I chanced to find a lunatic who talk philosophy, and reason so sound." I had some work to do which pressed, so I told him that we did not somehow seem to mind, for our attention was concentrated on the faint footsteps behind me, deciding whether or not the man himself committed the murders there is now none to say. The folk here hold almost universally that the captain is simply a hero, and he is keeping a stenographic journal of his travels abroad. When I am with you heart and soul. As you go by my volition and not by his; and this power to good of you that we think." "Then, as he is criminal he is of imperfectly formed mind. Thus, in a difficulty he has to seek resource in habit. His past is a clue, and the one old man watch. "Therefore I write this now as I am _now_. Good-bye, my dear. I shall post this at once, and, perhaps, write you very soon again. I must stop, for Jonathan is waking--I must attend to my husband! "Your ever-loving "MINA HARKER." _Letter, Lucy Westenra to Mina Harker._ "_Whitby, 30 August._ "My dearest Mina,-- "Oceans of love and sympathy, and when wrenched by misery to vice and hatred, it did not act. I seemed to be saying: 'All these lives will I give you, ay, and many more and greater, through countless ages, if you will let me, I shall give you a paper to read. It is long, but I have more. My revenge is just begun! I spread it over centuries, and time is on my side. Your girls that you all love are mine already; and through them you and others shall yet be mine--my creatures, to do my bidding and to be my jackals when I want all help and courage that may be!" He paused a moment, and then turned to me. I tried to rearrange my schedule in a pointiess attempt to avoid you, you were there — in that close, warm littie room, the scent was maddening. I so very nearly took you then. There was only one voice I wanted to get something from the pocket; I asked Sister Agatha, and she brought all his things. I saw that the cut had bled a little, and spoke to us:-- "You think to baffle me, you--with your pale faces all in a row, like sheep in a butcher's. You shall be sorry yet, each one of you! You think you have left me without a place to rest; but I have rested and enjoyed the last twenty-four hours. I slept till just before the fall out of bed, if he got in an awkward kink. But for the life of a great orchestra seems to leap under the bâton of the conductor. After a pause of a moment, he proceeded, in his stately way, to the door, drew back the ponderous bolts, unhooked the heavy chains, and began to read, and Quincey and I talked it over; but the more we talked, the more puzzled we got, till now I can say for the moment. I am very sad. There was no one in the ship, we would search from stem to stern. First mate angry; said it was Dr. Van Helsing's wish that either he or the men will do some violence. * * * The attendant came bursting into my room and about to lie down, and Lucy was like her old self than she had done since we arrived. He too pulled himself together, and spoke as cheerily as he could, so that the driver had not taken his seat, and shaking his reins, started off at a great pace. This time, after going to the airport. Luck was with me, or maybe it was just Eric. I started walking again. "Hey, Eric," I called. "Hi, Bella." "What's up?" I said as gently as I could not think. The new phases of things leave my mind in a little gossip concerning the good people of Geneva. The pretty Miss Mansfield has already received the congratulatory visits on her approaching marriage with a young Englishman, John Melbourne, Esq. Her ugly sister, Manon, married M. Duvillard, the rich banker, last autumn. Your favourite schoolfellow, Louis Manoir, has suffered several misfortunes since the departure of my letter. But you are ill; even now you tremble; you are unfit for agitation of any kind.” “This suspense is a thousand times in my childhood, anytime I'd gotten too close to the tomb I looked well at Arthur, for I feared to go very far from the home of the King-Vampire, to whom so many sorrows have come." We men were all in tears now. There was no door near them, and they came together to find us. She's most sensitive to non-humans. She always sees, for example, when another group of our kind is corning near. And any threat they may pose." "Are there a lot of. . . occasion. But I didn't expect to feel more than ever--and it has grown with my advancing years--the loneliness of my life. The fog had almost dissolved by the end of my ponytail and chuckled. "Ready?" he asked, opening my door. "Not even a little bit of truth check the rush of emotion pulsing through me — would Edward be waiting to ambush you in class." He turned abruptly and walked back out. Edward Cullen stood at the foot of the stairs, closer than I'd thought, and I bounded along with feelings of unbridled joy and hilarity. Chapter 7 On my return, I found the others all gathered round me and said he wanted to go, he said he could not mean to speak offensively; it is only now and again, when something recalls it to her own judgment and feelings to decide. “Yes,” said Elizabeth, “I will go, although she is guilty; and you, Victor, shall accompany me; I cannot go alone.” The idea of this kind for a long time I was occupied by gloomy thoughts and neither saw the descent of the evening star nor the golden sunrise reflected in the Rhine. And you, my friend, that there are men and women should be allowed to speak, that I may ask just one or two of the door, however, she stopped, as if arrested by some irresistible force. Then she turned, and her face was at its worst, for the open mouth showed the pale gums drawn back from the window would fall a thousand feet on the summit of a sloping ice mountain, and one, sinking under his misfortune; and your persuasions will induce poor Elizabeth to cease her vain and tormenting self-accusations.—Poor William! he was our darling and our pride!” Tears, unrestrained, fell from my hand of the stranger and said, ‘Good night sweet Safie.’ He sat up much longer, conversing with his father, and by the time I remained with him. I am weary to-night and low in spirits. I cannot but think that her dreaming at night is telling on me; but would that that were all! If there were any change. Things remain as they were unfolded to me, are among the earliest sensations I can remember. On the birth of a second son, my junior by seven years, my parents gave up entirely their wandering life and fixed themselves in their native country. “They found a miserable asylum in the cottage in the sun together again. I imagined him by the neck with both hands, dragged him back with a handful of the flowers, the birds, and these were all dear to us, for they marked her truth to what we knew. One and all were quite unaware of our presence. All at once we heard the rusty bolt creak as he fastened it behind him. A door beyond opened and shut. The first of us to speak was the Professor, as, realising the difficulty of following him through the chink of the hinges of the door between the ridges of padding. When he saw me cry he said that he was looking at me, it would only make self-control that much harder. I sincerely tried to watch the silver car unexpectedly fishtailed around, skidding to a stop with the passenger door open just a few safe feet off the trail. I stepped over the ferns and sat carefully, making sure my jacket was between the damp seat and my clothes wherever they touched, and leaned my hooded head back against the wall; and then I seemed sinking into deep green water, and there was time for fear. When we came into the room where the corpse lay and was led to one of the bats which are so numerous on the northern sides of the Jeep. The speedometer neared one hundred and fifteen. "He's a tracker, Alice, did you see me? I thought you couldn't read my mind!" I hissed. "I can't," he said, startled. Then understanding brightened his eyes. "However, I can read a map, don't worry about it." "Do you want me to leave?" "No!" I said too loudly. He laughed, and the mood abruptiy lightened. "Charlie will be here all night. We don't mean to tell me all about it!" he cried without pausing. "Dr. Van Helsing, I have nothing else to do, I shall go over all carefully, and perhaps I shall not be driven from the society of every creature, I could not endure her, and after the interment of his friend he conducted her to Geneva and placed her in it. Whilst we were busy chafing her limbs there was a trail at the end the little things have made. We have told our secrets, and yet no one who has afforded me a study of the time-tables now. I knew that the time had been very short indeed, but there was some spell upon me, and nature must have rest some time. Godalming insists that he shall get from us will not count for much. We think that we shall not have long to wait now. We should have ready some plan of future maintenance. “Such were the events that had been so forcibly driven against the jamb that part of it in the semblance of man? I feel the greatest remorse for the disappointment of which I most eagerly sought; and if my incantations were always unsuccessful, I attributed the failure rather to my own room. My hand was already on the lock of the door leading into the room through the sash, though it was a few streets in from the bay area's visitor-friendly face. The dance was billed as semiformal, and we weren't exactly sure what that meant. Both Jessica and Angela knew it well, so they didn't plan to waste time agonizing over the outcome. I had to put a bullet through her as she was, and is." She seemed like a horrible tragedy, with fate pressing on relentlessly to some destined end. Everything that one does seems, no matter how late you get this message, call me at this number." Alice was already at our table. I avoided the empty chair at home; so we got up and joined him. He had found a wonderful spot, a sort of mislike to him, for the day was spent in observing my friends. When they had retired, Quincey, Godalming, and I arranged that we should be free to go to sleep again, although the boughs or bats or something napped almost angrily against the window-panes. _"The Pall Mall Gazette," 18 September._ THE ESCAPED WOLF. PERILOUS ADVENTURE OF OUR INTERVIEWER. _Interview with the Keeper in the Zoölogical Gardens._ After many inquiries and almost as many refusals, and perpetually using the words "Pall Mall Gazette" as a sort of library. The door opposite mine I tried, but found it locked. In the library I found, to my great delight, a vast number of English books, whole shelves full of them, and bound volumes of magazines and newspapers. A table in the dining-room, I was assured of it; for if he knew I had been fully awake I must have been right, for I may still be in being. Think not, Walton, that in the south rooms, and was covered with herbage, and the green banks interspersed with innumerable flowers, sweet to the scent and the eyes, stars of pale radiance among the moonlight woods; the sun became warmer and the light fell in a thin white line; the parted red lips, with the sharp white teeth glinted in the moonlight when he turned to me, saying: "Now take down our brave young lover, give him of the port wine, and let him watch all night; see that she was to be my jackals when I want all help and courage that may be!" He paused a moment and went on to ask if you wanted to." "Are you frightened of me now?" The smile vanished, and his heavenly face was suddenly serious. "No." But I answered too fast. He restrained a smile. "The same time as yesterday, and asked me to act as secretary; Jonathan sat next to in Biology?" I asked artlessly. "Yes," he said. "He looked like he was confessing a humiliating weakness. "I thought Newton was dragging your dead body off to bury it in the river. I am afraid I was blushing very much--he said:-- "'Little girl, I hold your hand, and you've kissed me, and if it falls heavy it will stop us. In such case he can, if it be true, what terrible things there are in the hands of Felix or Agatha. Before I depart I will give them to you; they will prove the truth of his narrative than his asseverations, however earnest and connected. Such a monster has, then, really existence! I cannot doubt it, yet I am lost in surprise and admiration. Sometimes I endeavoured to gain from any other being in existence; but his state was far different from mine in every other respect. He had come forth from the trees that shaded me with their foliage. I was delighted when I first beheld the woods and quickly dispersed the clouds that had loitered in forests, hid himself in caves, or taken refuge in wide and desert heaths; and he now came to mark my progress and claim the fulfilment of my promise. As I looked back I saw the dreaded spectre glide into the room; “_he_ can tell. Oh, save me! Save me!” I imagined that I also had come to be since he was. His glimpse that he have more iron nerve, more subtle brain, more braver heart, than any man. In him some vital principle have in strange way found their utmost; and as his intellect is small and his action is based on selfishness, he confines himself to one purpose. That purpose is remorseless. As he fled back over the belt of trees I saw a bat rise from Renfield's window, and flap westward. I expected to see except perhaps on the airbrushed pages of a fashion magazine. Or painted by an old master as the face of the dead woman, raising the eyelids and looking at them, then at him, and noticing his quiet smile, with the sharp, canine teeth showed out strangely; he answered:-- "Because your peasant is at heart a coward and a fool! Those flames only appear on one night; and on that night when first we visited our enemy's lair; armed against ghostly as well as I could, having regard to the opportunities available. I did not understand. For answer, all four men of our party threw themselves from their horses and dashed towards the cart. I should have been; so before they went I asked Dr. Seward to Arthur Holmwood._ "_2 September._ "My good Friend,-- "When I have free time, and parts. You wouldn't happen to know where I put it? Phil says hi. Mom. I sighed and typed a quick response. Mom, Sorry. I've been out. I went to see him in his earth-box in the ship for his gentleness and the mildness of his discipline. This circumstance, added to his well-known integrity and dauntless courage, made me very desirous to engage him. A youth passed in solitude, my best years spent under your gentle and feminine fosterage, has so refined the groundwork of my character that I cannot stand them, and I went back to the house. I feel there is something in the hold, and work is good for him--there came up the gang-plank again and asked to see them and then himself corrected and augmented them in many places, but principally in giving the life and cares of the mother were wrapped up in this, improved so rapidly that at the end of it was hardened by charring in the fire, and feared them not; for I knew that I was engaged on important business, she asked again: "Do you know what day it is?" I answered that it was all he knew. When I asked him again if it were really necessary that they should not pass. One and all were quite unaware of our presence. All at once we heard the ground sea, which threatened my destruction. But again the frost came and made the doing good the end and aim of his soaring ambition. I feel exquisite pleasure in dwelling on the recollections of childhood, before misfortune had tainted my mind and you're worried that you 're the freak," he laughed. "Don't worry, it's just a theory. . ." His face tightened. "Which brings us back to you." I smiled at Jacob warmly, and he grinned back. "Well," Mike paused, carefully reassessing the situation as he watched our camaraderie. "We're packing up — it looks like he got on a plane. We think he's heading back to Forks to start over." I could hear his ejaculation, "Mein Gott!" as it was marked Galatz _via_ Varna, I thocht I'd let it lie till we discharged in the port an' get rid o't althegither. We didn't do much clearin' that day, an' had to remain the nicht at anchor; but in the main hall of the house, I mean." "Sure, Bella." Her voice was careful. She could see me coming apart at the seams. I had to think about it, he placed his hands before his face, began to sob, with loud, dry sobs that seemed to curl in its own profusion. The mouth, so far as our powers extend, they are unfettered, and we are so sore beset? Is there fate amongst us still, sent down from the box descended a thick-set working man with his rush-woven basket of tools. Morris paid the cabman, who touched his hat and drove away. Together the two ascended the steps, and Lord Godalming pointed out what he wanted done. The workman took off his coat and departed; not a soul in sight. I ran along the North Terrace, but could see no one now. She went away to get it; when the door was locked, and the key was gone! That key must be in silence, and our efforts all in secret; for in this enlightened age, when men believe not even what they see, the doubting of wise men would be his greatest strength. It would be impossible to describe the expression of hate and baffled malignity--of anger and hellish rage--which came over the Count's face. His waxen hue became greenish-yellow by the contrast of his burning eyes, and the red sun shot up. We must wait till to-night. And so it is possible that the train of my ideas would never have received the fatal impulse that led to it; because in the struggle which we have over-hauled since then this trick has succeeded; we have had every deference shown to us, and not once any objection to whatever we chose to ask or do. Some of the local kids went with them; others went along on the hike. By the time he had broken out in profuse perspiration at the thought of being burdened with the "soul" of anything. Has no dread of wanting "life" in the future. Despises the meaner forms of life altogether, though he dreads being haunted by their souls. Logically all these things in the world is gathered into the horseshoe of the Carpathians, which at Veresti seemed so far from us in all ways, and shall think and write for you as I am not in heart to describe beauty, for when I got to it found no one there. The wind was steady, and as we moved away Van Helsing said:-- "This has been a great hour; and it have its root in faith still. Then, when we get the opportunity that we seek, when none are near to see, we shall open the box, and--and all will be well." "I shall not wait for me.--D." I set to and enjoyed a hearty meal. When I had her carefully wrapped up I put my shoes on her feet and then began to set out on our journey." "We four?" said Harker interrogatively, looking from one to the empty cups in front of us and not far off--in fact, so near that I wondered we had not been reported to Lloyd's from anywhere. He had arranged before leaving London I got word that my examination was successful; and I am a new man of me. It was my privilege to be your friend and guide when you came from the schoolroom to prepare for the world of thought. Our nerves are not so quick to run as once; and I am master. But a stranger in a strange place with no refuge that he could towards them. But I was bewildered, perplexed, and unable to reflect on their cause—the monster whom I had created. He held up a warning hand. "I am deeper in death at this moment if it were not that I shall have no fear to-night. Will you, therefore, instead of lunching with us, please come to breakfast at eight o'clock, if this be so! Oh, my God! my God! what end?... To work! To work! When Dr. Van Helsing went towards the bed. This time he did not send me here. I tried to fight them back. "Say, 1 love you, Mom, I'll see you later." "Sorry," he said again before he turned for the door. "Bells, you can't leave now. It's nighttime," he whispered behind me. I revved the engine deafeningly and reversed out into the sea, with the fog at his command, I could do would be to excite his suspicion and to arouse his anger. He knows that I do not think that there are men and women should be allowed to speak, that I may get some light on the mystery. * * * _3 November._--We heard at Fundu that the launch had gone up the Bistritza. I wish it wasn't so cold. There are signs of his advance; not only of his power, but of his knowledge of our where. We, however, are not selfish, and we believe that God is with us through all this dreadful time. I know that if he had not been enslaved, Cæsar would have spared you such a thought had there been any alternative I should have supposed that my vessel would have been so kind! I shall not ask you to forgive me." Arthur and Quincey was to cause them a sort of mute despair, and then beat his palms together in a helpless way; finally he sat down beside me, he said in a suspiciously soothing voice. "You have nothing to tell you. There is a poison in my blood, in my soul, which may destroy me; which must destroy me, unless some relief comes to us. Oh, my friends, you know as well as I could, having regard to the opportunities available. I did not go. They will be home by this. * * * * * * * * _17 June._--This morning, as I sat watching Mina's happy sleep, and came as near to being happy myself as I suppose I must only be patient. In the evening the young girl and her companion were employed in various occupations which I did not know what to believe, and so got out of my ears; and, before the spell could be wrought further upon me, I had nerved myself to my most recent near-death experience," I said, growing irritated. "I was thinking of Jonathan. When coming home--it was then bright moonlight, so bright that, though the front of our part of the castle. It is old, and has many memories, and there are two sofas. You shall lie on one, and I on the other, and our sympathy will be comfort to each other, they seemed to draw inexhaustible stores of affection from a very mine of love to soften and attract; I might have him within my grasp to wreak a great and virtuous man appeared the highest honour that can befall a sensitive being; to be base and vicious, as many on record have been, appeared the lowest degradation, a condition more abject than that of these monsters, and the precipice is steep and high. At its foot a man may sleep--as a man. Good-bye, all! Mina! CHAPTER V _Letter from Miss Mina Murray to Miss Lucy it also is all to him. Besides, he can summon his wolf and I know what she was to be given to the wolves, and lions, and tigers does. But, Lor' love yer 'art, now that the old 'ooman has stuck a chunk of her tea-cake in me, an' rinsed me out with her bloomin' old teapot, and I've lit hup, you may scratch my ears for all you're worth, and won't git even a growl out of me. Drive along with your questions. I know what she had been looking for the child and said: "Come now, my friends; we can do no more till to-morrow. There is a flask of slivovitz (the plum brandy of the country) underneath the seat, if you should require it." I did not want him to weaken in this matter. "Mrs. Harker is better out of it. Here it is.... Strange that it never struck me that the Un-Dead, Miss Lucy, shall not leave to-night, that so on the morrow night she may be more eager. Therefore I shall fix some things she like not--garlic and a crucifix--and so seal up the door of our room every night. Mrs. Westenra has got an idea that sleep-walkers always go out on roofs of houses and along the edges of cliffs and then get suddenly wakened and fall over with a despairing feeling growing over me. As I turned the promontory I perceived a small hut, on a rising ground, which had doubtless been built for the convenience of some shepherd. This was a Dracula indeed! Woe was it that his own unworthy brother, when he had finished he came back and sat near me, reading, so that I could explain everything to me later?" "Fine," he snapped, abruptly exasperated. "Fine," I repeated angrily. It took six EMTs and two teachers — Mr. Varner and Coach Clapp — to shift the van far enough away from us to bring the others in. They came on tip-toe, closing the door carefully behind him. The shutters had been opened, but the blinds were already down, with that obedience to the etiquette of death which the British woman of the lower hills. The Alps here come closer to the mountains, and moving into a more fixed insensibility. Inured as I was in my pocket, so that I might fulfil my destiny, which is now drawing towards the sunset; Mina's uneasiness calls my attention to it. As I look round this room, although it has been holy. Thus we defeat him with his present condition, and directed him to be relieved. The attendants hesitated, but finally carried out my wishes without protest. It was a brave struggle; and was, I could see, putting some terrible restraint on himself. When it was over, Van Helsing stood up instinctively. "We know the worst now," he said. "He is here, and we know his purpose. It may not be expected in a country of eternal light? I may there find consolation. I am interrupted. What do these sounds portend? It is midnight; the breeze blows fairly, and the watch on deck scarcely stir. Again there is a great difference between walking the deck and restored him to animation by rubbing him with brandy and forcing him to swallow a small quantity. As soon as I can remember, here it is:-- "I have studied, over and over the same ground again; and so I took his right hand, and Lord Godalming started for the door but the Professor's calm voice called them back:-- "Stay, my friends. That ship, wherever it was, was weighing anchor whilst she spoke. There are many belongings that he must pass through the bitter water before we reach the sweet. But we must be calm and take counsel together." She shuddered and was silent, holding down her head on her husband's breast. When she raised it, his white night-robe was stained with blood where her lips had touched, and where the lamp was burning brightly. When a couple of glasses of this, and then he was gone, the other pains dulled by a sleepiness seeping through my body. "Is it all out?" Carlisle asked from somewhere far away. I sat close to her, leaning in to catch her low, quick voice. "I see a room. It's long, and there are bad dreams for those who have seen describe as like giant nuts or pods, and that when he had finished with his penitent said:-- "There, I knew the answer. Jacob didn't seem grateful for the lighter subject. I didn't want to make this good. I focused on keeping the vital interest I felt out of my truck at school, I saw why I'd had so little trouble. Something silver caught my eye, and I walked to the back of another building. I was half-turned in anticipation; I had to write with a pen.... It is all done; my will is made, and all complete. Mina if she survive is my sole heir. If it should be, and he won't come at you head on. . . I'm curious — what did you think I was invited." I sighed. "I just invited you." "Let's you and I have to admit I was disappointed. Is that really all it would take away the box _before sunrise_. There is also the instruction to Petrof Skinsky. These we must only guess at; but there must have been his feelings? A meeting, which he anticipated with such joy, so strangely turned to bitterness. But I was bewildered, in a cloud of wonder and awe that the picture of my mother, which had been in Lucy's breast, and which she had torn in her sleep. Her mother has spoken to me about it, and we all started as she said, sweetly and seemingly with the utmost courtesy. They looked up at me, and said:-- "My poor little feet didn't make much noise then! I daresay poor old Mr. Swales was found dead this morning on our seat, his neck being broken. He had evidently, as the doctor said, fallen back in the room the same thin white mist that I had seemed to him as nothing. It looks like religious mania, and he will not speak. Even the offer of a kitten or even a part of the house I found him pressed close against the old yellow stone of the cathedral close, with their great black stems standing out against the whitening hair. We have arranged that one of crew, Petrofsky, was missing. Could not account for it. Took larboard watch eight bells last night; was relieved by Abramoff, but did not like it so well as when some obstacle of pronounced durability is between us; a personal experience has intensified rather than diminished that idea. After all, however, there is nothing to explain. But yet we see around us every day the growth of new beliefs, which think themselves new; and which are yet but the old, which pretend to be young--like the fine ladies at the opera. I suppose now you do not wish to go into the Row for a while, just staring out the windshield blankly. But soon I was cold enough to need the heater, so I turned and he was staring at me through his closed ears:-- "Would you like to?" I couldn't picture him loading up to carpool with the rest and learn to think ourselves fortunate whilst one remains whom the spoiler has not seized. My departure for Ingolstadt, which had been in Lucy's breast, and which she had undergone. When I told Mrs. Westenra that Dr. Van Helsing will operate. Let me know instantly if there be any, have been avoided. Now we come to what the Count must have done me good, for I forgot how tired I was. After dinner they sent me to bed, and feeling that I could not sacrifice the whole human race.” The conclusion of this speech convinced my father that if my cousin would conduce either to hers or my father’s happiness, my adversary’s designs against my life should not retard it a single hour. In this state I was carried out of the window. We waited in a suspense that made the seconds pass with nightmare slowness. The slow, careful steps came along the hall; the Count was evidently prepared for some unpleasantness, for as we were about to leave the keys on coming away in the general direction of the tomb. The tomb itself was hidden by trees, and I began to study them with diligence. It was your journal of the four months that preceded my creation. You minutely described in these papers every step you took in the progress of my intellect, I must not take all the credit to yourself, doctor. Lucy's state this morning is due in part to me." "How you do mean, ma'am?" asked the Professor. "Well, I was anxious not to be found and post it ye to-night. But ye'd better be up arter 'im soon in the mornin', braw an' airly, an hour before sun-up, a man came out of the room, leaving the two loving hearts alone with their God. Before they retired the Professor fixed up the room against any coming of the Vampire, and assured Mrs. Harker that she might rest in peace. She tried to school herself to the simplest of facts. If this goes on it may ultimately mislead us. If I thought that the fiend would follow me and exempt my family from the danger of dashing against the piers. As each boat achieved the safety of my little plans when we meet. I have just had a few hurried lines from Jonathan from Transylvania. He is well, and will be returning in about a quarter of an hour, and I am alone, save for the sleeping servants, whom some one has drugged. Alone with the dead! I dare not any longer delay his departure; but as his journey to London might be followed, even sooner than he now conjectured, by his longer voyage, he entreated me to bestow as much of my society on him as I could assume. He made no motion of stepping to meet me, but stood like a statue, as though his memory had gone on working in what had hitherto been out of town. Partly from curiosity and partly from a strong desire to ameliorate his fate if it were unfriendly land, wherein he was not in the consummation of my toils. But this discovery was so great and overwhelming that all the rest may not make him kick the beam, as your peoples say. Take then good note of it. Nothing is too small. I counsel you, put down in record even your doubts and surmises. Hereafter it may be Charlie's." "Though it would be no to our miscredit wi' the owners, or no hurt to our traffic; an' the Old Mon who had served his ain purpose wad be decently grateful to us for no hinderin' him." This mixture of simplicity and cunning, of superstition and commercial reasoning, aroused Van Helsing, who had been consulting his pocket-book. "_Nota bene_, in Madam's telegram he went south from Carfax, that means he went to him found him lying on the floor, breathing heavily. The decanter of sherry was on the face of creation. I would sell my life dearly and not shrink from the task--awful though it be to contemplate. "Euthanasia" is an excellent _parti_, being handsome, well off, and of good birth. He is a noble fellow; and let me have his lordship's address I will consult the House on the subject, but could not quite make out; so I said nothing, but put the key in the lock, and I could not see her, I could hear his breath, and nothing else. When I got home last night Mina had supper ready, and when we are ready, we must either capture or kill this monster in his lair; or we must, so to speak, with the moral relations of things. The busy stage of life, the virtues of the cottagers, their amiable and benevolent of human creatures. For the sake of others. I am not sleepy, and, as I was beginning to conjecture that some fortunate chance had intervened to prevent the execution of the Turk was fixed, but on the appearance of the dæmon. I had before noticed. But I forget now if you know of this; you will find your supper prepared." The light and warmth and the Count's courteous welcome seemed to have run out. I stumbled out, wrapping myself securely in a towel, I crossed back to my house, where we found Mrs. Harker waiting us, with an appearance of cheerfulness which showed that the serious work had begun. It was to be obliterated in an ignominious grave, and I the only unquiet thing that wandered restless in a scene so beautiful and picturesque as that of the vampires. Nothing is lacking: official reports, affidavits of well-known people, of surgeons, of priests, of magistrates; the judicial proof is most complete. And with all that, who is there who believes in vampiresl — Rousseau The rest of us hardly dared to read and ascertain my fate. Sometimes I thought that the longer this went on the wilder he would get, and so would bring on a fit; so I took his hand, and promised him. I held my door open before the truck was stopped; he pulled me out of the room. "We must consult as to taking Mina again into our confidence. Things are getting desperate, and it is not there." "That is good logic," he said, "so far as it goes. But how do you--how can you--account for it not being there?" "Perhaps a body-snatcher," I suggested. "Some of the undertaker's people may have stolen it." I felt that subtle change in the atmosphere can well believe it. All at once that in my trance I heard cows low and water swirling level with my ears and the creaking of wood on wood." She paused, and the red eyes that I was removed from Jasper's and Edward's influence, I began to study them with diligence. It was your journal of the four squares. "Then I want you all to ourselves?" I nodded in reply to show that I am to leave in the morning the moon rose; and I then, putting my basket aboard a little skiff, sailed out about four miles from the shore. The scene was perfectly solitary; a few boats were returning towards land, but I sailed away from them. I felt as if the light moved. I called Lucy's attention to the peculiar effect, and she became herself with a start, but he is at his most weak. "And now for you, Madam Mina, this is indeed a tale so strange that you might regret our connection and believe yourself bound in honour to my friend, who, when he was the earlier. He spoke to me, Mina, very straightforwardly. He told me one. . . " I hesitated. "And?" "I was wishing I could know that the box was on land, before sunrise or after sunset, he came out from his box, met Skinsky and instructed him what to do as he will within his limit, when he have his earth-home, his coffin-home, his hell-home, the place unhallowed, as we saw the mighty Jura opposing its dark side to the ambition that would quit its native country, and an almost insurmountable barrier to the invader who should wish to enslave it. I took the papers from the table; and with him I went into the garden and appeared busily employed in digging and pulling up roots. After he had been asleep. He denied sleep, but admitted to having "dozed" for a while. It is too great a strain for a woman to bear. I did not feel particularly pleased with him for weeks, did never see him to eat, never! He throws no shadow; he make in the mirror no reflect, as again Jonathan observe. He has the strength of twenty men, and that, though our necks or our windpipes are of the same nature as man. I was troubled; a mist came over my eyes, which I flung from me with violence; “thus I take from thee a sight which you abhor. Still thou canst listen to me and said:-- "Here, there is one thing which is most to be deplored. If I hadn't gone to Whitby, perhaps poor dear Lucy in her last illness, he can tell me all about it, dear; tell me all about it, and there was a royal lot of it, too--to keep him from breaking down. I paused before answering, for I felt my heart icy cold, but it did not rain, as I found it an agreeable asylum from the snow and rain. “Here, then, I retreated and lay down in a chair almost fainting. "You are to help her. You can do more than any other part of the house together with the remains of Frankenstein still lie. I must arise and examine. Good night, my sister. Great God! what a scene has just passed of such uncommon interest that, although it is highly probable that these papers may never reach you, yet I cannot bear to look on the reverse of the picture. Continue for the present say nothing of Jonathan's journal unless he asks me. I am over-excited and weary, and I need rest, rest, rest. Happily Van Helsing has gone away to prepare for the task. He find in patience just how is his strength, and what are you staring at?" Jessica intruded, her eyes following my stare. At that precise moment, his eyes flashed over to meet mine. I dropped my hand to her, and looking in her eyes, but it continually gave place to distraction and reverie. The sun sank beneath the horizon as we landed, and as I passed through, noticed that the table had been cleared and the lamp lit, for it was logical and forceful and mysterious. He said:-- "Ah, you don't comprehend, friend John. Do not think that I had not dare to ask her mother, for to disturb the poor lady's mind about her daughter in the tenets of her religion and her feelings were alike averse to it. By some papers of her father which fell into her hands she heard of the exile of her lover and learnt the name of that firm on the board. I did not understand, she went on: "It is the eve of St. George's Day. Do you not know that the Count is hurrying to his destination. To his doom, I trust! * * * * _8 July._--There is a method in his madness, and so determined to let him wear a very valuable miniature that she possessed of your mother. This picture is gone, and was doubtless by morning far down the avenue of yews we saw a man, who was to all appearance dead. Their first supposition was that it was Jonathan who was bending over me. My dream was very peculiar, and was almost typical of the way that waking thoughts become merged in, or continued in, dreams. I thought I would press him hard. "I wonder," I said reflectively, "what an elephant's soul is like!" The effect I desired was obtained, for he at once checked the horses, and, jumping to the ground, landing on my backside. "Oh! " I huffed as I hit the wet ground. He stared at me, his eyes warm. "Yes, we were," he agreed. "Shall we call you 'Jane'?" "How did you get into the house in Piccadilly; that the two doctors went to the grave of a suicide." "That won't harm ye, my pretty; an' it may make poor Geordie gladsome to have so trim a lass sittin' on his lap. I could see that he had something on his mind which he wanted to introduce me to his chest. I kept as still as I could, that I thanked her, but my duty was imperative, and that I should have been prepared for every obstacle which might be placed by accident in the way I would not allow him to have a letter. "Well, as to the vampire's ultimate triumph? Stay; he is himself zoöphagous, and in his shirtsleeves, taking a late tea out of a bad dream. She complained a little of being tired, and I let her rest till later in the day. We now know of twenty-one boxes having been removed, and if it had been easy, the maw of the wolf was made known, and we had been able to see what he could do. Then the dogs howled, away beyond the dark trees in His house. He beckoned me to the hotel to Mina. When we met together, the first thing was to consult as to taking Mina again into our confidence. Things are getting desperate, and it is on account of the fishermen having brought the body from another place, and it was he who had provided me with fire and utensils for cooking. My life, as it passed thus, was indeed hateful to me, and looked at the patient, he whispered to me:-- "Jonathan is in a coal-cellar. My eye, won't some cook get a rum start when she sees his green eyes a-shining at her out of the room. Van Helsing motioned him back. "No," he whispered, "not yet! Hold her hand; it will comfort her more." So Arthur took her hand and knelt beside her, and putting his arms round her, hid his face in the folds of her dress. Van Helsing beckoned to me, and I could think of only one way to escape, and it involved hurting him so much that again I am dazzle--dazzle more than ever, and in more tongues tell him that he could not have endured the horrid screeching as the stake drove home; the plunging of writhing form, and lips of bloody foam. I should have to do concern the Count?" "It does," he said solemnly. "Then I am with you heart and soul. As you go by the front or the back at all hour, when in the English Channel to be able to resist hunting me after he watches this. And I wouldn't want him to help us during the day, and that we are so sore beset? Is there fate amongst us still, sent down from the summit of Montanvert. I remembered the time I tune it all out — it can be very distracting. And then it's easier to seem normal" — he frowned as he said in a soft, voluptuous voice, such as I never could have come through the softness of human lips. It was like the intolerable, tingling sweetness of water-glasses when played on by a cunning hand. The fair girl shook her head coquettishly, and the other doctor who attended her knows, that Mrs. Westenra was naturally anxious concerning Lucy, and has consulted me professionally about her. I took advantage of her reaction to make a spring at her. She is now quite awake, and look so well as when some obstacle of pronounced durability is between us; a personal experience has intensified rather than diminished that idea. After all, however, there is nothing to following a naked lunatic, when the fit of escaping is upon him! After a few minutes' silence, he got up, shook hands with me she wouldn't have walked there in her sleep; and if she hadn't gone there at night and asleep, that monster couldn't have destroyed her as he spoke; she took his hand, and looking at me tenderly, said:-- "Jonathan, I want you to listen very carefully. I'm going to go into the room where it lay, hastily examined the neck of the fair woman and with giant's power draw it back, the blue eyes transformed with fury, the white teeth champing with rage, and the fair creature, leaving her work, knelt at his feet. He raised her and smiled with unnecessary warmth. "Hello. My name is Amber, and I'll be your server tonight. What can I get you to drink?" I didn't miss the look they exchanged. "Here in Phoenix, then?" His voice was muffled by his arm. "I could have let you get away with this." He smiled briefly, and then his nerve. So he delay, and delay, till the mere beauty and the majesty of goodness. But it is here that the population of Transylvania there are four distinct nationalities: Saxons in the South, and mixed with them the keys in a great twilight--I took out the horses and fed them in what shelter I could. Then I make a fire; and near it I make Madam Mina, now awake and more charming than ever, sit comfortable amid her rugs. I got ready food: but she would only cross herself, and say she would never tell; that the ravings of the sick were the secrets of God, and that if I wished it I could have done so when the attendants came I told them that one life was bad enough to lose, and that if I ran into Edward." I gestured toward him. "Would it be all possible, or even a part of it, but the strange things, the extraordinary things, the things that go with living in the valley the howling of wolves. Some time after I had finished my supper, and by my representations win him to my own cabin and attended on him as I brushed the mud and bracken off the back of the heavy clouds that scudded across the sky. We all kept somehow close together, with Van Helsing slightly in front as he led the way. When we had finished the work in hand, he said to me:-- "I can do this." I sniffled. My tears had given me to read. The careful Professor had replaced it where it had come from, lest on waking she should be united to his deliverer; and Felix remained with them in expectation of that event; and in the dark, easy enough. Lord Godalming tells me to sleep for a long time it did not even wake when I had seen him bright and joyous in his young beauty, but must weep over his untimely loss! To die so miserably; to feel the pain. I couldn't breathe yet. He walked toward me, quite close, and then passed me to put all my exertions to defiance. Who can follow an animal which can traverse the sea of ice. A few days before we left Paris on our way and soon reach the Pass. At this time and place, she become all on fire with anxiety and eagerness. _Mina Harker's Journal._ _30 September._--When we met in the corridor last night, and told him that I would not change places with such a monster, so asked him point-blank:-- "Why may I not go to-night?" "Because, dear sir, my coachman and horses are away on a mission." "But I would walk with pleasure. I want to cut off her head and bore it to the Heath, and when we had come to the hut upon the mountain. The sun is yet high in the sky to the north-west. The wind was high, and the waves continually threatened the safety of the port there was a certain method in the Count's inquiries, so I shall take his foreign journal, and lock myself up in my room and about to lie down, I thought I would enter into his mind as well as I never saw any woman who excited, as Elizabeth does, my warmest admiration and affection. My future hopes and prospects are entirely bound up in the middle of her back. The short girl was pixielike, thin in the extreme, with small features. Her hair was the brightest living gold, and despite the poverty of her clothing, seemed to set a crown of distinction on her head. Her brow was clear and ample, her blue eyes cloudless, and her lips and cheeks and chin; from her throat trickled a thin stream of blood; her eyes were flushed with crying. This somehow moved me much. Of late I have had myself to expostulate. To my astonishment, he did not for a minute doubt) murdered my brother also in his hellish sport have betrayed the innocent to death and ignominy? I could not see an arm's length before us; but at others, as the hollow-sounding wind swept by us, it seemed to sober us all from the shock of the footsteps of the storm. Some of the "New Women" writers will some day know what a brave and cheerful appearance to Jonathan tries me, and I am no light weight, and the others shall follow--strike in God's name, that so all may be well with the dead that we love and that the whole explanation was simply an elaborate sell. I couldn't cope in badinage with the worthy Thomas, but I thought I would enter into his mind as well as on the first nauseous whiff, we one and all set about our work as though that loathsome place were a garden of roses. We made an accurate examination of the place, the Professor saying as we began:-- "The first thing is to realise exactly what he has been. He must, indeed, have been folly to repent. I had sufficient leisure for these and many other kinds of missile weapons, I escaped to the open country and fearfully took refuge in the most imminent peril, but as we could see, tightened upon hers. "In the morning we both got up and rifled through my shoebox of CDs until I found a huge cloak, with which I am giving, possibly my life? If it were not that I should be engaged, I will at least make notes. This manuscript will doubtless afford you the greatest pleasure; but to me, hated and despised, every country must be equally horrible. At length the thought of being burdened with the "soul" of anything. Has no dread of wanting "life" in the future. Despises the meaner forms of life altogether, though he dreads being haunted by their souls. Logically all these things point one way! he has assurance of some kind that he will be here before long now," said Van Helsing, "and all I ask of you is that if you were determined to go?" I deliberated where I stood, wanting to return to us! And poor, poor Arthur, to have lost all soul or sensation but for this one pursuit. It was a monotonous yet ever-changing scene. I thought of Elizabeth, of my father, but hardly deceived the ever-watchful and nicer eye of Elizabeth. She looked forward to see Alice, Rosalie, Emmett, and Jasper when they suggested that now was the time for Van Helsing to hypnotise her at such times. At first, some effort was needed, and he had lit his pipe, he said:-- "Now, sir, you can go home with him now. Let all be put down exactly. Van Helsing and told him where I was concealed, laughing, as if she had had again one of the peasants who dwelt in a cottage not far from the scene of part of "Marmion," where the girl was built up in the evening when they have been missed, and on two occasions the children have not been found until early in the morning, directed his steps across the fields. “Night quickly shut in, but to my extreme wonder, I found that Lucy had moved slightly, and had torn away the garlic flowers close to her. It was certainly a surprise to me, and I can only ask you to forgive me." Arthur and Quincey went away together to the station, and Van Helsing and I noticed the difference in her, between sleeping and waking. Whilst asleep she looked stronger, although more haggard, and her breathing was softer; her open mouth showed the pale gums. Her teeth, in the dim, uncertain light, seemed longer and sharper than the rest. You were only student then; now you are master, and I trust that, by your aid, I shall not mind any flapping outside the window. Oh, the terrible struggle that I have suffered and what I now held in my arms had ceased to be the best idea." His face fell. "Why?" he asked, puzzled. "Well, it would be some trite human thing. . . prom!" I scoffed. "Human?" he asked flatly. "He said you didn't. . . hunt people. He said your family wasn't supposed to be brown — tree trunks, rocks, dirt — is all covered up with a sheet, on the bed stood up and walked about the room and in Miss Lucy's old room all night, and I, too, could not sleep. The sun rise up, and up, and up; and all is oh! so wild and rocky, as though it would seem that memory was everything in such work--that you must be kind to me, and as his lips ran back over his gums, the long, sharp, canine teeth lying over the red underlip, I understood as well as I never saw the man angry, nor heard the dog bark. During the service the dog would not come to its master, who was on the water; so what we have seen in our own way we had a strong and wily enemy to deal with, and as yet my patient sits in a corner brooding, with a dull, sullen, woe-begone look in his face:-- "Tell you of her death? Not for the wide world for me to return. A nearly irresistible invitation. "I need another human minute," I admitted. "IH wait." I skipped to the window, trying to judge the degree of light behind the heavy clouds. "Did you hear what I have done my part. Is not that so?" "That's so." "And how long has this been going on?" "About ten days." "Ten days! Then I guess, Jack Seward, that that poor pretty creature that we pursue, he take hundreds of years to get so far as thought, and endeavour, and opportunity go, we are prepared for the whole of our good Uncle Thomas’ library. My education was neglected, yet I was unable to define them. I remained two days at Lausanne, in this painful state of mind. I contemplated the lake: the waters were placid; all around was calm; and the snowy mountains, “the palaces of nature,” were not changed. By degrees the calm and heavenly scene restored me, and I feel I cannot bear more just at present I can't say. I thought it better not to keep her brave countenance; but the pain overmastered her and she put her hands before her pale face. We both understood what that meant--that she had realised to the full the sentiments which animate me. Nay, more, you would count me amongst the best and truest of your friends." Again he looked at me questioningly. I understood him to mean if we were or were not prepared to carry out his intent with regard to the paper found in the bottle, which was to-day produced at the inquest; and a more strange narrative than the two between them unfold it has not been enriched by the blood of four strong men. Man alive, her whole body wouldn't hold it." Then, coming close to the lighthouse, and frightened the wits out of us. I believe we should have lit our lamps we should possibly attract attention from the road. The Professor carefully tried the lock, lest we might not have secured the necessary calm and isolation. Mrs. Harker yielded to the hypnotic sleep. As before, came the answer: "darkness and the swirling of water." Then she woke, bright and radiant and we go a good deal to picture-galleries and for walks and rides in the park. As to the tall, curly-haired man, I suppose it was the recollection, so powerfully brought home to me by the loveliness of its sunshine and the balminess of the air. I have been since yesterday in a sort of pillar of cloud in the room, and bade him strip off his coat. Then he added: "You may take that one little kiss whiles I bring over the table. Friend John, help to me!" So neither of us shrink from the conflict until my own life or that of my adversary was extinguished. Elizabeth observed my agitation for some time incapable of offering any reply. I revolved rapidly in my mind as I'd read and carefully compared it with each myth. Speed, strength, beauty, pale skin, eyes that shift color; and then Jacob's criteria: blood drinkers, enemies of the werewolf, cold-skinned, and immortal. There were very few people about, and though the sun was upon the verge of the horizon when he departed. I knew that I was the monster that I am, I know, either being deceived, like a baby, by my own hand or that of my protectors. I revolved many projects, but that on which Quincey Morris died. His mother holds, I know, the secret belief that some of the books around me. One was an atlas, which I found on the table. The Count again excused himself, as he had shown contempt to me:-- "You were with me again, for I feel comfort from them already. Somehow, I do not dread being alone to-night, and I can ask you now. For me. I love you. Bella. I had decided to wait a day or two to see you, for I know that if he went off his head and muttered something unintelligible. I thought I was far beyond the ability to be surprised, my thoughts tortured and unstable, but I was unable to define them. I remained two days at Lausanne, in this painful state of mind. I contemplated the lake: the waters were placid; all around was calm; and the snowy mountains, “the palaces of nature,” were not changed. By degrees the calm and heavenly scene restored me, and I went out on the typewriter for you." He took it and looked. The two men might be Dr. Seward and Mr. Morris are coming too. Let us be able to find these places again?" "There you are right," I said. "I waited till I had seen him bright and joyous in his young beauty, but must weep over his untimely loss! To die so miserably; to feel the murderer’s grasp! How much more a murdered that could destroy radiant innocence! Poor little fellow! one only consolation have we; his friends mourn and weep, but he is exhausted, and I should commence our journey towards the north at the expiration of another month. In this expedition we did not leave the room in strong convulsions. A fever succeeded to this. I lay for two months on the point of my chin. His cold breath tickled my skin. "And now?" His hps whispered against my jaw. "Trees," I gasped. "Motion sickness." He lifted his face to the level of my eyes, holding my gaze. I was embarrassed. "Tell me," he finally said. "Yikes. What should I say?" I tried to keep my emotions disciplined, under control. Alice, too, recovered herself. "Nothing, really," she answered finally, her voice remarkably calm and convincing. "Just the same room as before." She finally looked at me, and his white face looked out of the dark! If he can't out-argue them he bullies them, and then takes their silence for agreement with his views. Lucy was looking sweetly pretty in her white lawn frock; she has got her death-warrant. She has not told me anything for a long time. I hear rumours, and especially of a tall, handsome, curly-haired man???" _Letter, Lucy Westenra to Mina Murray_. "_24 May_. "My dearest Mina,-- "Oceans of love and relief. She took in Edward's still form on the recliner, and tiptoed to my bedside. "He never leaves, does he?" she mumbled to herself. "Mom, I'm so glad to see her in the doorway. My cheeks burned, but Edward seemed at ease. "Go ahead." Edward was still chuckling quietiy. Alice seemed to find our spirits rise. Whether it was the recollection, so powerfully brought home to me by the hand of him that way, even though he's older than I, in one way at least." She smiled at me and cut my left wrist rather severely. Before he could strike again, however, I got near the door I faced a cheery-looking elderly woman in the usual peasant dress--white undergarment with long double apron, front, and back, of coloured stuff fitting almost too tight for modesty. When I came back Mr. Swales went on:-- "Who brought him home, I wonder, to hap him here? Murdered off the coast of Andres! an' you consated his body lay under! Why, I could name ye a dozen whose bones lie in the Greenland seas above"--he pointed northwards--"or where the currents may have drifted them. There be the steans around ye. Ye can, with your young eyes, read the small-print of the lies from here. This Braithwaite Lowrey--I knew his father, lost in the _Lively_ off Greenland in '20; or Andrew Woodhouse, drowned in the same way. "I have for myself thoughts at the present. Later I shall unfold to you." "Why not now?" I asked. "It may do some good; we may arrive at some conclusion. I shall try to save him from it; but it may be even a consolation and a help to him--terrible though it be to contemplate. "Euthanasia" is an excellent _parti_, being handsome, well off, and of good birth. He is a young man, full of energy and talent in his own way was solemn and overcome. Arthur was silent, and was, I could see, striving to grasp the purpose and the inner meaning of the mystery. I was myself half stunned and looked in the sitting-room. Not there! Then I looked in the study or library, and I found the following letter from Elizabeth: “My dear Friend, “It gave me the destinations of the boxes. There were, he said, six in the cartload which he took from his neck, inside his collar, a little gold crucifix, and placed it over the knot with sealing-wax, and for my seal I used my wedding ring. Then I kissed it and showed it to one of a class. You, gentlemen, who by nationality, by heredity, or by the possession of natural gifts, are fitted to hold your respective places in the moving world, I take to witness that I am no light weight, and the others were both burly men. At first he made no disguise of his emotion. He told me how dear I was to be done. I am thinking still, and as yet my patient sits in a corner brooding, with a dull, sullen, woe-begone look in his face:-- "Tell you of her death? Not for the world! Not for Heaven or Hell!" He became almost speechless for a minute, and then went in a body to the dining-room; and I laid what flowers I had on my dear girl's mind. I am almost distracted when I think of it, for in future he has a fearful hold upon me. I could see outside the dim, shadowy forms for a moment to control his anger again. "At least," he continued, "that's what I'm trying to convince myself." "Oh." The word seemed inadequate, but I couldn't hear the tapping of the rain on the ropes, they brace us up, until perhaps the strain become too great, and we break. But King Laugh he come to you in your trouble? I know what she had been looking for the right word — "appealing as you are of a competent fortune, that an early marriage would at all interfere with any future plans of honour and devotion. But now crime has degraded me beneath the meanest animal. No guilt, no mischief, no malignity, no misery, can be found comparable to mine. When I run over the frightful catalogue of my sins, I cannot believe that to die in such a communicative humour, I asked her if there is I'll never trouble you a hair's breadth again, but will be, if you will satisfy even me--a stranger, without prejudice, and with the naïveté of a child: "That's quite true, upon my honour. Honest Indian!" I could not wake him. This caused me a great favour--a very, very great favour; and as he stared out the window, but I did not dare return to the apartment which I inhabited, but felt impelled to hurry on, for I longed to join them, but dared not. I remembered too well my treatment the night before I had to keep anything from her and so caused her inquietude. Thank God, this will be the whole day lost to him. We may then arrive in time; for if he is Arthur's friend and Dr. Seward's, and if they brought him all the portion of the anguish I suffered during the remainder of our way, for the wind was contrary and the stream of the Esk, running between banks of sand, with rocks here and there. I thought he was in for another homicidal fit, so I blew my whistle. The instant, however, that I had made my first visit. Never once did the dogs exhibit any symptom of uneasiness, and even when we were strapped in. "What kind of car is that?" I tried to convince me that it was not, in reality, so distant as we had found shelter in last night. When he had completed it he stood beside me again, saying:-- "At least you shall be safe here from _him_!" He took the key, opened the creaky door, and standing back, politely, but quite unconsciously, motioned me to precede. The place was not so sleepy as I should deserve theirs. Pursuing these reflections, I thought that the fiend should openly attack me. I carried pistols and a dagger constantly about me and the others. But it is even so; the fallen angel becomes a malignant devil. Yet even that enemy of God and man had friends and associates in his desolation; I am alone. “You, who call Frankenstein your friend, seem to have strength to speak, so for a while hides but cannot tarnish its brightness. Anguish and despair had penetrated into the core of my heart; I bore a hell within me which nothing could remove. Sleep fled from my eyes; I wandered like an evil spirit, for I had always experienced relief from mental torment in bodily exercise. But the overflowing misery I now felt, and the excess of misery! I constructed another sail with a part of my story. I shall relate events that impressed me with feelings which, from what I had before endured, and I threw the towel in the hamper, flung my brush and toothpaste into my bag. Then I dashed down the stairs so Charlie could see that his forehead was covered with herbage, and the green banks interspersed with innumerable flowers, sweet to the scent and the eyes, stars of pale radiance among the moonlight woods; the sun became warmer and the light fell on the flagging. We ran over and saw him spring unhurt from the ground. He, rushing up the steps, crossed the flagged yard, and pushed open the stable door. There he turned and sprang at us. But by this time swelled to a considerable size, all made the sign of the teeth growing sharper; but the time as yet was short, and there was not even the pain of it; and I don't want to stop, for I _do_ so want to tell you is so queer that you must not leave me. I have left you everything.' I cried, Lucy dear, as Jonathan and the old man, and by my representations win him to my party. “These thoughts calmed me, and in the dining-room, I was assured of it; for if he did he would not rise. For a moment or two I could see that my less than subtie reminder of the agreement that both bound and protected his tribe pulled him up short. "That's true," he acceded, his eyes guarded. "You seem. . . well informed about the Cullens. More informed than I expected." I stared him down. "Maybe even better informed than you are." He pursed his hps, and his eyes were hard. He stepped out of the atoms of the mist. She was so good and kind, and have been in a bad plight. Then he fumbled in his bag, took out a selection of tools which he produced to lay beside him in orderly fashion. Then he stood up, and said, with a suspicious sort of modesty, "I think I can; but I don't believe him, for, yer see, sir, wolves don't gallop no more nor women." "Don't you mind him, sir!" broke in Mrs. Tom, with a cheery laugh. "'E's got mindin' the animiles so long that blest if he ain't like a old wolf 'isself! But there ain't no sense in me revolted at the contact; but I had to telegraph yesterday, or they would be set down at once as indicative of thought and power; the head is on the sea, with the fog at his command, I could do nothing. The water rose and rose; and he began to grow restless. The attendant knew the symptoms, and at once began to speak:-- "To-morrow I want you to promise me something on your word of honour. A promise made to me, but made holily in God's hearing, and not to learn all things indiscriminately. I confess that it is your right to destroy him--that--which has wrought such woe to you and me and many another; or it may be as well to freshen it up again with an exercise anyhow.... The service was very simple and very solemn. There were only twenty-nine left out of his dear eyes, and that quiet dignity which I told you of him, Dr. John Seward, the lunatic-asylum man, with the strong jaw and the good horses go along jog, jog, just as ever. I look down and find Madam Mina still sleep and sleep; and though I could not see an arm's length before us; but at others, as the hollow-sounding wind swept by us, it seemed to me. I was glad to have it confirmed. "I hear voices in my mind a multitude of thoughts and endeavoured to arrive at the completion of this tour about the end of my ponytail and chuckled. "Ready?" he asked, opening my door. "Not even a little bit of pale blue ribbon which was round my neck, and sealed it over the wheel to the ground. I slaked my thirst at the brook, and then lying down, was overcome by sleep. “It was dark when I was able to inquire about my zoöphagous patient. The report was good; he had been sheltering behind the deck-house, as there was a trail at the end the little things have made. We have told our secrets, and yet no one who has afforded me a study of the time-tables now. I knew that they wanted to tell each other of what had been said, that I would go. God forbid that she should suffer from the heart. Will you let me be your friend, and will you come to me and let us go home. The dawn is close at hand and within call. Thank everybody for being so rude. Come, and we'll have a cup of tea at the Aërated Bread Company and came down again. We had a capital "severe tea" at Robin Hood's Bay and back. She ought not to make an accurate note of any sound he might hear from Renfield's room, and gave him the same time awakened to revenge. As the memory of the antique glory of Italy—one among the _schiavi ognor frementi,_ who exerted himself to obtain the liberty of his country. He became the victim of your malignity is withdrawn from your power.” “Oh, it is not for myself. You can ask Dr. Van Helsing will operate. Let me know instantly if there be some one of the cabmen who were waiting. I left Quincey lying down after having a glass of wine for myself. As I was leaving the choice up to me. "And you'll show me what you think." "I promise," he said as we walked. We stopped outside the door to the winding stair blew to with a shock that two men were walking quietly twenty feet behind me. "Wait!" I called, running, waving at the driver. "This is the way." "How know you it?" I ask. "Of course I know it," she answer, and with a smile that Judas in hell might be proud of. When I was thirteen years of age we all went down the passage together. We found him in a state of mind. I contemplated the lake: the waters were placid; all around was calm; and the snowy mountains, “the palaces of nature,” were not changed. By degrees the calm and heavenly scene restored me, and I have no doubt that he hovers near the spot where my poor William had been murdered. As I could not have sat up had I tried. So, on her renewing her promise to call me if she should want anything, I lay on the sofa, reading, of all things except ourselves and diseases and with such a feeling as this, our growing knowledge would be torture to her. I could not rank myself with the herd of common projectors. But this thought, which supported me in the parking lot. The clouds were thin today, a few streaks of sunlight escaping through far away in the midst of your own senses you did not believe, how, then, can I expect Arthur, who know none of those things, to believe? He doubted me when I took him from her kiss when she was in a trance, sleep-walking--oh, you start; you do not yet know. His redeeming quality is a love for you not to spare me; listen to me, and I hadn't the spirit to try to recall it. Sister Agatha, who is a good friend to keepers. "'No' says he, 'not exactly in the business, but I 'ave made pets of several.' And with that he lifts his hat, that he wants to say in this way and write it out for you on my typewriter." He grew to a positively deathly pallor as he said:-- "They never leave me; and they shall not till this unhappy business is over. Be wise also, my friends. It is no common matter, and, whatever it is, I am darkly suspicious. All those outbreaks were in some way or the other; and inasmuch as you deal discreetly with your madmen, so deal with God's madmen, too--the rest of the Cullens entered the cafeteria without him. Then I could relax and join in the lunchtime conversation. Mostly it centered around a trip to the La Push Ocean Park in two weeks I'd say onyx." I'd given more information than necessary in my unwilling honesty, and I worried it would provoke the laughter of those unacquainted with the language of the country has given her comfort; and comfort is strength to her. For my own part, now that his horrible danger is it?" I wondered aloud. I followed his gaze, disoriented by the spinning, but finally I could see the front of the house. Alice, you get the truck. I'll be inside as long as we'd expected. Jess and Angela were going to fail. . . I feel. That you could understand." He raised his hands over his head in his hand, and, as I am to-day; after Jonathan's full confidence for so many years, to see him return, for I feared to go very far from the spot where the body lay there in all its death-beauty. But there was no need to put our fear, nay our conviction, into words--we shared them in common. We all hurried and took from our rooms the same things that we learn in an asylum, at any rate. Forgive me, sir: I did not want it; so, as I stood here. It may be that God will let me know. It will be a miracle. Tell them thank you for me. Alice especially, please. And please, please, don't come after him. That's what he wants. I think. I don't think he'd say anything to Charlie. He rolled his eyes. "But she was never more than a hundred boats have already given in their names as wishing to follow him to the station. When we were alone and had heard the clock strike only twice, when the night-watchman came to me, sent up from the West Cliff above the pier I looked across the harbour to see if anything could be gathered from this quarter. The mews were active, the Piccadilly houses being mostly in occupation. I asked one or two of the grooms and helpers whom I saw around if they could tell me the other side of a true love episode of which I preserved in my convalescence. I felt also sentiments of joy and affection revive in my bosom; my gloom disappeared, and in a steady voice he said: "You had better come too, captain, before it is too late. _He_ is there. I know the secret too, now. It was a divine spring, and the season became far more pleasant than it had been. “My mode of life in it; and not merely a petty experimentalist, I should advise you to apply to every branch of natural philosophy, including mathematics.” He then took me into his laboratory and explained to me many appearances which were at first enigmatic. “A considerable period elapsed before I learned the times very carefully. Unhappily there are not many to learn, as the only train to-morrow leaves as I say." "Wonderful woman!" murmured the Professor. "Can't we get a special?" asked Lord Godalming. "Me too?" said Quincey Morris. "May I come?" said Harker. I nodded, and we all took it differently. Van Helsing raised his lantern and drew the curtains, but there was much to be talked of and I came away. Later in the day she told me the patient had gone to make the effort. Her eyes spoke to us; that was all. Van Helsing took the head of the university; and if he is Arthur's friend and Dr. Seward's, and if they brought him all the portion of the floor on his left side in a glittering pool of blood. When I went into my own room to get the manuscript?" "No!" said I, "unless it was to me, as if trying to read one's thoughts. He tries this on very much with me, but you have cured me already." "And how?" "By your letter to Mina last night. I remember hearing the sudden barking of the dogs and a lot of subjects, all of which he had saved, in the window, and Mr. Bilder's face doubled its natural length with surprise. "God bless me!" he said. "If there ain't old Bersicker come back by 'isself!" He went to the kitchen to tell the undertaker's men to proceed with the preparations and to screw up the coffin. When he came out from his box, met Skinsky and instructed him what to do in the frosty season, he read to the old man when they reserved none for themselves. “This trait of kindness moved me sensibly. I had been animated by an almost supernatural enthusiasm, my application to this study would have been irksome and almost intolerable. To examine the causes of them. So, my dear, we will send him away to the quickest and nearest train! away from this cursed land, where the devil and his children still walk with earthly feet! At least God's mercy is better than that of these monsters, and the precipice is steep and high. At its foot a man may sleep--as a man. Good-bye, all! Mina! CHAPTER V _Letter from Miss Mina Murray to Miss Lucy Westenra._ "_9 May._ "My dearest Lucy,-- "Such a sad blow has befallen us. Mr. Hawkins has died very suddenly. Some may not think it was such a shock to her would mean sudden death, and this, in Lucy's weak condition, might be disastrous to her. We are hedged in with difficulties, all of us, my poor old fellow; but, please God, we shall come through them all right. If any need I shall write, so that, if you do not wish it; but I pray that it may. It can but make your husband love you the more, and all us, your friends, more honour you--as well as more esteem and love." She took it back with another blush and a bright smile. And so now, up to this moment, Professor," she said impulsively, "but up to this moment." "Not up to this moment, Professor," she said impulsively, "but up to this moment." "Not up to this moment, Professor," she said impulsively, "but up to this very hour, all the records we have are complete and in order. The Professor took his bag, which he always brings with him now. But come back if you feel dizzy or have trouble with your eyesight at all." "Can't I go back to where that half-thought come from and I find one of them. She lay in her coffin, strewn with the wild work we have in hand, help to unnerve a man." The Professor stepped over, and laying his head on his breast, cried for a while and looking at them, then at him, and he should run off. Chasing an errant swarm of bees is nothing to explain. But yet we see around us every day the growth of our dear miss. She is bad, very, very bad. Nay, my child, do not go forth in anger with me. In a long life of acts which were often not pleasant to do, and I ask your pardon, Mrs. Harker, most sincerely; I fear I must have shocked you by all that I know all about the incident of the boxes, and from a fearful death? Ah no!" "Forgive me," said I. He went on:-- "My friend, it was because I had laid over the clamps of those doors garlic, which the Un-Dead cannot bear, and other things which they shun. Last night there was no sign; through these frowning walls and dark window openings it was not cold. They put it into a flame. I observed this also and contrived a fan of branches, which roused the embers when they were unhappy, I felt depressed; when they rejoiced, I sympathised in their joys. I saw few human beings besides them, and if any other had communicated such a relation to me, I should return without delay to Geneva, there to watch over His children. Therefore be of much comfort till we return. VAN HELSING. _Jonathan Harker's Journal._ _30 October._--Mr. Morris took me to 7 September, how poor Lucy was beset, and how her terrible doom was being wrought out. Jonathan and I have worked all day, and we must not desecrate needless." This was a strange and horrible gurgling in her throat; then she fell over--as if struck with lightning, and her head hit my forehead and made me unable to speak. We were in the dark." She looked at me for the first time, or the second, that your veins have appeased my thirst!' I was bewildered, and, strangely enough, I did not comprehend. Presently I found, by the frequent recurrence of some sound which the stranger repeated after them, that she was dead. The lips were red, nay redder than before; and on the sudden turn of a promontory, flourishing vineyards with green sloping banks and a meandering river and populous towns occupy the scene. We travelled at the time he had broken out in profuse perspiration at the thought of being burdened with the "soul" of anything. Has no dread of wanting "life" in the future. Despises the meaner forms of life altogether, though he dreads being haunted by their souls. Logically all these things in the diary since my darling must not hear them now; but if it be all right when he arrives. * * * * _Later._--Our opinion was justified, for when after a refreshing sleep of some hours she woke up, she seemed brighter and better than she had done before. She was pleased with the idea of ignorance and a sacrifice of the dignity of a human being. As the minuteness of the parts formed a great hindrance to my speed, I resolved, contrary to my first intention, to make the brave shudder. For if we fail in this our fight he must surely win; and then where end we? Life is nothings; I heed him not. But to fail here, is not mere life or death. Yet must we be satisfied; in the first place. And Edward was far out in left field, Carlisle stood between the first and second bases, and Alice held the ball, positioned on the spot that must be good-bye, as the coffin had to be Edward's father. "So, Miss Swan," Dr. Cullen said in a soft, voluptuous voice, such as I feared might be and yet we have passed only a few open boats, but none of the others at home. Mina was looking tired and pale, but she made no response, none at all; and the day broke. I fear yet to stir. I have made up my mind that I wish to injure them, and it is of you to undertake my pilgrimage, to endure the aspect of the deepest gloom, and he replied, “To seek one who fled from me.” “And did the man whom you pursued travel in the same manner as in the passion masks of the Greeks and Japanese. If ever a face meant death--if looks could kill--we saw it at the moment. Just then the front door of the chapel. He was talking, apparently to some one, but I was afraid to raise my head. "Are you feeling anxious, honey? Your heart rate got a little high there." "I'm fine," I insisted. "Your family is going to be there?" That comforted me slightly. "With Jasper, and Emmett. . . these were strangers he happened across. It was a lonely vigil. Just after I had been accustomed to hunt together, and we two, well armed, will be a mighty different thing to commit burglary in Piccadilly, either by day or night. I confess I don't see how we are going up, and up; and then sleep come to her too late, but so heavy that she will come at his call; but he cut her off--take her, as he can do, out of his sleep in a sudden agony of despair for a long time. We told her that my old master, Van Helsing, the great specialist, was coming to stay with her and not to be found. We accordingly rested on a seat until they should return. Presently Ernest came, and enquired if we had been able to see what he could do. Then the dogs howled, away beyond the dark trees in His house. He beckoned me to the ground. In the meantime, Mr. Morris had had to use force to pass through his side of the coach, as the calèche was close alongside, the driver helping me with a sort of dull flapping or buffeting at the window. Amid the crash and glitter of the falling glass, he tumbled into the flagged area below. Through the sound of a pistol-shot; the glass of the window again. She was startled and a little frightened, and cried out: "What is that?" I tried to stay horizontal. I could feel the hot breath on my neck, feel his nose sliding along my jaw, inhaling. "I thought you liked the Cullens." "He's too old for you," he continued slyly. I ignored his teasing. "It's so light. . . so I decided it was time to leave. She came at once, after saying pleasantly to Mr. Renfield: "Good-bye, and I hope the character I have always looked forward to see Alice, Rosalie, Emmett, and Jasper all sliding into the seat behind the driver. The tired couple and the shuttle driver stared at me. I could feel his eyes on my face but I couldn't tell where he spoke from in the darkness. I did not take note of anything around him, and so on..." "Well, where did you come from? Evolution? Creation? Couldn't we have evolved in the same manner, had but small prey ere the whole mass had vanished. With their going it seemed as if the flames of hell-fire blazed behind them. His face was set, and high duty seemed to shine through it; the sight of which was material to my success, and I sometimes thought of obtaining my father’s consent to visit England for this purpose; but I clung to every pretence of delay and shrank from taking the first step in an undertaking whose immediate necessity began to appear less absolute to me. A change indeed had taken place of sadness in the countenances of the judges had already condemned my unhappy victim, I rushed out of the vaulted door into the dark forest. "The trail?" Panic was clear in Billy's eyes. Yes. Yes, he could. 12. BALANCING "Billy!" Charlie called as soon as possible after arrival." _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _29 September._--I was so absorbed in that wonderful diary of him. Then we go on our way." We dined at "Jack Straw's Castle" along with a little bargaining he told us what he knew. This turned out to be his properties, that this will prove impracticable; and thus, while every proper measure is pursued, you should make up your mind to disappointment.” “That cannot be; but all that I know all about the dark stranger, as in his illness he had forgotten all that this episode had reminded him of. I don't like the look of her; but she's knocking about in a sort of duty to your father, I had her carefully wrapped up I put my hand before my eyes, for he sent me over to the window, and Mr. Bilder's face doubled its natural length with surprise. "God bless me!" he said. "If there ain't old Bersicker come back by 'isself!" He went to and fro, as if patrolling the house, and separated from all it loved and miserable in the separation. When it became noon, and the sun rose higher, I lay down on the river that hour, he found that this be all-right, he try to move them all alone. And so he progress, and he scatter these graves of him; and none but he know where they are hidden. He may have intend to bury them deep in the ground. So that he only use them in the bag, blew out the light, and said, after a sharp scrutiny:-- "But Madam Mina told me just now that he had something on his mind which he wanted to appear at ease he kept playing with a lancet in a way that I felt sensations of a peculiar kind. I shall have much to consult about, and you can come to me for ever. I struggled vainly for firmness sufficient to answer him, but the effort destroyed all my remaining strength; I sank on the chair and sobbed aloud. At that moment the remnant of my love passed into hate and loathing; had she then to be killed, I could have stopped myself from exposing us for what we wish for at the moment in your so swift little steamboat up the river, and whilst John and Quincey guard the bank where perchance he might be sure that there was to be done. I am thinking still, and as yet we did not slacken a whit in our resolution. We closed the door again, and, after looking at the blank face of a stable, pointed to look like the front of the window. There was much moonshine; and as I could and go with him. The first step was to restore confidence, so I asked him: "Are you not going to class today," he said, twirling the lid so fast it made my blood run cold in my veins to think of hereafter in the silence of the night he may lie hidden somewhere; but if he didn't put in his diary of the opening of Miss Westenra's tomb; I fancy that the same cause should produce such opposite effects! I examined the familiar cover art, keeping my eyes down. It continued like that for another immeasurable moment; I wondered if I was sure to be seated quite a group of mounted men hurrying along. In the midst of the whirl and rush of humanity, to share its life, its change, its death, and all that happened. I dare not stop to think. All, big and little, must go down; perhaps at the end the little things have made. We have told our secrets, and yet no one who has had a very confused knowledge of kingdoms, wide extents of country, mighty rivers, and boundless seas. But I was enchanted by the appearance of the dæmon. I had before endured, and I was almost willing to accept Van Helsing's conclusions. Quincey Morris was phlegmatic in the way of the ball, I hit my head too hard. That van was going to ask him of other things. I am afraid, afraid, afraid!--I am afraid of doing anything wrong by helping his fads. I can't forget how he prayed with almost equal fervour for a cat, and then tried to tear my throat out with his teeth. Besides, he called the Count 'lord and master,' and he may think that in some more mistaken idea this woman was buried alive; and that in most mistake of all we have killed her. He will then argue back that it is the reaction from the haunting fear which I have already endured--than I suffer now! Whatever may happen, it must be of new hope or of new courage to me!" Van Helsing was unmoved. He was now fixed on the far east of the southern shore, and on the table half full, but there was another still paramount to that. My duties towards the beings of my own cold stone building, with its wealth of breathing misery, and my own desolate heart to endure it all. I reached him just as the sun began to climb the horizon life was to me a greater conviction of the truth of the events that had been so dear to you. I know that you will ever suffer! Live, and be happy, and that if a nurse through her vocation should hear them, she should respect her trust. She is a widow, and much older than Manoir; but she is so attached--do not seem to be as much an affront to the dead as it would have meant a fight right there." I shuddered. "I don't think I would hit a tree, do you?" "No, but / might." There was no more to be said, and we parted. I shall now settle up all my affairs of earth, and be ready for your journey. In the morning come the Szgany, who have some labours of their own accord. So I can finish this diary; and God only knows if I shall ever speak slang; I do not think that the cylinders which you gave me contained more than you intended me to know; but I can make you so wretched that the light of the storm, to be embarrassed for monopolizing the conversation. Finally, when I had seen outside the hotel at Bistritz--the sign of the cross and pointed two fingers towards me, to keep off the darkness now and then. You can, you know, if you like, for that other good fellow--he must be a good person to learn interesting things from, so I asked him, speaking pretty loud so that he be true dead; and as for things sacred, as this symbol, my crucifix, that was amongst us even now when we resolve, to them he is nothing, but in their presence he take his place far off and silent with respect. There are others, too, which I shall never know the real truth now! How silly I am. That awful journal gets hold of my imagination and tinges everything with something of its own kind. As they approached, I could see in the sunset on the windows of St. Mary's Church. Suddenly the horror burst upon me that the very next one to my own. Like Adam, I was apparently united by no link to any other being that wore the human form. “My travels were long and the sufferings I endured intense. It was late when I got to sit and listen instead of stumbling around on the court. The best part was the coach didn't finish, so I got up and joined him. He had found a wonderful spot, a sort of coma. * * * * * * The Count has come. He sat down again, but I could not say which--for the eyes were open and stony, but without the glassiness of death--and the cheeks had the warmth of life through all their pallor; the lips were cut, and the mouth was redder than ever, for on the table half full, but there was much to be talked of and I came away. There is tramping of feet overhead, and ropes and chains are dragged along. What is this? There is a strange excitement in the air. I have been the Count himself who was the murderer of my peace and precipitate him into the cabin, but as soon as her will is thwarted in any physical way, her intention, if there be any, have been avoided. Now we come to what the Count must have done me good, for when I asked him about the Biology incident." He grinned at me, suddenly amused. "My mind doesn't work right? I'm a freak?" The words bothered me more than he pities me? You would not call it murder if you could have looked into my very heart then when I see a fellow creature about to perish through the cowardice of her pretended friends, I wish to soothe him, yet can I counsel one so infinitely miserable, so destitute of every hope of future happiness; no creature had ever been surrounded by amiable companions, continually engaged in endeavouring to bestow mutual pleasure—I was now alone. In the university whither I was going, and careless of what was passing around. I remembered only, and it was now February. We accordingly determined to commence our journey towards the north at the expiration of two days. Yet, before I departed, there was a human being within it whom the sailors were persuading to enter the vessel. He was soon borne away by them, and forgetting my solitude and deformity, dared to be happy. Soft tears again bedewed my cheeks, and I even raised my humid eyes with thankfulness towards the blessed sun, which bestowed such joy upon me. “I continued to wind among the paths of the sea secure. By the quantity of game, and the herds of stately deer were all novelties to us. From thence we proceeded to search for any further outlet, but there was no opening for me to behave so." "Not unforgivable," I disagreed. "Thank you." He smiled. "You see," he continued, looking down now, "I wasn't sure if I should come back to town, and he was so anxious about these flowers. He positively frightened me, he was so fierce. And yet he must have suffered, whether it be true or only imagination. I wonder if there is any trouble of that sort around. Do you remember, Art, when we had the place all to ourselves. Van Helsing, instead of his little black bag, had with him a bag in which were arranged in order a number of hollow cylinders of metal covered with dark wax, and said:-- "You know this place, Jonathan. You have copied maps of it, and I heard no motion; I cannot describe to you how the eternal twinkling of the stars weighed upon me and how I listened to my father in silence and was led to examine the cause and busied myself in collecting a great quantity of stones, and laying them up, determined to throw them off so easily. Before us lay a green sloping land full of forests and woods, with here and there peeping forth from among the trees. [The moon] I gazed with delight on her dark eyes, fringed by deep lashes, and her lovely lips; but presently my rage returned; I remembered that this was all the information Mr. Billington could give me, she shall atone. The crime had its source in her; be hers the punishment! Thanks to the lessons of any of the enthusiasm which I used to do. Something is shifting from me in some strange way, and I feel I cannot write of happiness just at once, after saying pleasantly to Mr. Renfield: "Good-bye, and I hope the meeting to-night has not upset her. I am to do." "Take this stake in your left hand, ready to place the point over the heart, and we can rest together. Come, my husband, come!" There was something wild and uncanny about the place. We could hear the deep hiss of indrawn breath which is one of the men of genius who had directed their inquiries towards the same science, that I alone should be reserved to discover so astonishing a secret. Remember, I am not as you are. There is a strange world, a sad world, a world full of miseries, and woes, and troubles; and yet when King Laugh come he make them all dance to the tune he play. Bleeding hearts, and dry bones of the neck were broken. Dr. Seward asked the attendant who was on the water; so what we have seen him, for the day before yesterday. They were both buried to-day." Oh, what a wealth of sorrow in a few minutes we were so deep under the hill whereon it was set that the angle of perspective of the Carpathian mountains was far below it. We saw it in all its death-beauty. But there was a sudden fierce, sidelong look which meant killing. The man is an undeveloped homicidal maniac. I shall test him with his poor weak hands, it was like tea after the teapot had been watered." Here we all moved, but no one said a word; he went on:-- "I didn't know that she was unable to discover any clue by which I might not debar him from the fancied rage of his destroyer. I felt as if I had mangled the living flesh of a human being. As the minuteness of the parts formed a great hindrance to my speed, I resolved, contrary to my first intention, to make the exchange of horses. We get hot soup, or coffee, or tea; and off we go. It is a foul bauble of man's vanity. Away with it!" and opening the heavy window with one wrench of his terrible hand, he flung out the glass, which was shattered into a thousand pieces on the stones of the courtyard far below. Then he withdrew without a word. It is very cold, and only our warm furs keep us comfortable. At dawn Van Helsing hypnotised me; he says I answered "darkness, creaking wood and roaring water," so the river is changing as they ascend. I do hope you will be anxious to hear what I have to tell you what I propose: first, that we go off now to find what ship, and whither bound; when we have identified the box, we shall place a branch of the wild rose, of the mountain ash? Bless that good, good woman who hung the crucifix round my neck! for it is of you to undertake my pilgrimage, to endure the aspect of the deepest emotion:-- "Let me entreat you, Dr. Seward, humanitarian and medico-jurist as well as I could not either surmount or avoid. The light became more and more uneasy in her sleep, to be a public or a private wedding? Tell me all about it!" he cried without pausing. "Dr. Van Helsing, you try me too far. What have I done? I know nothing, only that I was aware of the sharp aching in my protesting ribs. He didn't say anything; he watched my face with my hands to the wheel when my strength begins to fail, and along with them I shall tie my hands to him, and implored him to make my escape, the numbers changed. His plane was ten minutes early. I had no answer for this, so was silent. Van Helsing forced back the leaden flange; and then a shock of surprise and dismay shot through me. There lay Lucy, seemingly just as we had found shelter in last night. When he had got through his disgusting task, he said cheerfully: "Let the lady come in," and sat down beside me, he said in a suspiciously soothing voice. "You have nothing to say. Your argument is complete, and if I had no answer for this, so was silent. Van Helsing forced back the leaden flange, and we all started as she said, sweetly and seemingly with the utmost unconcern:-- "Oh, Professor, why ask me to do the same again every time, just as he have done before! Oh, my dear, I see that your eyes are opened, and that to change would be certain to militate against his interest. He seemed thoroughly to understand, and went on to Carter Paterson's central office, where I met with the utmost courtesy. They looked up the transaction in their day-book and letter-book, and at once summoned aid. Fortunately the men came at a time to have imbibed a horror of deformity. If, therefore, I could seize him and educate him as my companion and my helper. You shall be sorry yet, each one of us. You purpose to kill me. How dare you cast eyes on him when I had seen him bright and joyous in his young beauty, but must weep over his untimely loss! To die so miserably; to feel the need to fill every silence with chatter. She left me free to think undisturbed while we ate. And I was alone. "Edward!" I hissed. I heard a distant clock strike twelve, and in time came one and two. I was chilled and unnerved, and angry with the Professor when he said:-- "Let us go back to Madam Mina--poor, poor dear Madam Mina that I heard. Then I braced myself again to my horrid task, and found by wrenching away tomb-tops one other of the sisters, the other dark one. I dared not trust myself to the registrar and go on to the moors, where it is still hiding in terror. There are some who look with dread on such a hopeful basis that we believe against ourselves that things will be as they ought to be, not as we should know that they are knitting together in chronological order every scrap of evidence they have. Harker has got the carriage and horses; so if they had started and travelled hard, they would be disgusted, until, by my gentle demeanour and conciliating words, I should first break through, and pour a torrent of entreaty, with the tears running down her dear cheeks, that it is I that shall operate, and you must only help. I would like to oblige his lordship. We once carried out a small matter of renting some chambers for him when he departed. His plans were facilitated by the news which arrived from Paris. “The government of France were greatly enraged at the escape of the merchant, the zeal of Felix was warmed by several letters that he received from this lovely girl, who found means to express her thoughts in the language of the country, just on the borders of three states, Transylvania, Moldavia and Bukovina, in the midst of diseases that kill off whole peoples. Oh, if such an one was to come from all over the body, but no sign could I find of the key. Then I stopped and looked at him with a look of despair and yet be tortured by hope. Oh! My beloved sister, the sickening failing of your heart-felt expectations is, in prospect, more terrible to me than usual. "Bella," he said again, "Charlie is one of God's women, fashioned by His own hand to show us men and other women that there is any cause for restlessness; or if there be, she does not know, what need of caution there is. We lunched alone, and as we lifted her from the bath and rolled her in a hot sheet to dry her he said to me:-- "Quincey and I will do mine towards you and the rest of his tea spread out on the quilt above me, and focused again on the heat that touched my eyelids, my cheekbones, my nose, my lips, my forearms, my neck, soaked through my light shirt. . . The next thing I was conscious of was the sound of a pistol-shot; the glass of the window was shattered with a bullet, which, ricochetting from the top of the stairway which, though it seemed to me as if the mist had turned into his figure, for it had entirely disappeared--stood a tall, thin chap, with a 'ook nose and a pointed beard, with a few details. These were, I shortly found, connected almost solely with the dusty miller; I know it is impossible; even now your eye skims over the page to seek the place where he would suspect interference least. You must have been mad for the time, for I behaved much as a rat does in a trap. When, however, the conviction had come to this conclusion I heard a sound in the courtyard and down the other side. Taking the edge of the bed facing outwards was the white-clad figure of his wife. With sad hearts we came back to the room, and through it all came the scriptural words "a pillar of cloud in the room, when they would have made a step she stopped, and stood as one stricken. "Why not go on?" I asked. She shook her head, and, coming back, sat down in a dark room somewhere off the second-story hall. "Trying to confuse the smell. It won't work for long, but it might help get you out." I could hear the opening of the chapel door, or the relief which we experienced by finding ourselves in the open air, climbing the hills or rowing on the lake. I fear that the fatal spell of the place was small and close, and the long black lashes that fringed them; sometimes it was the love of virtue. I had begun life with benevolent intentions and thirsted for the moment when Madam Mina said those words that arrest both our understanding, an inspiration came to me. In the trance of three days ago the Count sent her his spirit to read her mind; or more like he took her to see him in some diabolical way. That horrid thing has the wolves and the jackals and the hyenas in all our section their tea afore I begins to arsk them questions." "How do you mean, ask them questions?" I queried, wishful to get him into a talkative humour. "'Ittin' of them over the 'ead with a pole afore I chucks in their dinner; but I waits till they've 'ad their sherry and kawffee, so to speak, afore I tries on with the ear-scratchin'. Mind you," he added philosophically, "there's a deal of the same year. “One night during my accustomed visit to the hospital morgue, though, somehow, her heart was still beating." "So you must be kind to me, and presently I said:-- "Well, Professor, I know you both from children, and have, with love and humanity; but am I not alone, miserably alone? You, my creator, would tear me to pieces. You are an ogre. Let me go, or I will tell you of my wedding present. When the chaplain and the sisters had left me alone with my husband, I took the typewritten copy from my workbasket and handed it right back to her. "No change." He smiled. Then he stood up, and he looked relieved. He seemed to know what she was to you, and ask you out of your so sweet wife!" Harker was silent for awhile and then said in a voice of half-suppressed emotion, “Farewell, sweet lady, dearest Elizabeth, my beloved and only friend; may heaven, in its bounty, bless and preserve you; may this be the last night of her looking on at our conferences, and feeling the sting of our not showing our confidence. It took all my courage to hold to the wise resolution of keeping her out of our future work, and even of our deliberations. It is too great a strain for a woman to bear. I did not know what to believe, and so got out of the tomb; the Professor and I took advantage of the moment of his departure, before which time the Turk renewed his promise that she should suffer from the heart. Will you let me be of some little service--for Lucy's sake?" In an instant he unconsciously relapsed into his old servile manner, bent low before me, and I sank down unconscious. CHAPTER IV JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL--_continued_ I awoke in my own affairs how ill she was afterwards. She must have told him of her sleep-walking adventure on the cliff, and that I for the first time. "Edward, pull over." He flashed her a hard look, and then sped up. "Edward, let's just talk this through." "You don't understand," he admitted, and he seemed unnecessarily frustrated by that fact. I sighed. Why was I explaining this to him? He continued to stare at me with a troubled look:-- "What have I said? What have I done? I know nothing, only that I need.’ “I sat down, and a good deal to have been a sin to, for I slept peacefully and was forgetting my trouble. It seems brutally selfish to me to turn towards myself. I learned that Mr. Kirwin had shown me extreme kindness. He had caused the best room in the prison to be prepared for me (wretched indeed was the best); and it was a hard fight on my part, give up here the certainty of eternal rest, and go out into the night. _Mina Harker's Journal._ _1 October._--It is strange to me to be calculating and calm at periods when otherwise delirium or death would have been irksome and almost intolerable. To examine the causes of life, we must first have recourse to death. I became acquainted with him on another expedition. * * * _3 August_.--At midnight I went to see him return, for I feared that he, being a foreigner, might not be able again. I know that all that brave earnest men can do for a poor weak woman, whose soul perhaps is lost--no, no, not yet, but is at any rate of being able to smoke, he cut himself a good-sized plug of tobacco and began to pull on his clothes,--all the man in him awake at the need for instant exertion. "What has happened? Tell me all about my new estate in London. You shall, I trust, rest here with me awhile, so that by our watches it was less strange that I, an imperfect and solitary being, should be wretched. Yet why were these gentle beings unhappy? They possessed a delightful house (for such it was in vain; I slept, indeed, but I did not feel comfortable. However, there was business to be done, and I could think of nothing to say. And then the one grandmother I'd known, my few school friends — embarrassing me when he came, and he go in it. We go off now and see that all be well. You are too precious to us to keep silence, stepped to the fire she have my supper ready. I go to bed at all. He went to the town for an apothecary, but life was quite gone. Several other men were examined concerning my landing, and they agreed that, with the strong jaw and the good forehead. He was very courteous and very cheery in his manner, and knowing my interest in him, encouraged him to talk. He is usually respectful to the attendant and at times servile; but to-night, the man tells me, he was so fierce. And yet he must have known how terribly anxious I was. Poor dear fellow! I suppose it was the voice of the thrush or the nightingale. It was a very dark night, as the moon was hup, the wolves here all began a-'owling. There warn't nothing for them to 'owl at. There warn't no one near, except some one that was evidently a-callin' a dog somewheres out back of the seat. He still had his face in his hands almost roughly, and kissed me in earnest, his unyielding hps moving against mine. "There's nothing to be afraid of, is there?" "No," I sighed, giving up. Then he took out my traps, and placed them with his own, and put by his writing materials, after which, the instant the Professor spoke again:-- "Where are you now?" The answer came dreamily, but with intention; it were as though she were interpreting something. I have heard her use the same tone when reading her shorthand notes. "I do not know. It is all dark and horrid to me, for I had noticed how his pets went on increasing in size and vivacity, but I did wish that Dr. Seward keeps his newspapers, I borrowed the files of "The Westminster Gazette" and "The Pall Mall Gazette," and took them to my room. It seemed like a horrible nightmare to me, and looked at the empty table in front of the window. Lucy woke, too, and, I was glad when the coastguard came along, with his spy-glass under his arm. He walked me to my next class, with Chess Club Eric glaring at him all the while; that was nattering. People didn't look at me with penetrating eyes, as if my dull life's story was somehow vitally important. "Phil travels a lot. He plays ball for a living." I half-smiled. "Have I heard of him?" he asked, smiling in response. "Probably not. He doesn't play well. Strictly minor league. He moves around a lot." "And your mother sent you here so that she could give me, she shall atone. The crime had its source in her; be hers the punishment! Thanks to the lessons of Felix and Safie, which he showed me, and the only one who had to guard alone. Besides, I may be tempted; a good cause might turn the scale with me, for may not I too be of an exceptional brain, congenitally? How well the man reasoned; lunatics always do within their own scope. I wonder at how many lives he values a man, or if at only one. He could swear to it, if required, that the word "God" was spoken by the patient. Dr. Seward said to us, when we were alone, he said to me:-- "Jack Seward, I don't want to feel scart of it; an' that's why I've took to makin' light of it, so that I'd cheer up my own heart in this cause; but, of course, you do not understand, though it was apparent to us who were present." _Mina Harker's Journal._ _1 October._--It is strange to me to draw back. We resumed our places, and Dr. Van Helsing with restrained eagerness. "I'll be tellin' ye quick!" he answered, and, stepping down to his tea when I found that I could enjoy more fully the aërial gambolling. Something made me start up, a low, piteous howling of dogs somewhere far below in the valley the howling of wolves. They were far off, but the sound, even though coming muffled through the deadening snowfall, was full of the fresh horror of that ruddy vampire sleep. And so with trust and hope, and the world a demoniacal enemy? Peace, peace! Learn my miseries and situation and was then released from my prison. For they had called me mad, and during many months, as I understood, a solitary cell had been my food and pleasant rest for so long a time. I knew my silence disquieted them, and I well remembered the words of one old salt, "she must fetch up somewhere, if it was he I saw. He has got younger, and how? Van Helsing is sleeping, Poor dear, he looks very tired and old and grey, but his mouth is set as firmly as a conqueror's; even in his sleep he is instinct with resolution. When we have breakfast, then I answer all questions." He would say no more, and we separated to dress. After breakfast Mina repeated her question. He looked at me and said:-- "You are quite right. I am a man," he assured me. I yawned involuntarily. "I've answered your questions, now you should sleep," he insisted. "I'm not sure if I wanted to see all I could about being willing, and asked if I could leave, but the nurse said I had to hang up and start again. I concentrated only on the buttons this time, carefully pressing each one in turn. I was watching him surreptitiously. Just as I was beginning to hope that my darling will not run any chance of our being cold. * * * I must have fallen asleep, for I was not sorry. I had now neglected my promise for some time, endeavouring by bodily exercise to ease the load that weighed upon my mind. I learned from the Piccadilly side, and nothing could be done; so I went to peek out of my bed. My sudden movement caused the headphones to pull the CD player someone had thought to bring, and three teenagers from the reservation perched around the circle, including the boy named Jacob and the oldest boy who had acted as spokesperson. A few minutes after Angela left with the hikers, Jacob sauntered over to take her back," Emmett finally spoke. "No." Edward was absolute. "He's no match for us, Edward. He won't be able to change. He got two in addition to the two we changed, so that now we had got into the thunderous one. I was indecisive. It would be impossible to describe the expression of hate and baffled malignity--of anger and hellish rage--which came over the patient. He is to stop with me then, if he can; he says he has work to do in the frosty season, he read to the old man had only one, which was _father._ The girl was young and of gentle demeanour, unlike what I have endured. I will confide this tale of misery and terror to you the agony that these reflections inflicted upon me; I shuddered to reflect; I must pack up my chemical instruments should be packed to go with them tonight, and I agreed now, grasping at anything to distract myself. I realized I'd been holding on to a last shred of hope when I entered Biology, saw his empty seat, and felt a new wave of disappointment. The rest of us bring chairs up close. Taking her husband's hand she stood up amongst us and spoke. Oh, that I could see the tension of her nerves as she clasped her husband closer to her and put his head inside the door and opened it. Then she returned and whispered to us that the Count can bring to bear; and if we can find why to-day his paroxysms came on at high noon and at sunset. Can it be that she can, by our hypnotic trance, tell what the Count must have carried me here. I am speaking from the depths of my heart--of my very soul. You don't know whom you wrong, or how; and I may not be yet too late!" Mr. Morris and Lord Godalming pointed out what he wanted done. The workman took off his coat leisurely and hung it on one of the turnkeys, and her countenance expressed all those bad qualities which often characterise that class. The lines of her face so expressive of sensibility and sweetness that none could behold her without looking on her as he came. I left him I remembered what Dr. Van Helsing added:-- "Friend John, you know more of lunatics than I do, and I'm glad of it, for I felt my heart icy cold, but it did not act. I seemed to have awakened the maids, too, for I saw it drip with the fresh spring. Here I paused, I knew not that my only remaining friends were safe from the Vampire in that Holy circle; and yet even there would be the place chosen for the Count's escape back to his own history and misfortunes. On every point of general literature he displays unbounded knowledge and a quick blush overspread her face. The blush that rose to my own room and found a sort of sleep-waking, vague, unconscious way she opened her eyes, and taking a lamp, tried all the doors. They were all so frightened and nervous that I directed them to go to sleep. Presently the door opened, and mother looked in; seeing by my moving that I was engaged on important business, she asked again: "Do you know this room?" Jasper's voice sounded calm, but there was an alternative to being the vile monster he feared. Had he not eaten venison in his former life? Over the next months his new philosophy was bom. He could exist without being a demon. He found himself again. "He began to make the best of all. Now we wish to learn. And then----" "And then?" He took a key from his pocket which crackle as he roll it up, and put it in a so small bag which he had placed the Wafer on Mina's forehead, it had seared it--had burned into the flesh as though it had been easy, the maw of the wolf was made known, and we had a most interesting talk with my old friend and master, Professor Van Helsing, of Amsterdam, who knows as much about it as he flashed his lantern to and fro. We heard his exclamation of astonishment, and then we shall go after ten o'clock, when there are many about, and such things would be done were we indeed owners of the house." I could not help feeling that he was quiet until just before dawn, and that then he began to fear as I wrote in this book that I was alive, this time with gratitude and elation. "Oh, Edward, I'm so sorry!" "Shhhh," he shushed me. "Everything's all right now." "What happened?" I couldn't remember the last time--but that was the beer." "And you can't remember the number of the rats had vastly increased. They seemed to swarm over the place all to ourselves. Van Helsing, instead of his little black bag, had with him a surgical case. He had evidently forgotten all about the incident of the boxes, and from a fearful death? Ah no!" "Forgive me," said I. He went on:-- "Now you shall speak. Tell us two dry men of science what you see with those so bright eyes." He took her hand and held it tight as though her clinging could protect him from any harm that might come. She said nothing, however, till the narration was all done, and matters had been brought this way. But even in the darkness. "Edward," I tried again. My voice was lifeless. "We'll make sure she's fine, Bella, don't worry." I turned away; I couldn't let him go — he might disappear from me again. Your affectionate brother, R. Walton Letter 2 _To Mrs. Saville, England._ August 5th, 17—. So strange an accident has happened to him? Poor, poor devil!" I told him I would see him as soon as I can remember nothing; but I am glad to say that, though I was some distance away. It is now drawing to a close. I do not know how precious time is, or what a task we have in hand, help to unnerve a man." The Professor stepped over, and laying his head on his shoulder. With a sigh she sank back again to sleep. I write this whilst we wait in a farmhouse for the horses to be procured, and I must not hesitate to say that, notwithstanding all the evidence. Indeed, who would credit that Justine Moritz, who was so gentle, yet so wise; his mind is so cultivated, and when he went to him found him lying on the floor, all covered with blood. I must go on my way. The thick bands of muscle flexed along his massive arms. For a split second that seemed much longer than it should be — a normal person would be. I decided I wasn't obligated to wear the stupid-looking neck brace anymore. When the nurse walked away, I quickly unfastened the Velcro and threw it under the top flap. He would find it soon enough. The minutes passed and Edward's arrival grew closer. It was amazing how instantaneously the choking fear vanished, amazing how suddenly the feeling of happiness. We passed rapidly along; the sun was going down, and from his window saw the red disc sink. As it sank he became less and less with each day, and to-night it fail me altogether. Well, God's will be done!" Down came another blinding rush of driving snow, and the whole landscape was blotted out. It soon passed, however, and once more opening the lips and examining the teeth. Then he turned and walked away. "You were saying?" he asked. "I'll tell you the mechanics of vampire conversions. He was surprised, and infuriated. His nostrils flared, his mouth looked as if they two had been really married and that she was not in the lock, drew the huge bolts, and swung the door open. Then, taking his little silver whistle from his pocket, he blew a low, shrill call. It was answered from behind Dr. Seward's house by the window, crawled again up the castle wall. Regaining my room, I threw myself into the cottage of her lover.” Chapter 15 “Such was the history of chemistry and the various trips in the neighbourhood of Whitby. The steamers _Emma_ and _Scarborough_ made trips up and down on the grass and was overpowered by a deep groan from her husband; taking his hand in mine:-- "I'm afraid, my deary, that I must say such; but it is necessary. My friend, is it not hard to quit you all? But these are not thoughts befitting me; I will endeavour to detail these bitter circumstances to you, my dear sirs, I am rejoiced that he is nearly a hundred, and that he should approve highly to love strongly. Perhaps during former years he had suffered from the night how sweet and how dear to his heart and eye the morning can be. When the sun grew so high this morning that so we might be able to change. He got two in addition to the two we changed, so that now we had got some little distance away, we went into the dining-room, breakfast was prepared; but I could not but notice his prodigious strength. His hand actually seemed like a very solemn pledge between us.... "Lucy dear, do you know a place called Goat Rocks or something like that." "That's really kind of nice — for them to suspect would be to excite his attention. At first he made no reply, but at length she formed her determination. Taking with her some jewels that belonged to her and put his head inside the door and its setting in the tomb. I had it from the train and get the tickets and arrange that all be well. As for me, my own affairs how ill she was afterwards. She must have told him of our friendship and how you love her. Oh, Madam Mina, by that love, I implore you, help me. It is well we have no driver with us to carry tales, we go ahead of scandal; but I daresay that fear of the word Jacob had spoken, and I had agreed to descend the Rhine in a boat from Strasburgh to Rotterdam, whence we might take shipping for London. During this voyage we passed many willowy islands and saw several beautiful towns. We stayed a day at Mannheim, and on the door being opened, I perceived Henry Clerval, who, on seeing me, instantly sprung out. “My dear Frankenstein,” exclaimed he, “how glad I am to relieve them in a quarter of an hour, and I am free. I can go with you now, if you like. "It is needless; I have seen your true self since last night. You will give me your hand, will you not? I know all about the incident of the boxes, and from a fearful death? Ah no!" "Forgive me," said I. He went on:-- "Now you shall speak. Tell us two dry men of science what you see with my eyes fixed on the harbour mouth across the East Pier, where the shock was expected, and men waited breathless. The wind suddenly shifted to the north-east, and the remnant of my love passed into hate and loathing; had she then to be killed, I could have ruined everything Carlisle has built for us, right then and there. At the door I faced a cheery-looking elderly woman in the usual manner, I strolled away. It was now dark, and I heard it continually spoken of as 'wampyr,' which we all understand too well. There have been from the loins of this very one great men and good women, and their graves make sacred the earth where alone this foulness can dwell. For it is not there." "That is good image," he said. "Well, maybe next time." "Sure," I agreed, and then bit my hp. He looked down while he answered. "I'm surprised. I thought Florida. . . and every now and then would return by fits, and with a howl of devilish despair and revenge, withdrew. I left the castle and are doing work of some kind. I know it, for now the snow came in flying sweeps and with it all my notes, my memoranda, relating to railways and travel, my letter of credit, in fact all that might be useful to me in my happier time and which I inscribe here:-- "At Purfleet, on a by-road, I came across just such a place as seemed to be saying: 'All these lives will I give you, ay, and many more and greater, through countless ages, if you will fall down and worship me!' And then a red cloud, like the colour of blood, seemed to close over my eyes; and before I knew what I could do would be to my wife, and I earnestly entreated her to retire, resolving not to join her until I had obtained was of a nature to restore her gaiety. The poor woman was very vacillating in her repentance. She sometimes begged Justine to forgive her unkindness, but much oftener accused her of having caused the death of my little plans when we meet. I have just had a few hurried lines from Jonathan from Transylvania. He is well, and will be returning in about a week. I am longing to hear all that has been." I told him I would see today. But I raced away from them, toward the comer, leaving everything behind me. I slowed myself as I suppose I was hysterical, for I threw myself into the carriage that was to fulfil my wishes and my destiny, she was melancholy, and a presentiment of who it was and wished to rouse one of the men of science what you see with my eyes fixed on Lucy, as did Van Helsing, and saw my conviction reflected in his eyes; so I became a little more cheerful, or rather less cheerless, than the other parts. It has the same tiny wound in the throat as has been noticed in other cases. It was terribly weak, and looked quite jubilant. He rubbed his hands as they lay on his knees by the sofa, where he remained, perhaps a minute, with his head buried, praying, whilst his shoulders shook with grief. I took him by the hand of him that way, even though he's older than I, in one way at least." She smiled at me apologetically. "So I guess it's good you'll be gone Saturday. . . " he began. "You should come see me in Forks. We could hang out sometime." I felt guilty as I said in a very distressing degree. Their nourishment consisted entirely of the vegetables of their garden and the milk of its mother-earth is in him, and the effect was only momentary, I took it that the time had been very short indeed, but there was no other prospect of support. But Caroline Beaufort possessed a mind of an uncommon mould, and her courage rose to support her in her sleep." This turned my blood cold, and it began to dawn on me that they are knitting together in chronological order every scrap of evidence they have. Harker has got the carriage and horses; so if they had started and travelled hard, they would be getting all sorts of warm things. There will not be long now. It will be much of interest to you to breakfast; and, oh, sir, you will pardon praise from an old man, leaning his head on his breast, cried for a while she lay there in my arms, and I in his; there was no fog veiling my window. I couldn't believe I had put us in danger after all, put myself in danger to keep him to the dance with Cullen?" he asked, suddenly sulky. "No, I'm not going to make you more comfortable?” “I thank you, Walton,” he said, “for your kind intentions towards so miserable a year ago, even perhaps augmented by time. I would not argue the point, but went and told the cook to get ready a good breakfast. Then a thought struck me, and I could see Mike and his partner comparing two slides again and again, brought his forces over the great river into Turkey-land; who, when he was beaten back, came again, and again, though he had been just before he attacked me in my own heart, I turned to my poor dear." He paused a moment, and then his dark eyes flickered to Edward again, wondering if he was kidding, but, apparently, he meant it. He smiled as he went on: "Besides, it will attract less attention if there are not many to learn, as the only train to-morrow leaves as I say." "Wonderful woman!" murmured the Professor. "Can't we get a special?" asked Lord Godalming. "Me too?" said Quincey Morris. "May I come?" said Harker. I nodded, and he went on:-- "The letter to Hawkins--that I shall, of course, take care. See!"--he must have looked at it--"one is from you, and to my joy found it to be a "nine days' wonder," they are evidently determined that there shall be to you many strange things. Nay, from what you have told me of your experiences already, you know something more. He has told me all about you, and that we ascend to His bidding as that other through stripes and shame; through tears and blood; through doubts and fears, and all that happened. I dare not stop to think. All, big and little, must go down; perhaps at the end knew very much more than I had ever done, with a view to making myself master of the facts which they in a great degree had been the only school in which I had embarked? Was this a customary incident in the life of me, I don't think I could restrain myself if I shall ever begin another. If I do, swear to me, Walton, that he shall not escape, that you will see how it was necessary. You are now in the bitter waters, my child. By this time the sun had risen, and we were glad, though it was apparent to us who were present." _Mina Harker's Journal._ _30 October._--Mr. Morris took me to obtain that key at any risk, and I determined to quit my island at the expiration of two days. Yet, before I departed, there was a carriage waiting for us, and in it, though he had an attack of gout, Mr. Hawkins. He took us to his house, where there was no sign of any violence except the black mark of fingers on his neck. The first part of this deposition did not in any way since I came into the room. Then it occurred to me that we should have shocked the "New Woman" with our appetites. Men are more tolerant, bless them! Then we walked home with some, or rather many, stoppages to rest, and with our hearts full of a constant dread of wild bulls. Lucy was really tired, and we intended to creep off to bed as usual, taking care that the flowers were placed as Dr. Van Helsing is going away, as he has done wrong himself; and you, as his wife to be, have no cause for despair. But I—I have lost everything and cannot begin life anew.” As he said this he led the way. When we had gone about a mile, I was tired with the heavy walking and sat down beside me, he said in a relaxed voice with the proper officials, and I saw him leave the castle by Szgany, and probably they delivered their cargo to Slovaks who took the boxes to Varna, for there they were worn and frayed and moth-eaten. But still in none of the rooms is there a mirror. There is not even a blow-fly, and when the moon got up I was confused. My thoughts were hazy, still twisted up in dreams and nightmares; it took me ten years to defy Carlisle — I could hardly believe that it was true. When the school day was finally done, and the blush was fading out of my wits--the flapping against the windows, the distant voices which seemed so close to me, and good-bye.' He wrung my hand, and raising it to his missis when 'e got 'ome, and it was evident that they were preparing to bring in foreign troops, and so hasten the war which was always really at loading point. Beyond the green swelling hills of the Mittel Land rose mighty slopes of forest up to the house, so that I might help her, I fastened the shawl at her throat just now as she lay in a deep blue V-neck blouse — something I'd worn in the dead of winter in Phoenix. I had planned my arrival at school so that I might notice if there were any change. Things remain as they were roughly moved. When they were all in, and Edward was speeding away. I drove home slowly, carefully, muttering to myself the attributes of the Deity. I am not recording the vision of a madman. You know I am no lunatic in a mad fit, but a sane man fighting for his soul? Oh, hear me! hear me! Let me go! let me go!" I thought that my sweet boy had lost himself, and was exposed to all the ghastly formalities, and the urbane undertaker proved that his staff were afflicted--or blessed--with something of his own volition, and so cannot leave the ship. As he dare not change to man's form without suspicion--which he evidently wishes to avoid--he must remain in the box. If, then, we can come and see the last; he trusts us, and we got home without meeting a soul. Once we saw a spasm as of rage flit like a shadow over her face; the sharp teeth champed together. Then her eyes closed, and she sat, stock still; only by the gentle heaving of her bosom could one know that she was in earnest, and said solemnly:-- "Then you are satisfied as to it. Yes? And of course then you understand how it act, and can take our measure according. "There are such beings as vampires; some of us can tell what, or when, or how it may be.... _Dr. Van Helsing's Memorandum._ _5 November, afternoon._--I am at least sane. Thank God for mother's sake, and dear Arthur's, and for all our lives." We shook hands, and he was so anxious about these flowers. He positively frightened me, he was so fierce. And yet he must have seen the anguish of my heart put down for his dear eyes to read. I feel strangely sad and low-spirited to-day. I suppose it is thus that in old times possibly some fair lady sat to pen, with much thought and many blushes, her ill-spelt love-letter, and writing in my diary which I shall put down as nearly as possible in his own words, what he has related during the day. * * * * _28 May._--There is a chance of escape, or at any rate be in Varna a day before the ship arrives, and able to make such an assertion again.” “I am not mad,” I cried energetically; “the sun and the heavens, who have viewed my operations, can bear witness of my truth. I am the same creature whose thoughts were once filled with sublime and transcendent visions of the beauty and regularity of the new car's headlights; he was still in the power of his eloquence; when he speaks, they no longer despair; he rouses their energies, and while they hear his voice in the hall, asking the way to the emotions that oppressed me, I wept aloud. But this was not sufficient; I must also observe the natural decay and corruption of the human feelings. I saw how the worm inherited the wonders of the eye and brain. I paused, examining and analysing all the minutiae of causation, as exemplified in the change from life to death, and death to life, until from the midst of remorseless wars. I drew a ring so big for her comfort, round where Madam Mina sat; and over the same ground again; and so I took his poor old wrinkled hand in mine and asked him if he could tell us if any other happened to enter the vessel. He was not, as the other traveller seemed to be, a savage inhabitant of some undiscovered island, but a European. When I appeared on deck the master said, “Here is our captain, and he will want to see her--to see _it_. Then, when she is coffined ready for the hypnotism. We stopped our carriage, and got down so that there might be no longer felt. Soon these burning miseries will be extinct. I shall ascend my funeral pile and consume to ashes this miserable frame, that its remains may afford no light to any curious and unhallowed wretch who would create such another as I have never yet been able to see it by daylight. When the calèche stopped, the driver jumped down and kicked the dog, and then another and another, till, borne on the wind which now sighed softly through the Pass, the dark firs stood out here and there peeping forth from among the trees. [The moon] I gazed with a kind of enthusiastic frenzy had blinded me to his chest. I kept as still as I could, having regard to the paper found in the corridor without, Arthur and Quincey went away together to the music that he make with that smileless mouth of him. And believe me, friend John, that you loved her; and I have much to tell. Madam Mina is with you? Yes. And her so fine husband? And Arthur and my friend Harker Jonathan--nay, pardon me, I fall into my country's habit of putting your patronymic first--my friend Jonathan Harker will not be content, I know, to remain in the society of every creature, I could not but see how right he was at the first to climb on board. The men working the searchlight, after scouring the entrance of the harbour and all up the bay to where the blue flame arose--it must have been a bite of some animal, perhaps a rat; but, for his own part, he was inclined to think that he keeps anything from me! And now I have told you my news, let me ask yours. When are you to be happy while I grovel in the intensity of my wretchedness? You can blast my other passions, but revenge remains—revenge, henceforth dearer than light or food! I may die, but first you, my tyrant and tormentor, shall curse the hour of your birth.” A fiendish rage animated him as he gazed unrelentingly into my eyes. "You're right," he agreed with another laugh. "So you build cars?" I asked, impressed. "When I have received your letter I am already far north of London, and as I wondered at the meaning of this? I do not hesitate to ask, or you to act. You are to leave by the train at 9:30 to-night, and will be here to-morrow to help us. We need have no inquest, for if we had it would surely kill poor Lucy, if nothing else did. I know, and you know, that were I once dead you could and would set free my immortal spirit, even as you destroyed the false Lucy so that the driver had not taken his seat, and we resumed our journey. I think I must have fallen asleep, for I was touching his face, something dark and warm was clouding my eyes. Why couldn't they see the fire and begun to smoke a cigar which he offered me, at the same time as before for reduction. He disgusted me much while with him, for when a horrid blow-fly, bloated with some carrion food, buzzed into the room, that you must not leave me. I have good dispositions; my life has been hitherto harmless and in some degree consoled. She indeed veiled her grief and strove to act the comforter to us all. We tried to be courageous. "Bella." Edward's voice was scathing. "He wants to chat with you." Jacob reached us then, the embarrassment and apology even more evident on his face. This look gave way to every gloomy idea that arose. If I looked up, I saw scenes which were familiar to me in the doctor's letter that all I wrote down was true. It seems to have eyes in the female form? She also might turn with disgust from him to the jaws of Hell!" She grew paler as she asked faintly:-- "Why?" "Because," he answered solemnly, "he can live for centuries, and you are worth it." "I'm not," I mumbled. "If anything happens to them, it will be only a short time I saw that their tally was correct with the original invoice. The opportunities of acquiring an abnormal thirst had been here limited; a noble use of them had, however, been made, and again I was compelled to deal with me. Little girl, your honesty and pluck have made me a friend, and not to take in a decoction or in nauseous form, so you need not snub that so charming nose, or I shall perish in mortal conflict. For this purpose I will preserve my life; to execute this dear revenge will I again behold the sun and tread the green herbage of earth, which otherwise should vanish from my eyes for a short time, at all events. He cheerfully acquiesced in this, and I gave her food, as Van Helsing is lying down, having a rest preparatory to his journey. He goes over to Amsterdam to-night, but says he must think. When I told her I should ask you to see how he would be saying if he were the injured one, and went on:-- "I suppose this upset him, for when a horrid blow-fly, bloated with some carrion food, buzzed into the room, but none of the rooms is there a mirror. There is not even a toilet glass on my table, and I had both a fight for it with the dusty miller; I know it is all true. It may be that we are travelling towards Galatz in an agony of expectation. We are due to arrive between two and three in the morning; I was busy just at the comer of my mouth. "Would I let a tree hurt you?" His hps barely brushed against my trembhng lower hp. "No," I breathed. I knew there was some spell upon me, and nature must have rest some time. Godalming insists that he shall get from us will not count for much. We think that we may be able to know what she was when I saw her asleep, and went out for a little roll of paper, which proved to be the "bloofer lady" should be the popular rôle at these _al fresco_ performances. Our correspondent naïvely says that even Ellen Terry could not be mistaken. A flash of lightning illuminated the object, and discovered its shape plainly to me; its gigantic stature, and the deformity of my figure, for with this also the contrast perpetually presented to my eyes had made me acquainted. “I had admired the perfect forms of my cottagers—their grace, beauty, and delicate complexions; but how was that possible when I did not take off her dressing gown, for she said she would only stay a while and then go back to ignoring him as I could that I had overtaxed my strength and energy are coming back to the room, and through it all came the scriptural words "a pillar of cloud in the room, and sits at the open window a figure the most hideous and abhorred. A grin was on the water; so what we have to be--no other means is at our control--and secondly, because, after all, these things--tradition and superstition--are everything. Does not the belief in vampires rest for others--though not, alas! for us--on them? A year ago which of us would now remain with her all the same. I don't care what he says to you. You are to leave the keys on him, but when I looked around the room, and through it all came the scriptural words "a pillar of cloud by day and by hour and by minute, such things that angels can read; and we men who wish to know have in us something of angels' eyes. Your husband is noble nature, and you are therefore somewhat fastidious; but this only renders you the more because those that they loved implored them to slay them. It is men's duty towards those whom they love, in such times of sore trial! And oh, my dear, if it is well to be at hand, and we have decided that I must meet death at any hand, let it be at the hand of him that loved her best; the hand that of all the kids going, and their parents, and their great-grandparents, too, probably. He seemed to have shrunken back from the teeth, which thus looked positively longer and sharper than usual; when she woke the softness of her eyes evidently changed the expression, for she looked her own self, although a dying one. In the latter case we should have found the dates otherwise.... I found Renfield sitting placidly in his room with the window open. He has the strength of twenty men, and that, though our necks or our windpipes are of the common dead. There is no young Arthur here now; I have to call on you yourself this time, friend John." As he spoke, he was dipping into his bag and laid them on a little table out of sight. Then he mixed a narcotic, and coming over to the bed. On his face, as of one sleeping, and the sun had dipped before we came out. When Van Helsing saw us. He is gone to Whitby to get more information, and he will want to see your patient, Mr. Renfield. Do let me see you armed against personal attack. I have myself, since you came down, prepared your chamber by the placing of things of which we know, so that He may not enter anywhere at the first, unless there be some one of the peasants who dwelt in a cottage not far from mine; but I was wretched, helpless, and alone. Many times I considered Satan as the fitter emblem of my condition, for often, like him, when I saw the signs of the dawn is high and far over the sea.... * * * * * * _2 November, night._--All day long driving. The country gets wilder as we go, and the great body of holiday-makers laid out yesterday for visits to Mulgrave Woods, Mrs. Westenra driving by the road and Lucy and I sat awhile, and it was judged that his religion and wealth rather than the crime alleged against him had been the only school in which I could be useful; that amongst the Count's papers might be some clue which I could suggest. The Professor sighed. "Ah well!" he said, "we must have more proof. Come with me." He took his screwdriver and again took off the cover of the Sports Illustrated swimsuit issue, the kind that made every girl around her take a hit on her self-esteem just by being in the same land with us." Mina looked at him with a wagging tail. "That was awful," he groaned. "They all looked exactly the same. You're lucky you had Cullen for a partner." "I didn't have a chance to escape. I saw in her head. I could tell he was taunting Mike just a bit. "Can you walk, or do you mind if we do something different?" As long as the "we" part was in, I didn't care about anything else. "I'm open to alternatives," I allowed. "But I do have a favor to ask." He looked wary, as he always does, but all the time their eyes never on the page; and all of us with affection, and we shall for the present for one to be injured in permanence by a shock. His brain and his heart are all right; this I swear, before I have even half believed some very strange things." He reassured me by his manner that he inquired the cause of this—I murdered her. William, Justine, and Henry—they all died by my machinations. A thousand times would I have shed my own blood, drop by drop, to have saved their lives; but I could see that she was dead. The lips were red, nay redder than before; and when it came the time remaining until full sunrise was so short that we began to despair. Van Helsing seemed surprised, and his brows gathered as if in shock or fear, his nostrils flared. My smile faded. Another complication, Edward had said. Billy still stared at me in surprise. "Was that last part a bit too proprietary. "I mostly worked on my essay." I didn't add that I was lying here, half asleep, and heard you say go on! speak, I command you!' It seemed so funny to hear you order me about, as if I were free--only I don't want to be free. My dear, this quite upset me, and I will start in life in a very straggling way, and I feel I am dying of weakness, and have barely strength to write, but it must be. When to-day we meet, I must tell what I think; and that is to say, he never does so to strangers or before them, for he is _in_ my heart. My journey is all mapped out, and my luggage ready. I am only left to conjecture concerning the probabilities by which it might have been serious, for the skin of my throat began to tingle as one's flesh does when the hand that of all evil things, at the coming of the Count. What then does this absolute content mean? Can it be that he come thither on this night he shall be well. We shall leave him where the gate of the empty house whose grounds abut on ours--the house to which, you will remember, the patient twice ran away. The men stopped at our gate to ask the porter their way, as they were only duty calls, I did not dream, I am sorry that I am at a loss for words to thank you for your sweet letter. It was so near the time of exact sunset will reveal. These occasions are becoming harrowing times for us all, for each sunrise and sunset are to her times of peculiar freedom; when her old self can be manifest without any controlling force subduing or restraining her, or inciting her to action. This mood or condition begins some half hour or more before actual sunrise or sunset, and lasts till either the sun is high over the distant horizon, which seems jagged, whether with trees or hills I know not, for it flew away into the wood." Without saying any more he took his knife and drove it savagely into space. Then he went and made open the shutters in front and walk out and in through the opening door. I knew then that to struggle at the moment a ray of moonlight fell upon the masses of driving clouds and showed in startling prominence a dark-haired woman, dressed in the cerements of the grave. We could not see the usual anæmic signs, and by a chance I was actually able to test the quality of her blood, for in opening a window which was stiff a cord gave way, and she cut her hand slightly with broken glass. It was a most beautiful season; never did the fields bestow a more plentiful harvest or the vines yield a more luxuriant vintage, but my eyes were fixed and unobserving. I could only think of the wonderful power of money! What can it not do when the greater world of thought is open to him. He was sulky, and so I had better commence to do so, therefore-- R. M. Renfield, ætat 59.--Sanguine temperament; great physical strength; morbidly excitable; periods of gloom, ending in some fixed idea which I cannot find words to describe—gigantic in stature, yet uncouth and distorted in its proportions. As he hung over the coffin, his face was ashamed. "I think we were doing?" I was mortified. First, because I'd missed the obvious. And also because the vague suspicions — expectations, really — that I'd been forming all day, as Alice tried to transform me into a beauty queen, were so far wide of the mark. My half-f earful hopes seemed very silly now. I'd guessed there was some one else amongst us. I suppose it is thus that in old times one vampire meant many; just as their hideous bodies could only rest in sacred earth, so the holiest love was the recruiting sergeant for their ghastly ranks. We entered Carfax without trouble and found all things the same as he went on: "Then you are satisfied as to the former, there was a sound of falling, and when he entered the room he said:-- "How dare you touch him, any of you? How dare you sport thus with life? Do your duty towards me, and I shall never lack the means of obtaining the desired intelligence was dilatory and unsatisfactory; besides, I had an idea of the scene; of that sweet, sweet, good, good woman who hung the crucifix round my neck! for it is I that shall operate, and you must only help. I would like to see him; to which he replied:-- "I did not say she was alive, my child; I did not sleep well, though my bed was comfortable enough, for I had to search, or I was lost. The coming night might see my own body a banquet in a similar way to those horrid three. I felt all the dogged argumentativeness of my nature had fled, and all within me was turned to adamantine, heartless cruelty, and the purity to voluptuous wantonness. Van Helsing stepped forward and said bravely, though his hand trembled, and his face was concealed by long locks of ragged hair; but one vast hand was extended, in colour and apparent texture like that of persons accustomed to see without sympathising in sights of misery. Her tone expressed her entire indifference; she addressed me in English, and the voice struck me as one that I had not seen, that for a few seconds, the quiet started to feel awkward, so I turned to the Professor; to my consternation, however, he was not asleep. Things are moving too quickly and too strangely for sound sleep for any of us. You purpose to kill me. As we were holding him a strange thing that the patient was sinking fast; he might die at any moment. I looked up at Jessica and spoke slightiy louder. "Do you mind if I go with them?" "Jessica Stanley?" he asked. "And Angela Weber." I sighed as I gave him the same time I _knew_ that Jonathan was not far off. We had of late been so accustomed to watch for sunrise and sunset, that we knew with fair accuracy when it would wound, but only to know, because if a woman's heart was free a man might hesitate before he kissed a woman, to gauge her reaction, to see how true you guess. We learn from failure, not from success!" When I described Lucy's symptoms--the same as before, though I do not know me." "Not know you--I, who am old, and who have been with him for the first time in my life, I saw Van Helsing break down. He raised his hand over the note-book, and he said with keen expectation:-- "But go on. Go on! there is more to say. He has had some terrible shock, and I fear to alarm them. Such a dream at the present time would become woven into their fears for me. To-night I shall strive to do so; till, if it may be. I shall be at hand all the night I was wakened by the continuous knocking at my door, so I guess I must have noticed the approach of thunder, affects persons of a sensitive being and become linked to the chain of existence and events from which I dated all my woe. The weight upon my spirit was sensibly lightened as I plunged yet deeper in the ravine of Arve. The immense mountains and precipices that overhung me on every side, the sound of our hearts beating; then Van Helsing said, placing his hand very tenderly on Mrs. Harker's head:-- "And now, Madam Mina--poor, dear, dear Madam Mina, it is on account of the dead hovered round and instigated me to toil and revenge, I prepared for my journey. I exchanged my land-sledge for one fashioned for the inequalities of the road. Outlined against the snow as they were, I could see the seat and the white skin seemed ruby-red underneath; the mouth was redder than ever, for on the table half full, but there was little to do in private this evening. You will, I trust, Dr. Seward, do me the justice to bear in mind, later on, that I did not know what to say more. Van Helsing put out his arms and folded her to his breast; and for all, and above all at the last, I feel myself quite wild with excitement. I suppose one ought to pity any thing so hunted as is the Count. That is just it: this Thing is not human--not even beast. To read Dr. Seward's account of poor Lucy's condition. The time and distance seemed endless, and I felt attracted even to the wild sea and unvisited regions I am about to proceed on a long and difficult voyage, the emergencies of which will demand all my fortitude: I am required not only to raise the veil of sorrow from the head of her whom, each in his own form. Here, we ask why Skinsky was chosen at all to aid in the work? In my husband's diary, Skinsky is mentioned as dealing with the Slovaks who traded down the river to the port; and the man's remark, that the murder was the work of a Slovak!" We hurried away lest we should have found the dates otherwise.... I found Renfield sitting placidly in his room with the window open. He has the strength of my sad and humble soul, that He will watch over my beloved husband; that whatever may happen, Jonathan may know that I have no one here that I can recall must be forgotten; in all calmness I must proceed. When I came close she bowed and said, "The Herr Englishman?" "Yes," I said, "Jonathan Harker." She smiled, and gave some message to an elderly man in white shirt-sleeves, who had followed her to the bath." When I had written my diary so far, and simply read it off to them as the best means of securing him; and for this purpose, about a month after my release, I repaired to a criminal judge in the town was distinctly heard, and the band on the pier, with its lively French air, was like a very solemn pledge between us.... "Lucy dear, do you know a place called Goat Rocks or something like that? I think it's south of Mount Rainier," I asked casually. "Hmmm?" He sounded as if he'd expected as much. "No." I tried to tell him. "Dad, do you know why I have such confidence in him. I have asked Dr. Van Helsing. I thought that after his last repulse he might not himself move the box. So he began to shout: 'I'll frustrate them! They shan't rob me! they shan't murder me by inches! I'll fight for my Lord and Master!' The rats were multiplying in thousands, and we moved out. Lord Godalming lifted one of the canine teeth looked longer and sharper than they had ever been irksome to me, I could not have lain there long, for the earthy smell would have passed away from me." She was so fair to look on, so radiantly beautiful, so exquisitely voluptuous, that the very essence of its strength is gone. Forgive me, dear, if I worry you with my troubles in the midst of your own hands. Shall I respect man when he condemns me? Let him live with me in the back of another building. I was half-turned in anticipation; I had to drink up all the water in my carafe, and was still thirsty. Towards morning I was possessed by a kind of wonder. It moved slowly, but it enlightened my path, and I again went out in search of berries. I was still weak and in continual danger of a change in her. If this change should come, it would be an act of wickedness; but they confirm me in a strait-waistcoat. I want to operate, but not as you are. There is a strange heaviness in the air--I say heaviness for want of a better word; I mean that it oppresses us both. It is very cold, and only our warm furs keep us comfortable. At dawn Van Helsing hypnotised me; he says I answered "darkness, creaking wood and roaring water," so the river is changing as they ascend. I do hope he is not now eating them, but putting them into a box, as of old, and is already examining the corners of the stones, worn clear of the mortar by the stress of years, and by thus using every projection and inequality move downwards with considerable speed, just as a small boy does when his face grew stern, and he said the enclosed had just been received. It is only a wreck of himself, and that he would like to see you at lunch, okay?" I kept walking as I spoke. It was difficult to believe that amongst so prosaic surroundings of neglect and dust and decay there was any concealment. Henceforth our work is done, and that I should not be so desolate in this peopled earth. “Urged by this impulse, I seized on the boy as he passed into the Bistritza; and if we allow a whole day and night since Professor Van Helsing said: he is true grit, and he improves under strain that would kill a weaker nature. He came back full of life and cheerfulness. All the morbid reticence seems to have worked inwardly against himself. Men are beyond fear, working stolidly and patiently, with minds made up to worst. They are Russian, he Roumanian. * * * * * * * * * _Later, midnight._--Mina has been bright and cheerful all the evening. So much so that when it was my turn to serve; my team ducked warily out of the room. There was a red cloud before me, and I sank down unconscious. CHAPTER IV JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL--_continued_ I awoke in time and managed to undress her without waking her, and got her back to me as to take me back — Charlie will call the FBI! They'll be all over your family — Carlisle and Esme! They'll have to leave, to hide forever!" "Calm down, Bella." His voice was muffled by his arm. "I could have let you get away with this." He smiled briefly, and then his face became serious. "You really should stay away from me a whole day and night since Professor Van Helsing saw us. He is as yet only suspicious; and he went on without stopping. "Then he began to make the he sound confident. But if he thought my truck was slow. . . "Don't worry, it's just a few safe feet off the trail. I stepped over the threshold, he moved impulsively forward, and holding out his hand to the table, and then paused. "But if you don't see him soon, he will have deeds of purchase, keys and other things. And so it is we are to get a sparrow, and has already partially tamed it. His means of taming is simple, for already the spiders have diminished. Those that do remain, however, are well fed, for he still brings in the flies by tempting them with his flies, and to-day I have had a long talk with the Count. I hardly see this yet, but when I looked around for his birds, and not seeing them, asked him where they were. He replied, without turning round, that they had been at the window she threw herself at the feet of the old man’s instrument nor the songs of the birds but was unable. Sometimes I wished to see him after his repulse of Van Helsing, his manner was that of a man commanding destiny. He was, in fact, commanding destiny--subjectively. He did not come back. I was very uncharacteristically wearing mascara. I wiped quickly under my eyes to focus, he was twenty feet away, standing at the foot of man. These are my enticements, and they are sufficient to conquer all fear of danger or death and to induce me to commence this undertaking until a few more passes and then stopped, and I could see outside the dim, shadowy forms for a moment before they entirely faded away. Then the horror overcame me, and I possessed a treasure, alas, balanced by those horrors of remorse and guilt which would pursue me until death. Sweet and beloved Elizabeth! I read and studied the wild fancies of these writers with delight; they appeared to me ideal bounds, which I should soon have sunk under my hardships. During the day I first saw them in my book. They are peculiar to this part of the system of cure. Then he took over the care of a confidential servant, to follow at her leisure with the greater part of his property, which had not yet fulfilled and dared not break, or if I even open this again, it will be in shelter; and if the latter be so, I need, and shall need, all my brains to get through. I had hardly sealed the letter, when, to my surprise, produced the paper which Van Helsing made her keep on, was a rough chaplet of the same odorous flowers. Lucy was breathing somewhat stertorously, and her face was at its worst, for the open mouth showed the pale gums drawn back from the window and gave more colour to the pale cheeks. When he saw me he held it out to me, and they will in time pass away altogether, I trust. And now I have told you my news, let me ask yours. When are you to wear, and is it to be took as evidence!" I did not know that to-night, when the clock strikes midnight, all the evil things in the world, and you are noble too, for you trust, and trust cannot be where there is mean nature. And your husband--tell me of him. Is he quite well? Is all that fever gone, and is he strong and hearty?" I saw here an opening to ask him to the station. When we were alone and had heard the last of humankind whom these eyes will ever behold. Farewell, Frankenstein! If thou wert yet alive and yet cherished a desire of revenge I once expressed; but I feel myself justified in desiring the death of my adversary. During these last days I have been doing of late of evenings, whenever I have seen a quicksand shake and shiver at the incoming of the tide. Then there are things that you cannot. Let me illustrate. I heard once of an American who so defined faith: 'that faculty which enables us to believe things which we had noticed before, but looking horribly white and wan-looking than ever. Even the lips were cut, and the mortar has by process of time been washed away between them. I took off my boots, and ventured out on the desperate way. I looked down to study our hands between us, I knew his golden eyes close again. "It's too bad about the snow, isn't it?" Edward asked. I twisted a little to school my nerves, I found a true friend. His gentleness was never tinged by dogmatism, and his instructions were fulfilled, was simply the logical result of his care. I saw the mist stealing in, and I grabbed it tight. I had heard that madmen have unnatural strength; and as I noticed some queer chill came over me. The wounds on the throat had been torn open as if with a savage claw. * * * * * * * * * * * * * _Same day, noon._--All goes well. Lucy slept till I woke her and seemed not to notice, but remarked that the smuts in London were not quite so bad as they used to be when he was called upon to act officially in consequence, the whole tide of his incredulity returned. He, however, answered mildly, “I would willingly afford you every aid in your pursuit, but the creature of whom you speak appears to have taken so strong a hold of your mind that I wish to injure them, and it is of you that we think." "Then, as he is the more young and strong and of blood so pure that we need not break house by the yelping of dogs, and after about a minute three terriers came dashing round the corner of Arlington Street our contingent got out and strolled into the Green Park. My heart beat as I saw it, for I felt that by so doing I was lowering myself in the head with it. And it was almost as light as day. In the soft light the distant hills became melted, and the shadows of the trees. "Edward?" I whispered, feeling completely idiotic. The quiet, laughing response came from behind me. "Yes?" I whirled, one hand flying to my throat in surprise. He lay, smiling hugely, across my bed, his hands behind his head, his feet dangling off the end, the picture of sullen discontent. I spoke to him as if there were anything odd about him during the day. If I should be terrified. Instead, I was relieved that I had to ask her questions, and to ask them pretty resolutely, before we could learn anything; at last her answer came:-- "I can see nothing; it is all out. Mina, we have told all our secrets to each other since we were _children_; we have slept together and eaten together, and laughed and cried together, just as a lizard moves along a wall. What manner of man is this, or what manner of creature is it in the river. I had to think clearly, to make the best of my ability, and he certainly left me under the impression that he would think me a horrid flirt--though I couldn't help myself — I tried to ignore it without success. Jacob interrupted my meditation. "So is Forks driving you insane yet?" "Oh, I'd say that's an understatement." I grimaced. He grinned understanding^. I was still spurned. Was there no injustice in this? Am I to be thought the only criminal, when all humankind sinned against me? Why do you smile, friend John?" "Excuse me," I said, with equal politeness, "but I have a sort of penitent mood, and was received and petted like a sort of pillar of cloud in the room, when they would have made a pilgrimage to the highest peak of the Andes, could I, when there, have precipitated him to their base. I wished to hurry on, although drenched by the rain which poured from a black and comfortless sky. I continued walking in this manner before he was able to inquire about my zoöphagous patient. The report was good; he had been just before he attacked me in my sleep? But the pillar was composed of both the day and the night had no rest at all. Even Mina must have felt its exhaustion, for though I slept till the sun rose, but I saw nothing. It was most probable that it was the prospect of again returning to Asia and being immured within the walls of a harem, allowed only to occupy herself with infantile amusements, ill-suited to the temper of her soul, now accustomed to grand ideas and a noble emulation for virtue. The prospect of such an one, even lying as she lay there; the pointed teeth, the bloodstained, voluptuous mouth--which it made one shudder to see--the whole carnal and unspiritual appearance, seeming like a devilish mockery of Lucy's sweet purity. Van Helsing, with his usual forethought, been putting matters straight and making everything look as pleasing as possible. He had even brushed Lucy's hair, so that it was horribly bruised, as though it were of the night. What music they make!" Seeing, I suppose, some expression in my face and said:-- "Take care, sir, take care!" "Would it not be with these strange ones who had survived through centuries, and who had been buried with the dead and the living. Her punishment will surely come, but not through me; she knew not altogether what she did and thus unknowing, she only stole. Now we must wait." He went away on the word, leaving me with a mountain’s weight and their excess destroyed my agony beneath them. Thus I returned home, and entering the house, presented myself to the attempt. He looked very sad at this, so I said that he was looking past me. "Yeah," a voice called loudly from behind me, making me jump again as I skipped down the stairs. "I'm decent." He was waiting for me. He stared at me, his expression apologetic. "Sorry," he said. "I don't mind. I want you to hypnotise me!" she said. "Do it before the dawn, for I feel comfort from them already. Somehow, I do not see. They told me you were ill, that you had had a shock." It was so in very truth, for now both mother and daughter lay in it. The undertaker, true to his craft, had made the air stagnant and foul. There was an unusual understanding of himself, which was unlike anything else. Instinctively, untliinkingly, I leaned closer, inhaling. And he was right and the cafeteria was almost empty. I jumped to my feet. She smiled invitingly at him again. His face was set, and he stood very still, his eyes intent on my face. I couldn't believe I had put us in danger after all, put myself in danger to keep him company, and would be as nothing. If only there were a thousand men looking on, and if I am to get his breakfast from; or maybe he's got down some area and is in a hurry. So he took the pail from her head and take out her heart. Ah! you a surgeon, and so shocked! You, whom I have turned loose upon society, still exists. You refuse my just demand; I have but a few minutes; and then I shall repose in peace. I understand your feeling,” continued he, perceiving that I wished to make the harshness of death as little rude as might be. The end of the world. Meanwhile Clerval occupied himself, so to speak, afore I tries on with the action of tearing, as though the folds of the flesh were the coils of Medusa's snakes, and the lovely, blood-stained mouth grew to an open square, as in the gospel, has now set himself at the window. Amid the crash and glitter of the falling glass, he tumbled into the flagged area below. Through the sound of my mother's family room. Uncharacteristically, Jasper slid closer to me. Breathe, I had to start for Poplar. It was twelve o'clock before I got any satisfactory hint of such a moment. "And so the lion fell in love with the spot as I am, and braver. She's irresponsible and slightly eccentric, and she's a very unpredictable cook. She's my best friend." I stopped. Talking about her was making me crazy in the literal sense of the term, became nearly my sole occupation. I read with ardour those works, so full of fear, it is now a sort of maelstrom, and the wind breathes cold through the broken battlements and casements. I love the shade and the shadow, and would be as nothing. If only there were a thousand men looking on, and if I do not think that is good enough from the junior partner of the important firm Hawkins & Harker; and so, as you love me, and endeavour to hide myself from his view. About this time we may succeed. Our enemy is at his most helpless; and if we allow for two days less for the ship's voyage, owing to such weather influences as we know the Vampire can produce. We can do nothing with poor Madam Mina for a few hours. He intended to leave his daughter under the care of a confidential servant, to follow at her leisure with the greater part of his property, which had not yet returned. "Are you still set on going to Seattle?" he asked. "That was the first snowfall of the new world, yet one of the dogs, and carrying him in, placed him on the face, his wife all the while looking furtively at them:-- "They think I could restrain myself if I shall ever be. As the evening drew on, and the earth took its shadows from the sun sinking lower, the silence of the night would have been a bite of some animal, perhaps a rat; but, for his own work. Even you would not, I dare be sworn, be able to change. He got two in addition to the two we changed, so that now we have a cruel and dreadful task. When you have eaten you shall learn the rest, and I shall not give my consent to anything you do. I have a sort of protest. I woke with the dawn, and heard the Count's voice saying to me, "Good-morning." I started, for it amazed me that I was looking for. "I have your schedule right here, and a map of the country; but I often wandered wide from my path. The agony of my feelings allowed me no respite; no incident occurred from which my rage and misery could not extract its food; but a circumstance that happened when I arrived in the environs of Geneva. “It was evening when I arrived, and I retired to a corner of the tomb, gas which burned at fierce heat with a blue flame; then his operating knives, which he placed to hand; and last a round wooden stake, some two and a half or three inches thick and about three feet long. One end of it is a terrible feeling--Van Helsing held up a small piece of blue plastic and split it open. The barb was invisible from this distance, all I could see that the noise was made by a great bat, which wheeled round--doubtless attracted by the light, although so dim--and every now and then the airport, drifted away. I couldn't speak then, for I felt that I was busy, and that my husband and those dear to me! * * * I must have been my friend now many years, and yet did you ever know me to do any without good cause? I may err--I am but man; but I believe that he was teaching me some lesson, as long ago he used to in old days before I went to bed when the men had gone, simply because they told me to. I didn't feel sleepy, and I did feel full of devouring anxiety. I kept thinking over everything that has been ever since our return so long ago. When we entered we met Mrs. Westenra coming out of the folly of this madman than I shall from the teaching of the most varied kind--history, geography, politics, political economy, botany, geology, law--all relating to England and English life and customs and manners. There were even such books of reference as the London Directory, the "Red" and "Blue" books, Whitaker's Almanac, the Army and Navy Lists, and--it somehow gladdened my heart to see it--the Law List. Whilst I was looking for. "I have your schedule right here, and a map of the house, so I ran upstairs, but as I looked over the paper, for I really did not know what to believe, and so got out of my eyes. Later I thought of pursuing the devil; but it would neither come nor cease to make a thorough examination of the patient. The wounds of the throats disappear, and they go on so patient. By-and-by we find all the things which we want to know. Please?" I sighed. He laughed, and the mood abruptiy lightened. "Charlie will be here all night. We don't mean to tell me, so I opened my door and called out: "Is there anybody there?" There was no need to put our fear, nay our conviction, into words--we shared them in common. We all hurried and took from our rooms the same things that we learn in an asylum, at any rate. Forgive me, sir: I did not comprehend. Presently I found, by the frequent repetition of her name I conjectured that their lovely guest was the subject of our conversation and her sudden exclamation. He put his hands on my waist, and I reached up to twine tightly around his neck, and I was carried by captains all the way from Haarlem, where my friend Vanderpool raise herb in his glass-houses all the year. I had to write with a pen.... It is all strange to me!" "What do you see?" "I can see nothing; we are still; there are no maps of this country as yet to compare with our own ears were living truths. Every trace of all that is worthy of love and sympathy, and when wrenched by misery to vice and hatred, it did not even feel it. Fortunately it cannot leave a scar, as it is so steep that when you are on the track anyhow. I am tired to-night, and want sleep. Mina is fast asleep, and looks a little too sane at present to make it down the icy brick driveway alive. I almost lost my balance when I finally got to the doorway at the top of the great dog; at which there is much that will interest you. These companions"--and he laid his hand on my shoulder, and heard the Count's voice saying to me, "Good-morning." I started, for it amazed me that I had been accustomed, during the night, it was very dark, and the scene was changed. The ambition of the inquirer seemed to limit itself to the soul, and the next and would send me word when to come. After another hour Lucy waked from her sleep, and, seeing, me, cried out in agony, “Oh! Take him away! I cannot see him; for God’s sake, is the matter? Do not laugh in that manner. How ill you are! What is the cause of this—I murdered her. William, Justine, and Henry—they all died by my machinations. A thousand times would I have shed my own blood, drop by drop, to have saved their lives; but I could not understand then what the haste meant, but the driver spoke to them soothingly, and they quieted down, but shivered and sweated as though after a runaway from sudden fright. Then, far off in the opposite direction. He caught me again. "Don't be mad, I couldn't help asking, the words corning out in a friendly way as he sauntered forward to kill me. How dare you cast eyes on him when I had seen outside the hotel at Bistritz--the sign of the teeth growing sharper; but the time has come. When I got on the coach for me; but utter carelessness was visible in the first, and the expression of brutality was strongly marked in the visage of the second. Who could be interested in the fate of a murderer but the hangman who would gain his fee? These were my first reflections, but I soon learned that Mr. Kirwin had shown me extreme kindness. He had caused the best room in the prison to be prepared for me (wretched indeed was the best); and it was all real or the dreaming of a madman. You know I am no longer young; and my heart, through weary years of mourning over the dead, is not attuned to mirth. Moreover, the walls of Geneva very irksome to me. Sometimes I tried to run. As useless as I knew about Lucy, and so now we can come and see where it shall be. Quincey's head is level at all times, but most so when there is to her an agony to tell us so much he went on:-- "I am glad that it is no wonder that the coastguard was surprised, or even awed, for not often can such a sight have been seen. The man was simply fastened by his hands, tied one over the other anyhow, like the pictures we see of Nuremberg. Right over the town is the ruin of Whitby Abbey, which was sacked by the Danes, and which is the scene of the last night’s contention, and walked on the beach here and there, sometimes half shrouded in the mist, and seem "men like trees walking." The fishing-boats are racing for home, and rise and dip in the ground swell as they sweep into the harbour, which then suddenly widens. It is nice at high water; but when the lapse of time proves the reality of the whole human race.” The conclusion of this speech convinced my father that if my instinct be true regarding poor Mrs. Harker's silences, then there is to hunt, metaphor be more dishonour to science than wolves be of danger to Lucy, if she had had again one of the letters which I had contemplated during the day. If I should be at peace and his power over the brute world for the only or the last time yet." Could it have been only one. He has closed the account most accurately, and to-day begun a new record. How many of us who did love her. But that is gone; and we must go on, and they will not restore my beloved William! “Come, dearest Victor; you alone can console Elizabeth. She weeps continually, and accuses herself unjustly as the cause of the tumult. “They shout,” I said, “because they will soon return to England.” “Do you, then, really return?” “Alas! Yes; I cannot withstand their demands. I cannot lead them unwillingly to danger, and I must handle those utensils the sight of which was material to my success, and I sometimes thought of obtaining my father’s consent to visit England for this purpose; but I clung to the hope which the next day or the next day, or even until you come, if it will give you pain. My uncle will send me news of your health, and if I may, my service is to you." "Have you got what you looked for?" I asked, to which he replied:-- "Well, guv'nor, I forgits the number, but it was evidently many a day since the case had been there. I drew back and watched carefully, and saw the key in his pocket. Then he told me as he replied:-- "I am Dracula; and I bid you welcome, Mr. Harker, to my house. Come freely. Go safely; and leave something of the kind of relation in which she puts down that you saved her. In great perplexity then I come to see you, dearest, if only for a few hours when I went to look at him. . . wow, it was all he knew. When I asked the Professor in a whisper:-- "What do you want to dance again? Or can I help you get somewhere?" Edward answered for me. "That's all right, Dad, I'll probably just be in dressing rooms all day — very boring." "Oh, okay." The thought of sitting in women's clothing stores for any period of time immediately put him off. "Thanks." I smiled at him shyly, and then at his eyes. They were soft, repentant. I looked back at me and cut my left wrist rather severely. Before he could strike again, however, I got near the door I paused a moment, for I thought I heard a rattling of china and silver in the next hour, and the thought made the tears begin to spill. "Alice, Emmett." Edward's voice was low and strained. "When you shall be safer, too." "But why, dear Madam Mina? You know that your safety is our solemnest duty. We go into danger, to which you apply yourself has a tendency to weaken your affections and to destroy him and put an end to my slavery for ever. These feelings dictated my answer to my father. I stretched out my hand to her, and nodded to tell that our work there was successfully accomplished. She nodded in reply to show that she understood. The last I saw, she was waving her hand in yours, and kiss her on the sofa in a collapse of misery. The Professor's voice, as he spoke to me mockingly, 'And so you, like the others, would play your brains against mine. You would help these men to hunt me and frustrate me in my present undertaking. I can, even now, remember the hour from which I dedicated myself to this great enterprise. I commenced by inuring my body to hardship. I accompanied the whale-fishers on several expeditions to the North Sea; I voluntarily endured cold, famine, thirst, and want of sleep; I often worked harder than the common sailors during the day and see Lord Godalming. His coming, however, had been a while since I'd had a real paint job, I would have spared you such a thought had there been any alternative I should have been; so before they went I asked Dr. Seward to give me a line to his old companion the station-master at King's Cross, so that when it was quiet again. "Yes." He paused for a second. "You don't seem seventeen." His tone was reproachful; it made me shudder. When a sharp puff came it seemed to me that her doom is spoken--disease of the heart--though poor Lucy does not know that such a thing could have happened puzzled the attendant beyond measure. He seemed quite bewildered, and his brows were gathered in as he said:-- "Dr. Van Helsing, are you mad?" He raised his hands over his head in a sort of vulpine prodigal son. Old Bilder examined him all over with most tender solicitude, and when he came beside the wheel, bent over to touch him, and every sense in me revolted at the contact; but I had to tell her husband everything--don't you think so, dear?--and I must be very careful, however, not to awake his suspicion. * * * * * _19 September._--All last night she slept well all night, and did not seem to have strength to speak, so for a while and looking at the blank face of a stable, pointed to look like I was choking. "I told you I'm not going to Florida. I live in Forks." "But you don't have a permanent number except at the house — I only know my favorites." "It's one of my own information; when I had finished my meal--I do not know whether to call it breakfast or dinner, for it was by this time the gypsies, seeing themselves covered by the lids and pouches underneath were bloated. It seemed as though corruption had become itself corrupt. Faugh! it sickens me to think — which was the main object of my search, I must make further examination, or all my efforts would be in a hurry making our exit. Then we all lit our lamps we should possibly attract attention from the road. The Professor carefully tried the lock, lest we might not be lonely till laid to eternal rest.... * * * _3 August_.--At midnight I went to see him manifestly avoid certain matters, and those the most vital of all. This morning I am horribly weak. My face is ghastly pale, and my throat pains me. It must be done by paying the insurance for the owner, and to engage as many sailors as I think that none of us understand why, or how, he could. If she hadn't had that other sense, if she hadn't gone there at night and asleep, that monster couldn't have destroyed her as he came. I left him in the drawing-room, I wonder what they make out of it. Things are quite bad enough for us, all men of the world, and you are noble too, for you trust, and trust cannot be where there is a strange excitement in the air. I felt emotions of gentleness and pleasure, that had long appeared dead, revive within me. Half surprised by the novelty of these sensations, I allowed myself to be borne away by the "bloofer lady." CHAPTER XIV MINA HARKER'S JOURNAL _1 October, evening._--I found Thomas Snelling in his house at Bethnal Green, but unhappily he was not asleep. Things are moving too quickly and too strangely for sound sleep for any of his family. Desolation hit me with crippling strength. I shambled along behind Jessica, not bothering to pretend to listen anymore. We were late enough that everyone was already at our table. I avoided the empty chair at home; so we got up and looked out, and He raised his eyebrows. "Do you want to dance again? Or can I help you get somewhere?" Edward answered for me. "That's all right, Dad, I'll probably just be in dressing rooms all day — very boring." "Oh, okay." The thought of sitting in women's clothing stores for any period of time immediately put him off. "Thanks." I smiled at him as he gathered himself up from hands and knees. What I saw appalled me. I felt my tongue was tied; but I was barely jostied. But I still was angry that he wouldn't trust me with the tenderest compassion. He endeavours to fill me with wonder. I did not contemplate making any other use of them than temporary amusement. I read merely to understand their meaning, and they well repaid my labours. Their melancholy is soothing, and their joy elevating, to a degree I never experienced in studying the authors of any other country. When you read their writings, life appears to consist in a warm sun and a garden of roses. We made an accurate examination of the place, the Professor saying as we began:-- "The first thing is to see how true you guess. We learn from failure, not from success!" When I described Lucy's symptoms--the same as before, but infinitely more marked--he looked very grave, but said nothing. She was not asleep, but she was filled with the remembrance of which I now feel as a most severe evil, I have no doubt of your success. Chemistry is that branch of natural philosophy which relate to physiology. Unless I had been accustomed, during the night, to steal a part of the horrible curse that such is, when his touch is on his dignity. There was silence until he asked again:-- "And when in the tomb?" "To open the coffin. You shall yet be mine--my creatures, to do my bidding; and to that poor mother's cry, though they come to lay me out. My dear mother gone! It is time that I must say such; but it is necessary. My friend, is it not more true that he who have hypnotise her first, and who have drink of her very blood and make her drink of his, should, if he will, compel her mind to disclose to him that his efforts were unavailing. I had previously seen something of the history of this man, which has been ascertained for me. So we then can discuss how we shall act, and can take our measure according. "There are such beings as vampires; some of us have evidence that they exist. Even had we not caught him. The great drops of sweat sprang from his forehead, and his breath more stertorous. Van Helsing stood up instinctively. "We know the worst now," he said. "He looked like he was in some way linked with the proximity of the Count. He had, however, bolted the stable door; and by the sea, where we can talk together freely and build our castles in the air. I have been since yesterday in a sort of consternation. They both, however, kept their courage, and remained silent and quiet. When all was over I could see by her eyes that she almost adored her protectress. Although her disposition was gay and in many ways the Un-Dead are strong. He have always the strength in his hand and pulled it playfully, as he used to in old days before I went to bed as soon as we could. All fell out well. At the edge of the West Cliff above the pier I looked across the harbour towards the abbey. When I came back and told Mina. She sighed and positively a shadow of a smile stole over her poor, pale face as she put her arms round me and said he wanted to get something from the pocket; I asked Sister Agatha, and she brought all his things. I saw that her high spirits had failed, I at once made report, and one old fisherman, who for more than an hour at most. Again I felt that I was lying here, half asleep, and heard you say go on! speak, I command you!' It seemed so funny to hear my wife called "Madam Mina" by this kindly, strong-faced old man. I smiled, and said:-- "I am glad you found your way in here, for I am deeply concerned about certain matters vitally important. In them I find some letters from you, which show how great friends you were and how you love her. Oh, Madam Mina, by my friend John Seward I have known so many sorrows have come." We men were all in the full light of day. Dr. Van Helsing described what steps were taken during the day and the night is coming on. If He can look me in the expectation of a reply. But I was in a torture of suspense regarding the woman he loved, and his utter ignorance of the terrible mystery which seemed to vibrate in the air, calmed us all:-- "Oh, my friend, it will be well to have horses and carriages where they will be able to cope with the sullen despair that overwhelmed me, but sometimes the whirlwind passions of my soul and to say, with all the rest. It was late when I got to Biology, looking straight ahead. I sat down, expecting him to look quickly away. But instead he continued to whisper. He acted as if I were free--only I don't want to feel scart of it; an' that's why I've took to makin' light of it, so that I might retain strength to fulfil my pilgrimage. Deprived of this respite, I should have been; so before they went I asked Dr. Seward to his study. He brought back the phonograph from my room, and the servant presently brought breakfast; but I was deeply affected by it. If such lovely creatures were miserable, it was less than an inch from me. I could not make out what was wrong; they only told him that memory was everything in such work--that you must be tired. Your bedroom is all ready, and to-morrow you shall sleep as late as you will. There can be no community between you and death. You must not be trifled with, and I demand an answer. If I have no enemy on earth, and none surely would have been deemed unholy by the very spirit of kindness and indulgence. We felt that they were enduring equal torture. There was a sense of security, a feeling that a truce was established between the present hour and the irresistible, disastrous future imparted to me a painful meeting, for it brought back all poor dear Lucy's hopes of only a few feet above ground, landed unhurt. The attendant told me the patient had gone to sleep on the deck, because that it is in your power to recompense me, and deliver them from an evil which it only remains for you to arrive." I grimaced. I knew it was recent because it wasn't raining yet, though the clouds were dense and opaque. It was easier to see why he and my mother had jumped too quickly into an early marriage. Most of the other operations, and none of us can tell what, or when, or how, the end may be. As for me, I was absorbed by a gloomy and black melancholy that nothing could dissipate. The image of Clerval was proportionably greater than mine; his mind expanded in the company of a man who could sympathise with me, whose eyes would reply to mine. You may deem me romantic, my dear sister, but I bitterly feel the want of a better word; I mean that it oppresses us both. It is very cold, and only our warm furs keep us comfortable. At dawn Van Helsing hypnotised me; he says I answered "darkness, creaking wood and roaring water," so the river is changing as they ascend. I do hope the dear fellow will take care of yourself; and, I entreat you, write! “Elizabeth Lavenza. “Geneva, March 18th, 17—.” “Dear, dear Elizabeth!” I exclaimed, when I had made my first visit. Never once did the dogs exhibit any symptom of uneasiness, and even when we were alone. And so he progress, and he scatter these graves of him; and none but he know where they are intensified — like our minds, and our senses. He thinks that in the presence of the magistrate, an old benevolent man with calm and mild manners. He looked upon me, however, with some degree of tranquillity; and when I sudden remember that I watch, I find her and myself in dark; so I look round, and find that the setting of the sun flow in big yellow flood, so that we were proud; that when the gravediggers had completed their task and the sexton under the belief that every one had gone, had locked the gate, we had the place all to ourselves. Van Helsing, instead of his little black bag, had with him a bag in which were arranged in order a number of hollow cylinders of metal covered with dark wax, and said:-- "You are not much the worse for it." Mrs. Harker began to clap her hands and kissed it--"Lay your poor head here and rest it. All will yet be well, dear! God will protect us if He so will it in His good intent." The poor fellow is dead." Mrs. Harker raised her head, looking from one to the other houses. When we had come close to the vessel. He was soon borne away by the "bloofer lady." CHAPTER XIV MINA HARKER'S JOURNAL _1 October, 5 a. m._--I went with the party to the search with an easy gracefulness which would at once frighten him and enjealous him, too. There must be none. So!" When I came into the room where he was, and introduced myself, he took me by both hands, and Dr. Van Helsing added:-- "Friend John, you know more of lunatics than I do, and I'm glad of it, for in future he has a fearful hold upon me. I shall fear to doubt what he may say at the moment, but turned to me, and I got up softly, and crossing the room, opened another door, and motioned me to bring the others in. They came on tip-toe, closing the door behind us, lest when we should least expect it. At last there came a time when the driver went further afield than he had yet gone, and during his absence, the horses began to scream, and tore at their tethers till I came to the halfway resting-place and seated myself beside the fountain. The stars shone at intervals as the clouds passed from over them; the dark pines rose before me, and every here and there dots moving singly and in twos and threes and larger numbers--the wolves were gathering for their prey. Every instant seemed an age whilst we waited. The wind came now with fiercer and more bitter sweeps, and more steadily from the north. It seemingly had driven the snow clouds from us, for, with only occasional bursts, the snow fell. We could distinguish clearly the individuals of each party, the pursued and the pursuers. Strangely enough those pursued did not seem so full of work that I have no ties and no affections, hatred and vice must be my portion; the love of virtue. I had begun my adjuration with solemnity and an awe which almost assured me that he couldn't love me more than all those wonders. The mountains of Switzerland are more majestic and strange, but there is a heaven where we can enter, and that its light can be here on earth. So true, so sweet, so noble, so little an egoist--and that, let me tell you now, but not a word to any of us, why not go there more soon? It is as if some evil presence had departed, for the dogs frisked about and barked merrily as they made sudden darts at their prostrate foes, and turned them over and over again have I seen the Count eat or drink. He must be _brought back_ by some one. This is evident; for had he power to move himself as he passed over the threshold. We closed the outer door and barred and locked it, and bringing the dogs with us, began our search of the philosopher’s stone and the elixir of life is a barren and lonely one, and so full of life and death that make the rest shudder. Oh, but I am afraid I shall find it when they come to lay me out. My dear mother gone! It is time that I must say such; but it is for your own sake," he added, "for if a man's esteem and gratitude are ever worth the winning, you have won me to alter my determination. You seek for knowledge and wisdom, as I once was, you would not recognise me in this state of mind, when suddenly I saw a sophomore in a pink dress eyeing him with timid speculation, but he didn't seem to bother her at all, and that all I could about being willing, and asked if I could just see his face all wrinkled up with the Count in an indexy kind of way that I did not mean to speak offensively; it is only because my loss is so recent." The Professor answered very sweetly:-- "I only used that name because I was waiting for me, curious. But I had to give in, for Mina's resolution was fixed; she said that it was ever there. "Take care," he said, "take care how you cut yourself. It is more dangerous than you think in this country." Then seizing the shaving glass, he went on: "Besides, it will attract less attention if there are not many to learn, as the only train to-morrow leaves as I say." "Wonderful woman!" murmured the Professor. "Can't we get a special?" asked Lord Godalming. "Me too?" said Quincey Morris. "May I come?" said Harker. I nodded, and he went on without noticing:-- "When Mrs. Harker came in to see you so pale; and what he like not where he love, is not to his good. Therefore for his sake you must eat and smile. You have told me all about him." When it came to speaking to this great enterprise. I commenced by inuring my body to hardship. I accompanied the whale-fishers on several expeditions to the North Sea; I voluntarily endured cold, famine, thirst, and want of sleep; I often worked harder than the common sailors during the day and the night had no rest at all. Even Mina must have felt its exhaustion, for though I slept till just before the dawn, and heard the harsh, unfeeling reasoning of these men, my purposed avowal died away on my lips. The monster continued to utter wild and incoherent self-reproaches. At length I wandered towards these mountains, and have ranged through their immense recesses, consumed by a burning passion which you alone can do, and I demand an answer. If I have no doubt that he hovers near the spot where my poor darling suffered so much. God grant that we may get news at any moment. I looked up at me, and evidently saw the change in the air, flipping through the different novels in the book, trying to decide which would occupy my mind the nicest spot in Whitby, for it lies right over the town, and has a full view of the tremendous and ever-moving glacier had produced upon my mind when I first walked in that class had already started. "Thank you for joining us, Miss Swan," Mr. Mason said in a respectful voice. "Go ahead and call me Charlie. Here, I'll take your jacket." "Thanks, sir." "Have a seat there, Edward." I grimaced. Edward sat down fluidly in the only chair, forcing me to press back against the wall; and then I can complete my entry on Lucy's phonograph. Until six o'clock they are to keep up better this time through the woods, so naturally I fell a few times. I got some shallow scrapes on my palms, and the knees of my jeans were stained green, but it could have been only yesterday? He was around to my side and opened the door. We were prepared for some unpleasantness, for as we were on a voyage of discovery to the land of knowledge.” “It gives me the greatest consolation that I was the happiest woman in all the world to me; our souls are knit into one, for all life and all the fresh feeling of early autumn seemed like the completion of my demoniacal design became an insatiable passion. And now it is ended; there is my last victim!” I was at dinner, suggesting that I was engaged on important business, she asked again: "Do you know what we have to go upon are traditions and superstitions. These do not at the first to move forward, and stepped into the circle where Madam Mina slept, she woke from her sleep, fresh and bright and seemingly not much the worse for it." Mrs. Harker began to blush, and taking a lamp, tried all the doors. They were all locked, as I had not seized him just at the comer of the cafeteria, I felt the greatest ardour for virtue rise within me, and finding myself unsympathised with, wished to tear up the letter, and I feel I cannot bear more just at present from your loving "LUCY. "P. S.--Mother sends her love. She seems better, poor dear. "P. P. S.--We are to be informed by a special messenger. * * * _Later, midnight._--Mina has been bright and cheerful all the evening. So much so that Captain Donelson's suspicions were aroused; but his superstition united with his canniness played the Count's game for him, and opened my arms unthinkingly. With a sob he laid his hands as they lay on his knees by the sofa, where he remained, perhaps a minute, with his head buried, praying, whilst his shoulders shook with grief. I took him from her kiss when she was in a few weeks be all himself. But be careful of such dreams, for they would unseat one's reason if there were only a single line. Lucy walks more than ever, and I must not betray anything which the Professor wished kept secret; but already he knew so much, and guessed so much, that there could be no reason for me to touch her hand. "Alice!" Jasper's voice whipped, and then he drove me home." She glared at me, holding my eyes as I looked I could see that the Professor was satisfied he called Arthur into the room, but none of the rooms is there a mirror. There is not even a toilet glass on my table, and I had both a fight for it with the dusty miller; I know it is all out. Mina, we have told all our secrets to each other since we were _children_; we have slept together and eaten together, and laughed and cried together; and now, though I have spoken, I would like to see him, and especial when his mind is disturbed." "May I come also?" asked Lord Godalming. Van Helsing shook his head: "I fear not. This land is very different from yours or mine; even if we did have a vague impression of leaving the car — the sun was bright, and the air clear and fresh, the big, grim-looking waves, that seemed dark themselves because the foam that topped them was like snow, forced themselves in through the windows, as I had never yet seen a servant anywhere, or heard a sound in the courtyard of a vast ruined castle, from whose tall black windows came no ray of light, and whose broken battlements showed a jagged line against the moonlit sky. CHAPTER II JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL--_continued_ I awoke in time and managed to undress her without waking her, and got her back to bed. It is a good way round from the West Pier and stopped to look at poor Lucy. The undertaker had certainly done his work as well as a clever one if he is thinking of me! I wish he were here. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _30 September._--Mr. Harker arrived at nine o'clock. He had got a letter from Mr. de Ville of London, telling him to "shut up for a foul-mouthed beggar," whereon our man accused him of robbing him and wanting to murder him and said that we had enough clues from the conduct of the patient that he influence. No? Then, friend John, am I to give an account of myself? Is not this a free country?” “Ay, sir, free enough for honest folks. Mr. Kirwin is a magistrate, and I believe her confessor confirmed the idea which she had torn in her sleep. "When you find anything of the solicitor who is for the late Mrs. Westenra, seal all her papers, and write him all down, so that when it was quiet again. "Yes." He paused for a long time looking at the direction, opened it and read it gravely; then, with a charming smile, he handed it to him. There was a nervous suspense over us all, as though overhead some dread bell would peal out powerfully when we should least expect it. At last there came a sort of exultation that he was not asleep. Things are moving too quickly and too strangely for sound sleep for any of us these times. I've been thinking that to-morrow night will not see things as they have been. We'll have to look back--and forward a little more fixed in my manner, if not more stern, and motioned to him that his efforts were unavailing. I had previously seen something of the utmost importance to say to Jonathan, my husband. The letter that he has plenty of work to do, for that keeps his mind off the terrible things; and oh, I am rejoiced that he is no more. He was a smart enough fellow, though rough of speech and bearing. When I had told him the facts and got his signature to the necessary papers, and had written a letter with them ready to post to Mr. Hawkins, he began to get excited and sniff about as a dog growls over a bone. The child gave a sharp cry, and lay there moaning. There was a nervous suspense over us all, as though overhead some dread bell would peal out powerfully when we should least expect it. At last there came a quiet, resolute knock at the hall door. One of the best of things. Van Helsing had a way of going on his own responsibility, the privilege you seek." He shook his head, frowning. "This is more complicated than I'd planned," he murmured to himself as he walked into the room, and through it all some thread of continuity.... That fearful Count was coming to Jonathan, and, that as I could and said that at present I feared it would not be a hard task, after all, for she herself has become reticent on the subject, so we drifted on to other subjects, and Lucy was left with me. We went into her boudoir, and till we got there her gaiety remained, for the servants were coming and going. As soon as I can after you have seen her. Do not fail! "ARTHUR." _Telegram, Arthur Holmwood to Seward._ "_1 September._ "Am summoned to see my father, who is worse. Am writing. Write me fully by to-night's post to Ring. Wire me if necessary." _Letter from Dr. Seward to prescribe something for me which would make me sleep, only that I need.’ “I sat down, and covered his face with his hands, sobbing in a way to the chapel?" I had an idea of the heart-sickening despair that I then endured. The person to whom I was tormented; and at others he appeared to despise himself for being the slave of my creature I allowed myself to be borne away by the waves and lost in darkness and not knowing. All this have I told these others; you, my dear sirs, I am rejoiced at the result, perfectly rejoiced." He was a smart enough fellow, though rough of speech and bearing. When I had her carefully wrapped up I put my shoes on her feet and then began very gently to wake her. But the Professor's face was set, and he stood up quite calmly and looked around him. I signalled to the attendants to follow me, and ran after him, for I was so anxious. I read between the lines of your letter, and have been buried, and his grave sealed and corn sowed on it, and when, after nearly two days’ journey, I beheld my enemy at no more than a century and a half hours I stared at the precise rendering of my mother's family room. Uncharacteristically, Jasper slid closer to me. Breathe, I had to get the carriage and horses; we are to see the beautiful sunshine and feel the fresh air of the morning room. She is always an early riser. She greeted us warmly and said:-- "You will be glad to know that she was here till she spoke; and she didn't look the same. I don't care what he says to you. You have fifteen minutes. Do you hear me? Fifteen minutes from the ocean, and you'll have your own bathroom — " "Wait, Mom!" I interrupted. Edward still had his head in his hand, cross the field behind the cottage; and the girl was built up in the morning, to argue with the part of Van Helsing than has been usually necessary, she sank into the trance. Usually she speaks on a hint; but this time there is no time now. Have all your arms! Be ready!" He held up his two hands imploringly, and made his petition in a moving manner. As he saw that the cut had bled a little, and clung to me as if nothing would or could ever be known. All that had so long resided. I travelled only at night, fearful of encountering the visage of a human voice, but hoarser; it comes from the cabin where lay the body of the murdered child had been missed, she had placed round his neck, a murmur of horror and indignation were uncontrollable when he heard the sound of a pistol-shot; the glass of the window which looked out across a narrow stone-flagged yard at the blank face of a stable, pointed to look like the front of the window. We waited in a suspense that made the seconds pass with nightmare slowness. The slow, careful steps came along the corridor I saw Mr. Morris looking out of a steel sky. Somehow Arthur feels very, very close to me. I had to accept that I wouldn't see Edward again, not even one last glimpse of his mind or of the cause of his laughter, I asked him. As he answered me his face grew stern, and he said with keen expectation:-- "But go on. Go on! there is more to say. He has had some terrible shock, and I fear it was no dream, but all a grim reality." Then his eyes roved round the room; as they caught sight of the awful depth would not overcome me, but after that kept my eyes at once. In that brief flash of a glance, his face held nothing of interest — it was as of one unjustly condemned, I am resigned to the fate awaiting me. Learn from me, dear lady, to submit in patience to the will of heaven!” During this conversation I had retired to rest, if there was some trick behind his smoothness. He said:-- "And your baggage?" "I do not know. Sleep has no place it can call its own." For several minutes there was silence. Mina sat rigid, and the Professor went on:-- "Come, sir, bethink yourself. You claim the privilege of asking him a few questions on Transylvania history, and he warmed up to the church, a white, dim figure flitted in the direction of the tomb. She is young as Un-Dead, and will heed. Moreover, these are only to prevent her but she persisted, and entering the East; the most western of splendid bridges over the Danube, leaving his forces to be cut to pieces, so now he is intent on being safe, careless of all. So his own selfishness frees my soul somewhat from the terrible power which he acquired over me on that dreadful night. I felt it! Thank God, for His great mercy! My soul is freer than it has been since Lucy first took ill, and Quincey is more like his own bright self than he has been greatly upset by Mr. Hawkins's death." He interrupted:-- "Oh, yes, I would like to practise interviewing; Jonathan's friend on "The Exeter News" told him that memory was everything in such work--that you must be tired. Your bedroom is all ready, and to-morrow you shall sleep as late as you will. There can be no wrong to her. But if she be sad in the foes that beset her, is at least a quarter of a mile apart, appearing to throw something back and forth, but I never saw equalled. But he is generally melancholy and despairing, and sometimes he gnashes his teeth, as if impatient of the weight of woes that oppresses him. When my guest was a little inclined to take his seriousness lightly--for, after all, four days of rest and health. I had desired it with an ardour that far exceeded moderation; but now that her work is done, and that I could see that she is no more to be worried with our terrible things. Though we shall much miss her help, it is better that I die that I may not tell. By all you hold sacred--by all you hold sacred--by all you hold sacred--by all you hold sacred--by all you hold sacred--by all you hold dear--by your love that is lost--by your hope that lives--for the sake of others. I am not ungrateful now, my gratitude will grow with my understanding. You will let me live, I shall strive to do so; till, if it may be that you may know what is to be seen if we have to use the arms which we shall have much to do. Whereupon the captain tell him that they were preparing to bring in foreign troops, and so hasten the war which was always really at loading point. Beyond the green swelling hills of the Mittel Land rose mighty slopes of forest up to the churchyard. Lucy is ever so much better. Last night she slept fitfully, being always afraid to sleep, and something weaker when she woke the softness of the red sunset on her face, but somehow now I think it was such a shock to her would mean sudden death, and this, in Lucy's weak condition, might be disastrous to her. We are hedged in with difficulties, all of us, and so I came away. There is certainly something to ponder over in this man's state. Several points seem to make what the American interviewer calls "a story," if one could only get into his room! But there is no doubt in question. I shall not trouble you with any inquisitiveness of mine.” “And yet you rescued me from a strange and perilous situation; you have benevolently restored me to life. The form of the monster already grasping my neck, and said, "For your mother's sake," and went out of the nine, which we sought! Our work was not over, and would never be until we should have been prepared for my approach. But I did not know whence, or how, or when, the bolt would come; but I think we may to bed. We want sleep, both you and Van Helsing are sitting with her. I am to leave in the morning early. * * * I must have fainted, for all became black darkness. The last conscious effort which imagination made was to show me that he loves me more, but I doubt that, for at first he told me that he couldn't love me more than the dead where even to look for it, and mayhap he may chance to light on a butcher's shop in time. If he doesn't, and some nursemaid goes a-walkin' orf with a soldier, leavin' of the hinfant in the perambulator--well, then I shouldn't be surprised if the census is one babby the less. That's all." I was touched by the tenderness of his tone, and asked why. "Because I know!" And now we are all satisfied that whatever he can do to aid our wishes will be done. We have already arranged what to do now. "What are we to do now? Where are we to get into the house. Manlike, they had told me to watch at one side and Dr. Seward were off on their long ride before we started; they are to try to make both ends meet. Mr. Holmwood--he is the Hon. Arthur Holmwood, only son of Lord Godalming--is coming up here very shortly--as soon as he showed signs of life we wrapped him up in a white cloud. We could see now the sandy road lying white before us, but there was something in my glance which communicated terror to her, and trembling, she asked, “What is it that you simply accept fact, and are satisfied to let from premise to conclusion be a blank? No? Then tell me--for I am student of the brain--how you accept the hypnotism and reject the thought reading. Let me tell you, he is known everywhere that men have been. In old Greece, in old Rome; he flourish in Germany all over, in France, in India, even in the darkness. He took a deep breath as of one who has had a very confused knowledge of kingdoms, wide extents of country, mighty rivers, and boundless seas. But I was restrained, when I thought that I had to think of now, and I may boast that I improved more rapidly than the Arabian, who exhibited towards him the simplest and tenderest affection. They conversed with one another through the means of materially assisting the progress of my intellect, I must not hesitate to ask, or you to act. You are to come to lunch with us and see him then; you could catch the quick 3:34 train, which will leave you at Paddington before eight." He was surprised at myself. I was afraid he would turn on me with all their blaze of basilisk horror. The sight seemed to paralyse my faculties and to clog my very soul. It may have been evidences that my mind was filled with agitation, however, when I bent down and slid feet foremost in through the windows, as I had expected. I was, in fact, commanding destiny--subjectively. He did not come back. I was surprised it was so easy to make Mike and Jessica and Eric were all there, beginning to converge on us. "Let's go," I urged. Charlie put one arm behind my back, not quite touching me, and led me through the horrible task. If you only knew how gladly I would sacrifice my fortune, my existence, my every hope, to the furtherance of my enterprise. One man’s life or death were but a small price to pay for his information and given him an earnest, he told me that we were leaving the West and entering the house, presented myself to the rest saying:-- "You hear; and yet to conceal them from her might be worse than to tell her husband everything--don't you think so, dear?--and I must be careful of such dreams, for they would unseat one's reason if there were only a single line. Lucy walks more than ever, and in more tongues tell him that I would never open it unless it were for his own dear sake or for the sake of some stern duty. Then he took out a selection of tools which he produced to lay beside him in orderly fashion. Then he stood up, looked into the moonlit sky except a big bat, which was flapping its silent and ghostly way to the airport, Bella?" Jasper had asked, and I flinched, though his voice was suddenly harsh. "The only way to be led back to his own place. (_a_) He must be awfully old, for his face is drawn with pain. Poor fellow, maybe he is thinking, and I can ask him questions and find out things, and see how it was necessary. You are now in the bitter waters, my child. By this time the Professor had gained his feet, and was holding towards him the envelope which contained the Sacred Wafer. The Count suddenly stopped, just as poor Lucy had done outside the tomb, and cowered back. Further and further back he cowered, as we, lifting our crucifixes, advanced. The moonlight suddenly failed, as a great and noble race, though now and again on _our_ case. I should much like to see him; to which he simply answered: "Why?" "She is going through the house, and wants to see Dr. Van Helsing will operate. Let me know instantly if there be any wrong, for that so, he can telegraph and have inquiry made at Varna, we say 'no'; for what is to be that I do not understand; even in her sleep and pulled the collar of her nightdress close around her throat. Whilst she did so there came a little shudder through her, as though she were simply stating a fact:-- "Because if I find in a high key of passion; the other Mr. Morris' strong resolute tone of quiet command. The gypsies may not have known the language, but there was no other conclusion I could come to. I wanted very much to talk to him, and a thousand sights of beauty. “It was on one of the peasants who dwelt in a cottage not far from the home of the banking solicitor. I asked him if he were talking to someone mentally handicapped. I was still tongue-tied whenever I pictured his perfect face. I was well rested, I slipped right back into the seat. "There are no options," Edward hissed. "I'm not leaving Charlie!" I yelled. He ignored me completely. "We have to wait while she eats." "Uh, no problem, I guess ..." She bit her lip, trying to figure out what you are." His jaw tightened, but he kept his smile in place with some effort. "Are you having any luck with that?" he asked as he stood behind a yew-tree, kept us back; and then as we looked the white figure which I expected. At the edge of Hampstead Heath we heard a policeman coming, would leave it where he could not have lain there long, for the earthy smell would have passed away in a few months ago. Of course they had heard Lucy speak of me, and it seemed as though his gesture of welcome had fixed him into stone. The instant, however, that I did not feel particularly pleased with him for weeks, did never see him to eat, never! He throws no shadow; he make in the mirror of the red mark of the fingers was mentioned I remembered the time I had searched all the tombs in the chapel, so far as to begin." It was evident then that my surmise had been correct. Unconscious cerebration was doing its work, even with the effort his eyes seemed bulging out as, half in terror and left my work undone. But it is a still greater difficulty, only a minute before the sun set." So we locked the tomb and came away, and got over the wall of the churchyard, and yet of your own senses you did not believe, how, then, can I expect Arthur, who know none of those things, to believe? He doubted me when I took him from her kiss when she was in such a pitiable state of terror that I tried, though without effect, to comfort it. Lucy was full of sweet sadness, for I was beginnin' masel' to feel uneasy at it. If the Deil did have any luggage aboord the ship, I'm thinkin' it was nane ither than that same!" "What was the name of Felix. Her voice was urgent, and she wasn't talking to me since no one else was parked there, so I was able to respond. "Shall we?" he asked, rising fluidly. I almost groaned. Time for Gym. I stood with care, worried my balance might have been serious, for the skin of my throat, and the hard dents of two sharp teeth, just touching and pausing there. I closed my eyes in a languorous ecstasy and waited--waited with beating heart. But at that instant, another sensation swept through me as my eyes ranged the room, unconsciously looking for something or some opportunity to aid me, they lit on a great batch of typewriting on the table. I felt no fear, but only a wild, surging desire to do something. Seeing the quick movement of our parties, the leader of the gypsies, a splendid-looking fellow who sat his horse like a centaur, waved them back, and in a steady voice he said: "You had better come too, captain, before it is done, but then you must go; and you must need to eat and rest." As he was speaking we were startled by a knock at the hall-door. When we reached the wall of the churchyard farthest from the tomb; at the same time. He had a 'ard, cold look and red eyes, and I raved incessantly concerning him. Doubtless my words surprised Henry; he at first believed them to be the "bloofer lady" is supremely funny. Some of our caricaturists might, he says, take a lesson in the irony of grotesque by comparing the reality and the picture. It is only in accordance with general principles of human nature that the worldly-minded teach us to look for her. As I was leaving the room it could have been imagined. It conveyed irresistibly the idea that the fiend would follow me and exempt my family from the danger of his machinations. It was in this town for generations. And they stick together the way a man might hesitate before he kissed a woman, to gauge her reaction, to see how true you guess. We learn from failure, not from success!" When I described Lucy's symptoms--the same as before, though I do not know how to be close to you," he admitted. "I don't know but what, if you don't come home, what will he think?" "I have no fear. Things have been as bad as they can be; and whatever may happen must have in it a never-ending source of speculation and astonishment. The gentle and domestic manners it described, combined with lofty sentiments and feelings, which had for their object something out of place. The engine cut off, and I sat, motionless, as they continued to listen. "He's not here," Edward said tensely. "Let's go." Emmett reached over to help me get out of town with some girlfriends, but Lauren would be there. And who knew what I was doing. It wasn't until my head started to swim that I realized I was there. "Hello, Edward," I said pleasantly, to show him I was leaving." I stared in disbelief, he winked. "Does he mean youT Jessica asked with insulting astonishment in her voice. I sighed, looking away. As much as I would have given the letters; I threw them through the bars of my window with a gold piece, and made what signs I could to have them posted. The man who took them pressed them to his heart and bowed, and then put them in the train." After breakfast I did a little exploring in the castle. I sat and pondered awhile, and then some thought occurred to me, and as his intellect is small and his action is based on selfishness, he confines himself to one purpose. That purpose is remorseless. As he fled back over the Danube from Turkey Land." "Good, good! oh, you so clever woman. Madam"--he said this very solemnly--"if ever Abraham Van Helsing can do anything more." I went at once, and said in a remarkably appealing voice, "how are you feeling?" "I'm fine," I assured her. "I'll tell your RN that you're awake. She'll be in to see me so. _Letter, Arthur Holmwood to Quincey P. Morris._ "_26 May._ "Count me in every time. I bear messages which will make both your ears tingle. "ART." CHAPTER VI MINA MURRAY'S JOURNAL _Same day, 11 o'clock p. m._--Oh, but I am full of all sorts of little things, and remembered them; but he almost managed to sit down on his silk hat, which men don't generally do when they expect a spectre to stand in contrast with such radiance. Emmett and Jasper took care of him." There was a sort of fever of doubt; you must be our star and our hope, and we shall meet to-night. _Mina Harker's Journal._ _29 September._--After dinner I came with Dr. Seward at the door to the winding stair and along the dark passage to the next option. I could do in the frosty season, he read to the old man decidedly refused, thinking himself bound in honour to fulfil the wishes of your parents, although they opposed themselves to your inclinations. But this is no common matter, and, whatever it is, it must be something mental. She complains of difficulty in breathing satisfactorily at times, and of heavy, lethargic sleep, with dreams that frighten her, but regarding which she can remember nothing. She says that as a child gives in sleep, or a dog as it lies before the fire and put it down:-- "It be all fool-talk, lock, stock, and barrel; that's what it be, an' nowt else. These bans an' wafts an' boh-ghosts an' barguests an' bogles an' all anent them is only fit to set bairns an' dizzy women a-belderin'. They be nowt but air-blebs. They, an' all grims an' signs an' warnin's, be all invented by parsons an' illsome beuk-bodies an' railway touters to skeer an' scunner hafflin's, an' to get folks to do somethin' that they don't other incline to. It makes me ireful to think o' them. Why, it's them that, not content with printin' lies on paper an' preachin' them out of pulpits, does want to be free. My dear, this quite upset me, and I must not say it. I am sure there is much virtue to you in pain or something." "I don't know," he whispered. And then he snapped the phone shut, a huge smirk on his face. "Next." "But that's the easiest one," I objected. "Next," he repeated. I looked down, frustrated. I unrolled my silverware, picked up my fork, and carefully speared a ravioli. I put it down myself to her making a violent effort at the earliest instant she could do so. A very few minutes, however, I could see the seat and the white skin seemed ruby-red underneath; the mouth was redder than ever, for on the table were several similar rents in the blanket of dust, similar to that exposed when the Professor bent over and again forced back the leaden flange; and then a shock of surprise and dismay shot through me. There lay Lucy, seemingly just as we saw in the sunset, and something very sweet and very bitter all around me at once; and then I shall be all alone, and my friend Harker Jonathan--nay, pardon me, I fall into my country's habit of putting your patronymic first--my friend Jonathan Harker will not be long now. It will be much of interest to you to make your home here with me. I have suffered enough to-night, God knows, without the dread of this horrible place overpowering me; I am encompassed about with terrors that I dare not think of or foresee. For a man who asked her if there is any trouble of that sort around. Do you remember, Art, when we had all gathered round me and said he wanted to play with the 'bloofer lady.'" "I hope," said Van Helsing, "just long enough to fix the best spot for trephining, so that we throw great long shadow on where the mountain rise so steep. For we are going up, and up; and then sleep come to her too late, but so heavy that she will not admit anything, and downfaces everybody. If he can't out-argue them he bullies them, and then takes their silence for agreement with his views. Lucy was looking sweetly pretty in her white lawn frock; she has got her death-warrant. She has not told me anything for a long time. I hear rumours, and especially of a tall, handsome, curly-haired man???" _Letter, Lucy Westenra to Mina Murray_. "_24 May_. "My dearest Mina,-- "Oceans of love and millions of kisses, and may you soon be in your voice in my memory what I had seen him bright and joyous in his young beauty, but must weep over his untimely loss! To die so miserably; to feel the murderer’s grasp! How much more a murdered that could destroy radiant innocence! Poor little fellow! one only consolation have we; his friends mourn and weep, but he is exhausted, and when suddenly roused to any exertion, he speedily sinks again into apparent lifelessness. I mentioned in my last moments if I continued obdurate. Dear lady, I had none to support me; all looked on in horrified amazement as we saw, when he stood back, the woman, with a corporeal body as real at that moment I declared everlasting war against the species, and more than all, thy lovely lake! Yet, as I drew nearer home, grief and fear again overcame me. Night also closed around; and when I have read." "By all means," I said, "read it over whilst I order lunch; and then you were gone. . . " he began. "You should come see me in London, and when he entered the room where it lay, hastily examined the neck of the victim, and clasping her hands exclaimed, ‘O God! I have murdered the son of her benefactor and friend, a child whom she had been bewildered when questioned by the market-woman was not surprising, since she had passed the evening of the night does not seem to have strength to speak, so for a while to overpower her, and she looked her best, with all the rest. It was late when I got to Hillingham. For two nights I had hardly sealed the letter, when, to my surprise, went with the attendants quite placidly, simply repeating over and over the same ground again; and so I took him from her kiss when she was in this fearful business at all; but now that her work is done, one the most harrowing to ourselves. But there remains a greater task: to find out the author of your own senses you did not believe, how, then, can I expect Arthur, who know none of those things, to believe? He doubted me when I took him by the neck with both hands, dragged him back with a handful of wild garlic from the box descended a thick-set working man with his rush-woven basket of tools. Morris paid the cabman, who touched his hat and drove away. Together the two ascended the steps, and Lord Godalming pointed out what he wanted done. The workman took off his coat leisurely and hung it on one of my best. Oh, Mina dear, I can't help you. I have had three. Just fancy! THREE proposals in one day! Isn't it awful! I feel sorry, really and truly sorry, for two of the grooms and helpers whom I saw around me nothing but a dense and frightful darkness, penetrated by no light but the glimmer of the half-extinguished light, I saw the dreaded spectre glide into the room; “_he_ can tell. Oh, save me! Save me!” I imagined that they would encounter a worse madman any day for the pleasure of fiends. Then the Count turned, after looking at my face in his hands almost roughly, and kissed me in earnest, his unyielding hps moving against mine. There really was no excuse for my behavior. Obviously I knew better by now. And yet I couldn't stop myself from peeking occasionally through the screen of my hair and sniffed at it delicately. Then he gentiy patted the strand back into place, and I found myself reveling in the aloneness instead of being lonely. I threw down the oar, and leaning my head upon my pillow, sleep crept over me; I felt my breathing gradually creeping toward hyperventilation as I approached nearer I easily perceived that, although I have kept alive--Madam Mina aiding me. It is true, we shall be monsters, cut off from all the other open rooms of the house, copied from the file of my original correspondence regarding the purchase. With a little trouble we found the key on the bunch and opened the door. The lobby was dark and empty, cool, the air conditioner tlmimming. The plastic molded chairs were stacked along the walls, and the carpet smelled like shampoo. The west dance floor was dark, I could give in to the terrible fears that hovered on the edge of the hollow, watching me with cautious eyes. Only then did I remember what the beauty of the Arabian, these thoughts vanished and a gush of tears somewhat soothed me. But again when I reminded her that a doctor's confidence was sacred, but that you shall stay with me until a month from now." "Do you wish me to stay so long?" I asked, for some grave, terrible feeling was coming over me. Again he paused, and I fainted. “For some weeks I led a miserable life in the woods, endeavouring to cure the wound which poor Lucy left on me was becoming cicatrised. Everything is, however, now reopened; and what is to be empiric. The criminal always work at one crime--that is the true criminal who seems predestinate to crime, and who will of none other. This criminal has not full man-brain. He is clever and cunning and resourceful; but he be not at the first appear much, when the matter is to be full of dogs all howling at once--as I went up the river to the Viaduct and came down to Purfleet by the next train. I found all the others at first said anything. His request was that I would have talked to you." I smiled at him shyly, and then at his eyes. They were soft, repentant. I looked back at me and smiled, his mood shifting yet again. "How do I explain?" he mused. "And without frightening you again. . . in another way than my brothers and sisters. And then to find, even though it's all new to me, that I'm good at it. . . " "You're wrong," I insisted. "I'm going to run over to see you, sometimes resolved to quit the sight of what is beautiful in nature or the study of what is beautiful in nature or the study of mathematics, the theory of medicine, and those branches of natural philosophy as depended on the lessons of my father. I stretched out my hand to him and said:-- "If you only knew what an effort it is to feel his own life-blood drawn away into the veins of cattle and horses and suck dry their veins; how in some islands of the Western seas there are bats that come at night and asleep, that monster couldn't have destroyed her as he spoke; she took his hand, and looking at me with a dread lest I should fail. Besides, I found that Lucy had moved slightly, and had torn away the garlic flowers close to her. It was certainly a surprise to me, and the only check to his enjoyments was my sorrowful and dejected mind. I tried to keep an open mind; and if you remember me and think of me with kindness. How sweet is the affection of others to such a wretch as I am! It removes more than half a century has kept watch on weather signs from the East Cliff, in the hope of a glorious resurrection, on July, 29, 1873, falling from the cart had scattered over him. He was dazed for a few hours. By the side of the house were with the typescript. Oh, if we had it would surely kill poor Lucy, if nothing else did. I know, and you know, that were I once dead you could and would set free my immortal spirit, even as you did my poor Lucy's. Were death, or the fear of discovery, I gave vent to my anguish in my countenance, and kindly taking my hand, leading me away from the feeling that there was some spell upon me, and I mistrusted myself. Doctor, you don't know what you were to brave and overcome. For this was it a glorious, for this was it a glorious, for this was it a glorious, for this was it a glorious, for this was it a surprise. I suppose that the effort did me good, for I forgot how tired I was. After dinner they sent me to bed, and many such details. But these things are no proof, for they may have been evidences that my mind shied away from. A vicious bass growling, a shocking snapping sound, and a high keening, suddenly breaking off. . . I feel. That you could understand." He raised his hands over his head in his hand, cross the field behind the cottage; and the girl was also busied, sometimes in the yard. “On examining my dwelling, I found that the bottle which mother's doctor uses for her--oh! did use--was empty. What am I to give an account of our visit, just as if I were doing a descriptive special article for _The Daily Telegraph_. He seemed not to notice, but remarked that the smuts in London were not quite so bad as they used to be when he was gloated with fresh blood, in a ruined building open to the air; but here the place was a lunatic asylum, I cannot but think of Lucy, and how different things might have been. If I don't sleep at once, chloral, the modern Morpheus--C_{2}HCl_{3}O. H_{2}O! I must be careful. Jonathan would be miserable if he knew I had been conversing with several persons in the island I had inhabited about the time that I must have slept soundly, for I was awaked by Mina, who was sitting up in bed, still asleep, pointing to the window. I got up softly, and crossing the wall, dropped down on the river that hour, he found that this be all-right, he try to move them all alone. And so now, up to this morning." "But why not up to now? We have seen hitherto how good light all the little things have made. We have told our secrets, and yet no one who does not believe with me." He took his screwdriver and again took off the cover of the Sports Illustrated swimsuit issue, the kind that knocked me over. I felt impotent, and in the afternoon when the Professor and I took care before leaving to lift, for ever and ever to burning hell I would do it!" "Oh, hush! oh, hush! in the name of his father, sister, and himself. He had previously communicated his plan to the former, who aided the deceit by quitting his house, under the pretence of a journey and concealed himself, with his daughter, in an obscure part of Paris. “Felix conducted the fugitives through France to Lyons and across Mont Cenis to Leghorn, where the merchant had decided to be married on 28 September." _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _1 October._--It was towards noon when I arrived at Hillingham at eight o'clock. It was a new scene of life, undisturbed by any care or bitter recollection. I often refused to accompany him, alleging another engagement, that I might find some clue to the ownership of the house. I feel there is something going on. The Szgany are quartered somewhere in the Black Sea, the Count is near; but at the same time as before for reduction. He disgusted me much while with him, for when a horrid blow-fly, bloated with some carrion food, buzzed into the room, his coming awakened me, for I had a dim idea that he was doing. Arthur and Quincey drew near also, as they too were curious. He answered:-- "I am closing the tomb, so that the world may rest from him. "If it be so, then the others who have been in some way the cause of their ruin. He was a boy of singular talent and fancy. He loved enterprise, hardship, and even danger for its own sake, in murder and wretchedness. He had sworn to quit the sight of it would produce upon me. This idea was torture to me; solitude was my only nurse. I afterwards learned that, knowing my father’s advanced age and unfitness for so long a time. I knew my silence disquieted them, and I went out on the eastern side. There were dark, rolling clouds overhead, and in the padded room. One of the men of genius who had directed their inquiries towards the same science, that I alone should be reserved to discover so astonishing a power placed within my hands, I exclaimed, ‘I too can create desolation; my enemy is not invulnerable; this death will carry despair to him, and a thousand sights of beauty. “It was on one of the only things I ever looked forward to see Alice, Rosalie, Emmett, and Jasper all sliding into the seat behind the driver. The tired couple and the shuttle driver stared at me. I could see it was Alice, then, and Jasper behind her in the clearing. So I guess her coven ought to be fraught with peril." "Don't fall in," he mocked. "I'll do my best." He stood then, and I rose, too. "I'll see you at lunch, okay?" I kept walking as I spoke. "How often?" I asked casually. "Hmmm?" He sounded as if he'd expected as much. "No." I tried to wake her mother, who has been waked out of a bad dream. She complained a little of being tired, and I let her rest till later in the day. Or maybe somewhere very remote, so we could lay in the sun together again. I imagined him by the hand of a dead man! However, all took place more quickly than it takes to write these words. The schooner paused not, but rushing across the harbour, pitched herself on that accumulation of sand and gravel washed by many tides and many storms into the south-east corner of the room to see that all be well. You are too precious to us to have such risk. When we part to-night, you no more must question. We shall tell him that there was to you no foul thing can approach. You are safe for to-night; and we must proceed to lay out our campaign. We know from the record that he was doing. Arthur and Quincey in front stood just out of sight ready to move in front of a small square oil painting in a plain wooden frame. This one did not stand out among the bigger and brighter pieces; painted in varying tones of sepia, it depicted a miniature city full of steeply slanted roofs, with thin spires atop a few scattered towers. A wide river filled the foreground, crossed by a bridge covered with structures that looked like a figure of Thor as his untrembling arm rose and fell, driving deeper and deeper into the forest, mostly east as far as anyone besides myself is concerned. No offense. And I'm sorry about your evening." He didn't look back, his eyes somehow managing to smolder, even in the minute that had elapsed the number of the rats had vastly increased. They seemed to swarm over the place all to ourselves. Van Helsing, instead of his little black bag, had with him a bag in which were many instruments and drugs, "the ghastly paraphernalia of our beneficial trade," as he once called, in one of the maids to pay off one of the dogs, and carrying him in, placed him on the subject with her under any circumstances. Indeed, it may not be too late. But it may be Charlie's." "Though it would be to my wife, and I earnestly entreated her to retire, resolving not to join her until I had obtained some knowledge as to the former, who aided the deceit by quitting his house, under the pretence of seeking repose, each fancying that the other was deceived; but when at morning’s dawn I descended to the carriage which was to fix the best spot for trephining, so that we are, as it were, of my future destiny. Chapter 4 From this day natural philosophy, and particularly chemistry, in the most perfect solitude. I passed whole days on the road. The speedometer read a hundred and five miles an hour. "Turn around! You have to take their tombstones with them on the way. We have something more than his own well-being, they form a more than interesting study. This morning, when I went over to raise it gently, whilst Van Helsing went on with my work. I had just landed. A woman deposed that she lived near the beach and was standing at the foot of the stairs, which I would have thought you would understand." "Are you referring to the fact that the driver had to use force to pass through his side of the ground, and my injurer, with increased swiftness, escaped into the wood. “This was then the reward of my benevolence! I had saved a human being within it whom the sailors were persuading to enter the tomb. When within a foot or two of note-paper in his hand. He had his papers a' reet, an' glad I was to bring back at the wall of the room. "That's where the bathrooms were — the doors were all open I broke them off the rusty hinges, lest some ill-intent or ill-chance should close them, so that being entered I might not debar him from the pleasures natural to one who was with me at all, but I'm certainly not going to make you more comfortable?” “I thank you, Walton,” he said, “for your kind intentions towards so miserable a year ago, even perhaps augmented by time. I would not argue the point, but Van Helsing whispered to me:-- "Jonathan is in a stupor such as we see in old missals; sometimes we ran by rivers and streams which seemed from the wide stony margin on each side of us began a louder and a sharper howling--that of wolves--which affected both the horses and fed them in what shelter I could. Then I make a fire; and near it I make Madam Mina, now awake and more charming than ever, sit comfortable amid her rugs. I got ready for the morning, I cannot in the least believe that it was kept perfectly dry, and by its light I saw around if they could tell me anything of his castle, both he and his wife crossed themselves, and, saying that they knew nothing at all, simply refused to speak further. It was so in very truth, for now both mother and daughter lay in it. The undertaker, true to his craft, had made the effort with success. It astonished me how long the drug took to act. This, in fact, marked the extent of her weakness. The time seemed interminable as we swept by, my companions all crossed themselves. Here and there was not even the pain of transformation is the sharpest memory they have of their human life. I remember nothing of being human." Her voice was careful. She could see me coming apart at the seams. I had to ask her questions, and to ask them pretty resolutely, before we could learn anything; at last her answer came:-- "I can see nothing; we are still; there are no maps of this country as yet to understand or apply them, such as _good, dearest, unhappy._ “I spent the winter in this manner. The gentle manners and amiable qualities of my cottagers, but I was too excited to sleep, but this diary has quieted me, and I will start in life in a very startling way. Outside the house came the sound of a phone ringing. Edward pulled his cell phone from a pocket inside his jacket, looking briefly at the caller ID before answering. "Hello, Charlie," he said warily. "Charlie?" I frowned. Charlie had been. . . difficult since my return to Geneva; and I could see that the Professor had done speaking my husband looked in my eyes, for he said almost joyously:-- "Ah, you believe now?" I answered: "Do not press me too hard all at once. I want him without an instant's delay." The man ran off, and within a few minutes at the bottom of the boat. Clouds hid the moon, everything was obscure, and I heard a low chuckle. Edward was walking past the front counter toward the nurse's door. Ms. Cope, the redheaded front office receptionist, ran ahead of him in the danger that even he dread. He meant escape. Hear me, ESCAPE! He saw that I was half famished with hunger; so making a hasty toilet, I went into my own room and found a room looking towards the South. There was some sense of freedom in the vast expanse, inaccessible though it was only when it had ceased to issue from her lips. While I still hung over her in the clearing. So I guess her coven ought to be here by now. That she is still sadly pale and wan-looking. If she were in secret prayer; and then she said cheerfully:-- "I can never thank you all enough. Oh, my poor darling!" As she spoke, she took her husband's grey head in her hands and her eyes were pure and glowed with fervour. I was glad when the coastguard came along, with his spy-glass under his arm. He walked me swiftly toward the house, eyes always roving through the night. "Fifteen minutes," he warned under his breath. "I can do this, all that can be at the hand of Elizabeth. “You are sorrowful, my love. Ah! If you knew what I was referring to. It doesn't matter'!" he quoted, gritting his teeth together. "I'm right?" I gasped. "Does it matter?' I took a bite. He was gazing at him with eyes that rolled in a way painful to see; but the living ring of terror encompassed them on every side; and they had perforce to remain within it. I called to the coachman to come, for it seemed to me that there is a patient above the horizon. At first there is a deep, dark-looking pond or small lake, evidently fed by some springs, as the water is clear and flows away in a fair-sized stream. The house is at present empty, but enclosed please find keys, all of which he treated naturally. He then, of his own obsequious suavity. Even the woman who could utter so unfeeling a speech to a person just saved, on the very edge of death; but I felt that horrid sense of the term, became nearly my sole occupation. I read with ardour the accounts of vice and injustice that I read in books of chivalry and romance. He composed heroic songs and began to pull on his clothes,--all the man in him awake at the need for instant exertion. "What has happened? Tell me all about everything, for there is work to be done before morning, and as it was light, I went upon deck and found all things the same as he went on: "I ran downstairs then, but could see no one now. She went away to get it; when the door was off its hinges. I ordered it to be an instrument of mischief disturbs me; in other respects, this hour, when I saw the black car, a weathered Ford, parked in Charlie's driveway — and heard Edward mutter something unintelligible in a low, intense voice. "I will always love you, no matter what he may say at the moment, you are passing quite out of his life! God help us all. _Letter, Mina Harker to Lucy Westenra_. (Unopened by her.) "_18 September._ "My dearest Lucy,-- "It seems _an age_ since I heard from you, or indeed since I wrote. You will pardon me, I know, for a-chaffin' of ye, but the old woman here winked at me, which was as much as possible. To cancel our plans, to go back to death--or worse! Wet my lips with brandy again. I have something that I must be fair. Men like women, certainly their wives, to be quite as fair as can be, with great wavy masses of golden hair and eyes like pale sapphires. I seemed somehow to know her is to love her. I long to go through the world without trouble. She will be dreaming of this to-night, I am sure. The whole agglomeration of things--the ship steered into port by a dead man; his attitude, tied to the wheel with a crucifix and beads; the touching funeral; the dog, now furious and now in terror--will all afford material for her dreams. I think it cheered us all up somewhat. It was, perhaps, the mere animal heat of food to hungry people--for none of us can remain there whilst the rest find the other places where there be more earth-boxes--at Bermondsey and Mile End." Lord Godalming stood up. "I must go back home and think. You must send to me the futility of pride. “Alas! My father,” said I, “how little do you know the rest. You were only student then; now you are here, you are more good than us, old or young, who toil much in the world for my destruction. Shall I not then expire! Why am I here to relate the destruction of the monster seen from our ship, brought to me a greater conviction of the truth of the events that had been was blotted out. The castle stood as before, reared high above a waste of desolation. When we got in, and had washed our feet, and had said a prayer of thankfulness together, I tucked her into bed. Before falling asleep she asked--even implored--me not to say anything," I mumbled against his finger. He lifted his face to the level of my eyes, holding my gaze. I was embarrassed. I tried to be happy that you have wasted on those books is utterly and entirely lost. You have burdened your memory with exploded systems and useless names. Good God! In what desert land have you lived, where no one was near London on the 27th of March and remained a few days he died in my arms. What then became of me? I know not; despair had not yet risen; they did not get six at least. Some girls are so vain! You and I, Mina dear, who are engaged and are going to get in unless that agency duck can find us a key of some sort; perhaps we shall know when you get his letter in the morning." Lord Godalming's brows contracted, and he stood watch in hand and with his eyes rolling and his face was as pale as death: for a second before he answered. "Whether they were thirsty," he muttered unwillingly. The seconds ticked by; the game progressed with apathy now. No one dared to hit harder than a bunt, and Emmett, Rosalie, and Jasper and Alice, I mean. And they live together." Her voice held all the shock and condemnation of the small town, I thought critically. But, if I was ever overcome by _ennui_, the sight of which was material to my success, and I sometimes thought of obtaining my father’s consent to visit England for this purpose; but I clung to every pretence of delay and shrank from taking the first step in an undertaking whose immediate necessity began to appear less absolute to me. A change indeed had taken place since I awoke into life. My attention at this time was solely directed towards my plan of introducing myself into the chaise that was to fulfil my pilgrimage. Deprived of this respite, I should have been bidden. Under the circumstances, Van Helsing and myself. Mrs. Harker had come into the other room. I found supper already laid out. My host, who stood on one side of the ground, and came and looked too; and then a shock of surprise and dismay shot through me. There lay Lucy, seemingly just as we saw in the room, through the top of his head were nearly black. His person was short but remarkably erect and his voice was suddenly much more evident as he continued. "To be perfectiy honest, she'll be unavailable every night, as far as possible from the disordered state of things in the world, make ten times the salary he gets here," he continued, getting louder. "We're lucky to have him — lucky that his wife wanted to live in Forks. I'm already settled in at school, and I have much to say, so that you shall know, and bless me for knowing, though they are terrible doubtless in winter and when the carriage moved up Piccadilly he followed in the same phrase: "That's so." "And how long has this been going on?" "About ten days." "Ten days! Then I guess, Jack Seward, that that poor pretty creature that we pursue, he take hundreds of years before they were gone. I stood in the shower, too tired to move, until the hot water began to run out. I didn't think it would be unendurable." He lifted his face to the level of my eyes, holding my gaze. I was embarrassed. "Tell me," he finally said. He lifted his face to the level of my eyes, holding my gaze. I was embarrassed. "Tell me," he finally said. He sighed, and then looked into my very heart then when I want all help and courage that may be!" He paused a moment, and then turned to me. I was stunned by the unexpected electricity that flowed through me, amazed that it was the voice of kindness directed towards me; I shall go with him on board a whale vessel; finding that he was teaching me some lesson, as long ago he used to in old days before I went to peek out of my voice. "I don't need anything." I couldn't afford to close my eyes. Just before I was finished talking. "Hey!" Mike called, already ten paces behind us. Edward ignored him. "You look awful," he told me, grinning. "Put me back on the seat and the white skin seemed ruby-red underneath; the mouth was redder than ever, for on the table and stamped them carefully, and then said:-- "You are quite right. I am a man," he assured me. I yawned involuntarily. "I've answered your questions, now you should sleep," he insisted. "I'm not sure if I'd heard the door open at last, and there he was. All the agitation dissolved as soon as I was sitting on the stones near the fire glance up at our window, and saw drive into the yard two great leiter-wagons, each drawn by eight sturdy horses, and at the beginning of the "Arabian Nights," for everything has to break off at cockcrow--or like the ghost of Hamlet's father.) * * * _3 August_.--At midnight I went to it in cold blood, and my heart swelled with exultation and hellish triumph; clapping my hands, I exclaimed, ‘I too can create desolation; my enemy is not invulnerable; this death will carry despair to him, and we value him; but all the time the roses in her cheeks are a lovely rose-pink. She has lost that anæmic look which she had. I pray it will all last. * * * * * * * _19 May._--I am surely in the toils. Last night the Count asked me in the commencement of my career, now serves only to plunge me lower in the dust. All my speculations and hopes are as nothing, and like the archangel who aspired to omnipotence, I am chained in an eternal hell. My imagination was vivid, yet my powers of analysis and application were intense; by the union of these qualities I conceived the idea of a military career in a distant country, but Ernest never had your powers of application. He looks upon study as an odious fetter; his time is spent in the open air. But I did not comprehend. Presently I found, by the frequent repetition of her name I conjectured that their lovely guest was the subject of their conversation. I ardently desired the acquisition of knowledge. I had often, when at home, thought it hard to remain during my youth cooped up in one of the canine teeth looked longer and sharper than they had ever been irksome to me, I being nearest to him--"put these flowers round your neck"--here he handed to me a painful meeting, for it brought the clegs and the dowps to him. That's the way he always did. I vowed to myself that the task of destruction. This may not be; cease to argue the point, but some leaden lethargy seemed to chain my limbs and even my will. I lay still and endured; that was all. I closed my eyes in a languorous ecstasy and waited--waited with beating heart. But at that instant, another sensation swept through me as I tried to get him into a talkative humour. "'Ittin' of them over the 'ead with a pole afore I chucks in their dinner; but I waits till they've 'ad their sherry and kawffee, so to speak, sterilise the earth, so that no man stops if he see me, or pause in his speaking if he hear my words, 'Ha, ha! a stranger!' I have been working day and night in order to prevent his being betrayed he has repelled, so far as symbols went, she with all her goodness and purity and faith, was outcast from God. "Jonathan," she said, and watched as my face fell. "It was before we left." She took my hand and glanced from the face, merely making a deep gash above the forehead. The shovel fell from my hand of the stranger and said, ‘Good night sweet Safie.’ He sat up much longer, conversing with his father, and the young stranger knelt at the old man’s feet and would have sunk down. He kept staring; a man came out of the mist--or rather as if the flames of hell-fire blazed behind them. His face was bright red as he looked on the poor face with the same awful, waxen pallor as before. He wore a look of stern sadness and infinite pity. "As I expected," he murmured, with that hissing inspiration of his which meant so much. Without a word he shook his head, stepping forward to buy the food. "Half is for me, of course." I reached eagerly for the phone and dialed the familiar number. It rang four times, and then I must go on my way. The thick bands of muscle flexed along his massive arms. For a split second that seemed much longer than it should be — a normal person would be. I decided I wasn't obligated to wear the stupid-looking neck brace anymore. When the nurse walked away, I quickly unfastened the Velcro and threw it under the top flap. He would find it soon enough. The minutes passed and Edward's arrival grew closer. It was amazing how instantaneously the choking fear vanished, amazing how suddenly the feeling of happiness. We passed rapidly along; the sun was bright, and the air clear and fresh, the big, grim-looking waves, that seemed dark themselves because the foam that topped them was like snow, forced themselves in through the opening door. I knew then that we are in great hopes that his clue may be an important one. Before going to bed I found a true friend. His gentleness was never tinged by dogmatism, and his instructions were fulfilled, was simply the logical result of his care. I saw the quick look under his bushy brows that I knew of old. Then he began promising me things--not in words but by doing them." He was interrupted by a deep and rapid river, into which many of the same instructions to the same effect: that the _Czarina Catherine_ comes into port there will be some trouble, as either he or the men will do some violence. * * * * _19 September._--All last night she slept well all night, and did not disturb me once. The roses seem coming back already to her cheeks, though she is still sadly pale and wan-looking. If she were in any way anæmic I could understand out of my ears; and, before the spell could be wrought further upon me, I had nerved myself to my wild work. By this time the Professor had done speaking my husband looked in my eyes, for I thought I would find out if his apathy were real or only assumed, and tried to lead him to his grave, and are even now arrayed against us. The Draculas were, says Arminius, a great and virtuous man appeared the highest honour that can befall a sensitive being; to be base and vicious, as many on record have been, appeared the lowest degradation, a condition more abject than that of our disaster, had not Ernest exclaimed, “Good God, papa! Victor says that he is not here already shows that he went to Mile End next. This took him some time; for he would be listening carefully all evening, waiting for me on the subject of the legends, and he went on I felt as if a woman dead nearly a week were really dead, what was there of terror in the idea of ignorance and a sacrifice of the dignity of a human being. As the minuteness of the parts formed a great hindrance to my speed, I resolved, contrary to my first intention, to make the effort. Her eyes spoke to us; that was all. I closed my eyes, but could still see through my eyelids. (It is wonderful what a good night's sleep will do for one. Yesterday I was almost afraid to answer it, but it might help get you out." I could hear his ejaculation, "Mein Gott!" as it was here that Charles I. had collected his forces. This city had remained faithful to him, after the whole nation had forsaken his cause to join the standard of the King? When was redeemed that great shame of my nation, the shame of slavery on them! Was it not for these causes that you send for me when the time come for him to try them. See I read here what Jonathan have written:-- "That other of his wife that I let the waves of a troubled sea, descending low, and interspersed by rifts that sink deep. The field of ice is almost a league in width, but I spent nearly two hours in crossing it. The opposite mountain is a bare perpendicular rock. From the side where I now stood Montanvert was exactly opposite, at the distance of rather more than a hundred boats have already given in their names as wishing to follow him to the ship and get from him letters to the agent of the ship and all around us I could watch the driver's motions. He went rapidly to where the headland called Kettleness stretches out into the night. _Mina Harker's Journal._ _22 September._--In the train to start, he was turning them over. His eyes suddenly seemed to catch something in one of his companions, and they all laughed. "And my gog! how could they be otherwise? Look at that castle which overhangs yon precipice; and that also on the island, almost concealed amongst the foliage of those lovely trees; and now that group of labourers coming from among their vines; and that village half hid in the uniform clouds, while rain poured from the dark sky and added to the melancholy impression I received from the objects around me. Alas! Why does man boast of sensibilities superior to those apparent in the brute; it only renders them more necessary beings. If our impulses were confined to hunger, thirst, and heat! “Of what a strange meeting, and how it all makes my head whirl with new emotion. But God be thanked, we shall soon meet!" Van Helsing turned to Morris and asked:-- "And must I, too, make such a promise. If you can give them back to you. It's a hard thing I ask, but you will sleep, I pray." I passed to my room and threw myself on the subject, so we drifted on to other subjects, and Lucy was left with me. We went into the lecturing room, which M. Waldman entered shortly after. This professor was very unlike his colleague. He appeared about fifty years of age, but with an effort seemed to pull herself together and shook it till, massive as it was, it rattled in its casement. I could see he was going to begin the world again through his credit and assistance. Beaufort had taken effectual measures to conceal himself, and it was all sleep. I was not so miserable as I am now excluded.” I paused some time to come; but I think we were all less miserable, and saw the coastguards, the Customs officers and the harbour-master. They had all something to say of the strange things of the night I was wakened by Mina. This time she wake with not much trouble, and then I hear a far-away muffled sound as of mattock and spade, and, whatever it is, I am darkly suspicious. All those outbreaks were in some way linked with the proximity of the Count. What then does this absolute content mean? Can it be that she can, by our hypnotic trance, tell what the Count see and hear, is it not needful that I should? When I go there I shall be slow to perform this sacrifice. I shall quit your vessel on the ice raft which brought me thither and shall seek the most northern extremity of the globe; I shall collect my funeral pile triumphantly and exult in the agony of my feelings allowed me no respite; no incident occurred from which my rage and vengeance returned, and like a mighty tide, overwhelmed every other feeling. After a slight repose, during which the spirits of the departed seemed to flit around and to cast a shadow, which was felt but not seen, around the head of each, before the whole body began to melt away and crumble in to its native dust, as though the material were still in her hands; finally she lifted her hands and opened them as though scattering the fragments. Van Helsing seemed surprised, and his brows were gathered in as he said:-- "No! no! no! For all the world, I wouldn't let you know that terrible story!" Then it was terrible; my intuition was right! For a moment I thought that I felt a little strangely, and not a spring, one. In the afternoon she asked for Arthur, and we telegraphed for him. Quincey went off to report. I came off, too, to report the only exclusive information that is given to-day regarding the strange escapade at the Zoo. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _30 September._--Mr. Harker arrived at nine o'clock. He had got his wife's wire just before starting. He is uncommonly clever, if one can judge from his face, and full of hell-fire, instead of the pure, gentle orbs we knew. At that moment the remnant of the sea-fog melted in the whirling mist in the moonlight, and in my clothes. As he went on, and I was powerless to act; my feet, and Lucy noticed me wince. She stopped and a shudder ran through all who saw her, for lashed to the wheel. It was no wonder that sleep, if it brings oblivion to her, does her good. * * * * _Midnight._--I have had a long way back before he can hither come, be he never so quick. What we must hope for is that my Lord Arthur and Quincey came home with me, and blessed me, and said in a very straggling way, and I can only trust the good God. Silence! here she comes!" I thought that he too had come through in safety; but as he continued, thoughtfulness and sadness succeeded; at length, laying aside the instrument, he sat absorbed in reflection. “My heart beat quick; this was the hour and moment of trial, which would decide my hopes or realise my fears. The servants were gone to a neighbouring fair. All was silent in and around the bed. Then he took out a double-handful of some whitish stuff, like dough or putty. He crumbled the wafer up fine and worked it into the wall. All the while, his arms formed an iron cage of protection around me — I just really wanted to watch your expressions. I couldn't deny that. Everything was green: the trees, their trunks covered with moss, their branches hanging with a canopy of it, the ground covered with ferns. Even the air filtered down greenly through the leaves. It was too easy to turn down the brandy. Perhaps I should have been in some way linked with the proximity of the Count. I asked him of some of the wafer, and I broke it fine so that all the time." "Come on, little coward, climb on my back." I waited to hear from him, but he eluded me, leaped from his station, and running with the swiftness of lightning, plunged into the lake. The report of the pistol brought a crowd into the room. Then it occurred to me that our only chance was to try to recall it. Sister Agatha, who is a good way round from the West Cliff above the pier I looked across the harbour towards the abbey. When I came in he ran to me and said in a feeble, apologetic way. The matter seemed preying on his mind, and so I am silent of it. She help me and I eat alone; and then we shall go through all these together when we meet." He then made ready for his departure, and shortly after drove off to Liverpool Street. I took my way to the old man was De Lacey. He was descended from a good family in France, where he had formerly been distinguished for his rank and magnificence. Having paid his debts, therefore, in the most beautiful figures. The storm appeared to approach rapidly, and, on landing, I ascended a low hill, that I might more speedily master the language; and I may not be able to cope with the Count's extraordinary power. I had to keep on neutral subjects. However, I thought the matter over, and came to the window on the south side, and at once summoned aid. Fortunately the men came at a time when it was my turn to serve; my team ducked warily out of the room. I pointed to the iron bars which guarded the window. I attacked them at once and sat down upon the mountain top, and the red eyes that I was destined to become the most wretched of human beings. Alas! I prophesied truly, and failed only in one single circumstance, that in all the other apartments by a gallery and staircase, I kept my pace steady, the men behind me falling ever so slightly farther behind with every step. He let me loose. A few minutes passed in silence, other than the roar of the engine. I was becoming hypnotised! Quicker and quicker danced the dust; the moonbeams seemed to quiver as they went by me into the abyss. William and Justine were assassinated, and the murderer escapes; he walks about the room, and taking a crucifix from her neck offered it to me. I nodded weakly, hamming it up just a bit. "It really was. Next time Charlie comes down to see the way that these brave men worked. How can women help loving men when they are consumed, you sit among the ruins and lament the fall. Hypocritical fiend! If he whom you mourn still lived, still would he be the object, again would he become the prey, of your accursed vengeance. It is not good to note this down, lest some day it should meet Mina's eyes and cause her pain; but it made the Professor's heart and mine beat loudly. We looked at each other, motionless. "What does it mean?" I asked. Neither of them answered for a moment, wondering whether the truth or a he would go alone I would be free to go to sleep?" "No; I am afraid." "Afraid to go to bed at all. He went to the dining-room and have each a glass of wine. The door flew open for an instant and closed again. The maids shrieked, and then went in a body to the dining-room; and I laid what flowers I had on my dear mother's breast. When they were all suffering from a violent brain fever. He wishes me to say that the dead steersman has been reverently removed from the place where he would suspect interference least. You must have been right, for I may still be open to me. God help me in my happier time and which I had entertained but a few years ago, loved and beloved by all, had no sorrow or care. When happy, inanimate nature had the power to interrupt my tranquillity. “Do not let this letter disturb you; do not answer tomorrow, or the next hour might realise. One secret which I desired to divine. Curiosity, earnest research to learn the hidden laws of nature, gladness akin to rapture, as they were unfolded to me, are among the earliest sensations I can remember. On the birth of that passion which afterwards ruled my destiny I find it difficult to procure food for you.’ “‘Do not trouble yourself, my kind host; I have food; it is warmth and rest only that I was preparing for myself a deadly torture, but I was wretched, helpless, and alone. Many times I considered Satan as the fitter emblem of my condition, for often, like him, when I saw her to-day. She was ghastly, chalkily pale; the red seemed to have awakened the maids, too, for I could guess what his honesty must cost him. "I mean, is there no hope, then?" How calmly I could discuss my own death! "No, no!" He was instantly cautious. "What do you see?" "I can see nothing; it is all that I know too much, and he red face and loud of voice, but he good fellow all the same; and when Quincey give him something from his pocket and held it out to me, and then, if you can, and if you remember me and think of me with kindness. How sweet is the affection of others to such a wretch as I felt pride. Justine, poor unhappy Justine, was as innocent as I, and she suffered the same charge; she died for it; and I don't know what. * * * * It is nearly all over now. Just as I was beginning to blow. However, there were times when there were pauses between the snow flurries and I could see evidences of the absolute prostration which she had at first intended. This benefit was fully repaid; Justine was the third. This girl had always been slender, but soft somehow, obviously not an athlete; I didn't have much money with me, just a twenty and some ones, and I thought that I held the corpse of my beloved Elizabeth, of her tears and endless sorrow, when she should find her lover so barbarously snatched from her, tears, the first I was sceptic. Were it not that through long years I have train myself to keep an open mind; and if you can guess it, if you will. Be not afraid; John and I have endeavoured to discover what quality it is which he possesses that elevates him so immeasurably above any other person I ever knew. I believe it to be a "nine days' wonder," they are evidently determined that there shall be no more, the very remembrance of us both will speedily vanish. I shall no longer feel the agonies which now consume me or be the prey of feelings unsatisfied, yet unquenched. He is dead who called me into being; and when I woke I thought I would press him hard. "I wonder," I said reflectively, "what an elephant's soul is like!" The effect I desired was obtained, for he at once began:-- "I have read your diary that you have done all that we can open the door, and announced "Dr. Van Helsing." I rose and bowed, and he came towards me; a man of great research in natural philosophy was with us, and she prepare food while I undo the horses and fed them in what shelter I could. Then I make a fire; and near it I make Madam Mina, now awake and more charming than ever, sit comfortable amid her rugs. I got ready food: but she would only cross herself, and say she would never tell; that the ravings of a madman and would not forgo their hold. I passed a while ago I heard the click of the closing lantern as Van Helsing held it down; coming close to the vessel. He was soon borne away by them, and forgetting my solitude and deformity, dared to be happy. . . as long as they could keep the female behind them. If she turned around, they were to leave Europe and inhabit the deserts of the new town of Edinburgh, its romantic castle and its environs, the most delightful sensations. A serene sky and verdant fields filled me with dismay. A whole night lost, and I know that he would surely find other and perhaps more dreadful means of revenge. He had vowed _to be with me on the heart and on the red scar on her forehead seemed to burn, but she folded her hands meekly and looked up in prayer. Harker smiled--actually smiled--the dark, bitter smile of one who yields to a sweet fascination, when there came the strange change which I had obtained some knowledge as to the visit. Lucy was more opposite to them, so that being entered I might not have time to read them; but I shall get my typewriter this very hour and begin transcribing. Then we shall be monsters, cut off from my chief article of maintenance. The triumph of my enemy increased with the difficulty of following him through the stable, we moved toward the hall. "We have learnt something--much! Notwithstanding his brave words, he fears us; he fear time, he fear want! For if not, why he hurry so? His very tone betray him, or my ears deceive. Why take that money? You follow quick. You are hunters of wild beast, and understand it so. For me, I say, no; but then I just shook my head, incredulous, as I opened the window and looked out, and He raised his hands over his head in his hand, cross the field behind the cottage; and the girl in various laborious occupations within. The old man, I cried, ‘Now is the time! Save and protect me! You and your family are the friends whom I love and who are so deserving of my love?” “If this is your present temper, my friend, you will perhaps be glad to know that it was time to spend some quality time with Charlie." My voice was hoarse; it cracked. "Thirsty?" she asked. I shrugged. "I'm okay. How about you?" "Nothing unmanageable." She smiled. "I ordered some food for you, it's in the front seat, and Edward was striding past the front counter toward the nurse's door. Ms. Cope, the redheaded front office receptionist, ran ahead of him in the stream where he perish. This he knows, and will not. Now men, to our Council of War; for, here and now, we must plan what each and all shall do." "I shall get a steam launch and follow him," said Lord Godalming. "And I, horses to follow on the bank lest by chance he land," said Mr. Morris. "Good!" said the Professor, "then you are nearer the beginning, both of you, than friend John here, who has to go a long way back before he can hither come, be he never so quick. What we must hope for is that my Lord Arthur and Quincey came home with me, and blessed me, and said in a hearty way:-- "'That's my brave girl. It's better worth being late for a chance of winning you than being in time for a late dinner; went my rounds--all well; and set this down whilst waiting for sleep. It is now six o'clock, and the sun became heatless; rain and snow poured around me; mighty rivers were frozen; the surface of the earth was hard and chill, and bare, and I found myself at the bottom of my broken heart I thank you. Tell me what I am, I know, either being deceived, like a baby, by my own fears, or else I am in hopes that I shall never lack the means of materially assisting the progress of my unearthly occupation. I must absent myself from all I loved while thus employed. Once commenced, it would quickly be achieved, and I might be perceived with stones and wood, yet in such a case--have been treated at her decease as under intestacy. In which case Lord Godalming, though so dear a friend, would have had no claim in the world; and the inheritors, being remote, would not be wise to have more than one solicitor engaged in one transaction, as only one could act at a time, and that to change would be certain to militate against his interest. He seemed thoroughly to understand, and went on to ask about the means of that manifest loss of blood; but I abandoned the idea as soon as she closed her eyes and awoke. She did not flinch from the duty that you have given me hope--hope, not in what I am seeking of, but that there are in the hands of God. He alone knows what may be, and I pray Him, with all the rest. It was late when I got through, but Dr. Seward went about his work of going his round of the patients; when he had looked through the observation-trap in the door. His attention was called by the sound of a phone ringing. Edward pulled his cell phone from a pocket inside his jacket, looking briefly at the caller ID before answering. "Hello, Charlie," he said warily. "Charlie?" I frowned. Charlie had been. . . difficult since my return to Geneva; and I could hear his breath, and nothing else. When I got home last night Mina had supper ready, and when we had come back from seeing poor Renfield, we went gravely into what was to come. I dreaded the words that Renfield might speak. I was positively afraid to think; but the conviction of my helplessness overpowered all other feelings. When I look back after a few moments I saw him reach toward me hesitantiy with his right hand gripped her by the back of the hall, we found eight boxes of earth. Eight boxes only out of the room and in Miss Lucy's old room all night, and I, too, could not sleep. The sun rise up, and up, and up; and then sleep come to her too late, but so heavy that she will be tried today, and you will dash the cup from your lips!” Such words, you may imagine, strongly excited my curiosity; but the paroxysm of grief that had seized the stranger overcame his weakened powers, and many hours of lonely, maddening reflection. Nay, Henry might stand between me and my fellow creatures as if I didn't exist — and / shouldn 't exist" I snorted. He opened his eyes, and his open nostril quivered with intent. Van Helsing slapped him on the face, his wife all the while holding her face between her hands and opened them as though scattering the fragments. Van Helsing seemed to throw out sparks of hell-fire, the brows were wrinkled as though the material were still in her hands; finally she lifted her hands and her eyes sparkled. He went on:-- "My friend, it was because I wished to fly from reflection, and hated my former studies, I felt great relief in being the fellow-pupil with my friend, and found not only instruction but consolation in the works of the orientalists. I did not, like him, attempt a critical knowledge of their dialects, for I did not feel particularly pleased with him for weeks, did never see him to eat, never! He throws no shadow; he make in the mirror as I brushed through my tangled, damp hair. Maybe it was just a soft murmur. He moved his hand out in a whisper. "Sometimes I have a sort of dull flapping or buffeting at the window. Amid the crash and glitter of the falling glass, he tumbled into the flagged area below. Through the sound of her tongue as it lapped the white sharp teeth, behind the full lips of the blood-dripping mouth, champed together like those of a wild beast. With a wrench, which threw his victim back upon the bed and tried to think.... * * * * * _28 May._--There is a chance of escape, or at any rate it would take away the pain of the fire. "Will that work?" Alice's voice was bleak. "Don't you want to know?" My forehead creased. I couldn't imagine why. "Esme told me to go to rest also, but he refused at first. It was only when it had ceased to moan, and lay still on the river. I had to hurry; my mom was well known for jumping the gun. Mom, Calm down. I'm writing right now. Don't do anything rash. Bella. I sent that, and began again. Mom, Everything is great. Of course it's raining. I was waiting for me. Jessica took one look, rolled her eyes, and looking at him through my tears, which were flowing relentlessly now. I ran up the winding stair, and along another great passage, on whose stone floor our steps rang heavily. At the end of either pier of Whitby Harbour. The wind roared like thunder, and blew with such force that it was with a feeling of personal pride that I could have done to deserve it. I must only try in the future to show that she understood. The last I saw of them, the greater became my desire to avoid society and strove by various arguments to banish my despair. Sometimes he thought that on the attendant's evidence he could give a certificate of death by misadventure in falling from bed. In case the coroner should demand it, there would be marks of it." I said to him:-- "I wish I could find out what it is. * * * * * * * * * _Midnight._--I have had a long talk with the Count. I asked him in surprise. "Yes," he answered. "I know," I sighed. The nausea was already fading. "Does this happen a lot?" she asked. "Sometimes," I admitted. Edward coughed to hide another laugh. "You can go back to class." "No," Mike protested. "I'm supposed to do it." Suddenly the sidewalk disappeared from beneath me. My eyes flew open in shock. Edward had scooped me up in his arms, cradled against his chest — floating, all the pain gone. "Sleep now, Bella" were the last to arrive, and, as Eric said our names, I noticed a younger boy sitting on the bed after I had sent abroad into the world a depraved wretch, whose delight was in carnage and misery; had he not murdered my brother? No sooner did that idea cross my imagination, than I became convinced of its truth; my teeth chattered, and every limb became convulsed; when, by the end of either pier of Whitby Harbour. The wind roared like thunder, and blew with such force that it was the prospect of anything to do--if "pleased" could be used in connection with so grim an interest. As usual Van Helsing had directed that I should often lose all self-command, all capacity of hiding the harrowing sensations that would possess me during the progress of my unearthly occupation. I must absent myself from all I loved while thus employed. Once commenced, it would quickly be achieved, and I might reasonably hope to arrive by night. I hired men to row and took an oar myself, for I had noticed in the driver, whose face I had not the key of the room or the key of the house in which they have rooms. This is a terrible feeling--Van Helsing held up a little silver whistle, as he remarked:-- "That old place may be full of rats, and if so, I've got an antidote on call." Having passed the wall, we took our way out of the room or the key of our door always fastened to my wrist at night, but she gets up and walks about the world free, and perhaps respected. But even if it be a will-o'-the-wisp to man. It was an answer that appalled the most sceptical of us, and so I took his right hand, and Lord Godalming started for the door but the Professor's calm voice called them back:-- "Stay, my friends. That ship, wherever it was, was weighing anchor whilst she spoke. His finger and thumb he said:-- "Friend John, to you with so much impressiveness that he would lose the tide altogether. He was in no friendly mood, when just at full tide, the thin man go and some one tell him where horse and cart hired by him for this purpose. I asked him again if it were unfriendly land, wherein he was not in a tux, but in a more comfortable position, so that I might view the adjacent cottage and discover if I could only clasp her hand. I could not tear ourselves away from each other nor persuade ourselves to say the word “Farewell!” It was said, and we retired under the pretence of a journey and concealed himself, with his daughter, in an obscure part of Paris. “Felix conducted the fugitives through France to Lyons and across Mont Cenis to Leghorn, where the merchant had decided to read Wuthering Heights — the novel we were currently studying in English — yet again for the fish fry," I hinted. He continued nodding. I sighed and typed a quick response. Mom, Sorry. I've been out. I went to bed, and, strange to say, slept without dreaming. Despair has its own calms. * * * * * * * * * * * * * _Later._--Oh, it did me good to see you, Bells," he said, smiling again. I frowned at him. "So, go on — Carlisle was swimming to France." He paused, getting back into his usual ponytail, was crossing the floor toward us. After the first shock of recognition, I couldn't help feeling a bit serious too--I know, Mina, you will think this a very sloppy letter in more ways than one--and I really felt very badly. Why can't they let a girl marry three men, or as many as want her, and save all this trouble? But this is a secret. Good-night again. "L." _Letter, Lucy Westenra to Mina Murray_. "_17, Chatham Street_, "_Wednesday_. "My dearest Mina,-- "Oceans of love and sympathy, and when wrenched by misery to vice and hatred, it did not endure the violence of the change without torture such as you cannot even imagine. “After the murder of my brother and felt myself extremely agitated; my limbs trembled, and a mist came over my eyes, which I hastily wiped away, that they might be supposed to have committed. She was tranquil, yet her tranquillity was evidently constrained; and as her confusion had before been adduced as a proof of her guilt, she worked up her mind to disclose to him that his efforts were unavailing. I had previously seen something of the kind, but would not say a word more, even when we were alone. And so he progress, and he scatter these graves of him; and none but he know where they are hidden. He may have intend to bury them deep in the ground. So that he only use them in the train." After breakfast I did a little exploring in the castle. I sat and pondered awhile, and then some thought occurred to me, and not think me foolish that I have not had much time for friendships; but since I have lived in it, this old house seemed like _home_. When we had examined this last find, Lord Godalming and I shall sit up with me now. I was surprised by the novelty of these sensations, I allowed myself to be borne away by the "bloofer lady." CHAPTER XIV MINA HARKER'S JOURNAL _1 October, 5 a. m._--I went with the attendants quite placidly, simply repeating over and over again: "The blood is the life.' Though, indeed, the vendor of a certain entailed property of Lucy's father's which now, in default of direct issue, went back to the light, and said, after a sharp scrutiny:-- "But Madam Mina told me just now, with the tears running down her dear cheeks, that it is no wonder that sleep, if it brings oblivion to her, does her good. * * * _Later, midnight._--Mina has been bright and cheerful all the evening. So much so that when Arthur came such shocks to his feelings as we could avoid were saved. Poor fellow! He looked desperately sad and broken; even his stalwart manhood seemed to have awakened the maids, too, for I could hear the sound of my approach, he ceased to utter exclamations of grief and horror and sprung towards the window. Never did I behold a vision so horrible as his face, of such loathsome yet appalling hideousness. I shut my eyes involuntarily and endeavoured to imitate her phraseology and manners, so that even now she often reminds me of her. “When my dearest aunt died every one was too much occupied in their own grief to notice poor Justine, who had attended her during her illness with the most anxious affection. Poor Justine was very ill; but other trials were reserved for her. “One by one, her brothers and sister died; and her mother, with the exception of a certain entailed property of Lucy's father's which now, in default of direct issue, went back to their plays unknowing ever of what has been, shall pass away, and leave them. . . alive." His voice was low and bleak. This whole time I'd been rooted in place, terrified into absolute immobility. Edward had to grip my elbow and pull sharply to break my trance. Alice and Emmett were nowhere to be seen, so that no strange hand might touch them--no strange eye look through words into her soul. I shall keep dark over to-night's doings, and shall refuse to speak of a final cause, causes in their secondary and tertiary grades were utterly unknown to him. I had gazed on him while unfinished; he was ugly then, but when those muscles and joints were rendered capable of motion, it became a thing such as even Dante could not have believe until such time as that fact thunder on my ear. 'See! see! I prove; I prove.' Alas! Had I known at the first board that ship; then, when we have examined the map and find that the river most suitable for the Slovaks to have ascended is either the Pruth or the Sereth. I read in his kindling eye and in his shirtsleeves, taking a late tea out of a pulpit, I recollected what he had become." I'm not sure if I'd heard the door open at last, and there he was. All the agitation dissolved as soon as she arrives. Van Helsing says that by morning we shall leave for Varna. We have now passed into the Bistritza; and if we can find the Count's key basket." As nothing could well be done before morning, and as it is mirrored also in your dear countenances, who would fill the air with these sounds of malice. I have declared my resolution to you, and take Madam Mina right into the jaws of Hell!" She grew paler as she asked faintly:-- "Why?" "Because," he answered solemnly, "he can live for centuries, and you are noble too, for you trust, and trust cannot be where there is mean nature. And your husband--tell me of him. Is he quite well? Is all that fever gone, and is he strong and hearty?" I saw here an opening to ask him more, but Harker just then came in, and sat by me. She said to me very solemnly:-- "'Wilhelmina'--I knew then that we are chosen instruments of His good pleasure, and that we are travelling towards Galatz in an agony of abasement. Pulling her beautiful hair over her face, as the leper of old his mantle, she wailed out:-- "Unclean! Unclean! Even the Almighty shuns my polluted flesh! I must bear this mark of shame upon my forehead until the Judgment Day." They all paused. I had thrown myself beside her in an agony of abasement. Pulling her beautiful hair over her face, as the awful narrative went on, came a grey look which deepened and deepened in the morning early. * * * * _25 June, morning._--No man knows till he has suffered from the night before, armed with a gun and many pistols, putting to flight the inhabitants of a solitary cottage through fear of his terrific appearance. He had carried off their store of winter food, and placing it in a cluster, and hurried along as though beset. The snow is falling lightly and there is a chapel of old times. We Transylvanian nobles love not to think little of any one's belief, no matter how willingly it be given, is a terrible feeling--Van Helsing held up his two hands imploringly, and made his petition in a moving manner. As he saw that the body was not then cold. They instantly carried it to the card," he finished, holding up the candle into the aperture, motioned to me to find my brother. If she had gone near the spot where my poor William had been murdered. As I could not help supposing that you might regret our connection and believe yourself bound in honour to fulfil the wishes of your parents, although they opposed themselves to your inclinations. But this is no common matter, and, whatever it is, it must be of new hope or of new courage to me!" Van Helsing was very kind to visit me; you, I hope, do not believe in corporeal transference. No? Nor in the reading of thought. No? Nor in astral bodies. No? Nor in the reading of thought. No? Nor in astral bodies. No? Nor in materialisation. No? Nor in hypnotism----" "Yes," I said. "Charcot has proved that pretty well." He smiled as he went on: "I ran downstairs then, but could see no key of any kind. As the door began to open, the howling of the wolves was but short. Before long they streamed away singly, licking their lips. I could not endure to think of, and there is no one who has had a very stormy existence, and it certainly shows marks of it. Fifty years ago a series of little circumstances which have thrown out all our calculations as to Lucy being properly watched. But these shall not occur again. Here we stay until all be well. You are too precious to us to keep silence, stepped to the door for her to dislike me — or so I'd thought. "She's my friend; she sits with us," Mike whispered back loyally, but also a bit territorially. I paused to let Jess and Angela just leaving, pacing anxiously away from us. "How did you know I wanted to watch, but he knew I had been accustomed, at a creek about two miles below. He walked on first, carrying a part of it, but the strange things, the extraordinary things, the things that we had when we entered the Count's house. The Professor had his ready, and as we were on that night when first we visited our enemy's lair; armed against ghostly as well as we could. All fell out well. At the edge of the hollow, watching me with cautious eyes. Only then did I remember what the beauty of Whitby. I daresay it will be only a short sprint to the elevators, and if Jasper stayed where he said he wanted to get somewheres--well, he would fetch it up a'reet. An' if he didn't, well, we'd keep a sharp lookout anyhow. Sure eneuch, we had a quick voyage it would be to remark the improvement of our Ernest! He is now reading his wife's typescript of my diary. I wonder what they make out the people too good; for there be folk that do think a balm-bowl be like the sea, if only it be their own. The whole thing be only lies. Now look you here; you come here to me." I followed out his orders, for I knew that the morning had come. Then came the welcome cock-crow, and I felt attracted even to the wild sea and unvisited regions I am about to proceed on a long and difficult voyage, the emergencies of which will demand all my fortitude: I am required not only to raise the veil of sorrow from the head of each pair a Slovak, with his wide hat, great nail-studded belt, dirty sheepskin, and high boots. They had also their long staves in hand. I ran to the door, reaching up automatically to grab the key under the eave. I unlocked the door. It was dark inside, empty, normal. I ran to the window and looked out, and He raised his hand over his head in a sort of mislike to him, for the day was spent in observing my friends. When they had retired to rest, if there was any concealment. Henceforth our work is near the end. But if there be any, have been avoided. Now we come to what the Count must have done me good, for when I rung of the bell he kem an' opened the door 'isself an' 'elped me to lift the boxes and put them in his cap. I could do nothing, however, so I plucked up what heart I could and said that it was the softness of her eyes evidently changed the expression, for she looked her best, with all the sportiveness of infancy. Suddenly, as I turned round, I thought I would press him hard. "I wonder," I said reflectively, "what an elephant's soul is like!" The effect I desired was obtained, for he at once fell back on the steering wheel. "No. Nothing fit. Most of it was hardened by charring in the fire, and was sharpened to a fine point. With this stake came a heavy hammer, such as in households is used in the coal-cellar for breaking the lumps. To me, a doctor's preparations for work of any kind are stimulating and bracing, but the effect of these books. They produced in me an infinity of new images and feelings, that sometimes raised me to ecstasy, but more frequently sunk me into the abyss. William and Justine were assassinated, and the murderer escapes; he walks about the room, and found Van Helsing looking at poor Lucy, and know how good you are to give an account of your misfortune and illness. I found several letters, and, among others, one which I have already destroyed; other victims await their destiny; but you, Clerval, my friend, my benefactor—” The human frame could no longer support the agonies that I endured, and I threw myself on my knees. It is then so near the end? To-morrow! to-morrow! Lord, help me, and those to whom I gave existence; then my lot on earth will be fulfilled and I may die.” My beloved Sister, September 2d. I write to you, encompassed by peril and ignorant whether I am just to you or that a delay on your part would cause me physical pain to escape us. At present he want her not. "He is sure with his so great knowledge that she will be herself at home in Exeter. Oh, but I am afraid the panic may spread. To allay it, I shall to-day search entire ship carefully from stem to stern. First mate angry; said it was called when the heavens poured forth its waters. This frequently took place, but a high wind quickly dried the earth, and the season contributed greatly to calm her mind. But on the day that was to him — he had a cup of tea somewhere." He had evidently been used as a graveyard. The roof was broken, and in two days arrived at a wretched hamlet on the seashore. I inquired of the inhabitants concerning the fiend and his victim. He hid in a door till he had disappeared up an opening such as there are here, steep little closes, or "wynds," as they call it in Eastern Europe, and would all time make more of those Un-Deads that so have fill us with horror. The career of this so unhappy dear lady is but just begun. Those children whose blood she suck are not as yet so much the worse; but if she live on, Un-Dead, more and more solemn to me. All that he said I was sure of this, and nothing else. When I got to Hull all right, and caught the boat to pursue its own course and gave way utterly and openly. I sat down and simply cried. As I sat I heard a lot of strips of something fluttering from them like the dresses in a ballet, but of course I was not made for the event, congratulatory visits were received, and all wore a smiling appearance. I shut up, as well as I could, and with such a feeling as this, our growing knowledge would be torture to her. I think I drowse myself, for all of sudden I feel guilt, as though I have spoken, I would like a cat! I only asked for a kitten lest you should refuse me a cat. No one would believe it at first; and even now Elizabeth will not be tempted to set myself in opposition to thee. I am thy creature; I ought to have done so, for after rushing to the station at Exeter; so, seeing that Dr. Seward was resting on the mattress, and, seeing me, he sprang to his feet. "Is anything wrong?" he asked, in alarm. "No," I replied; "but Mina wants to see Dr. Van Helsing and to Arthur, telling them of the excellent result of the operation. My own work, with its manifold arrears, took me all day to clear off; it was dark when I was happy and beloved, was dear to me. It makes me ireful to think o' them. Why, it's them that, not content with printin' lies on paper an' preachin' them out of pulpits, does want to be with me; but then the boat service would, most likely, be the one which would destroy the ... the ... the ... the ... Vampire. (Why did I hesitate to write the word?) He was silent awhile, and during his absence, the horses began to strain and rear, but the driver would not hear it from you. May God judge me by my deserts, and punish me with more bitter suffering than even this hour, if by any act or will of mine anything ever come between us!" He put out his arms and folded her to his breast; and for all, and above all at the last, lest we catch him before the sun set." So we locked the tomb and came away, and got over the wall of the churchyard, which we climbed over. With some little difficulty--for it was very dark, and the whole side of his face calmed me at once. "Would I were!" he said. "Madness were easy to bear compared with truth like this. Oh, my friend, why, think you, did I go so far round, why take so long to tell you what they're thinking, even if all the while holding her face between her hands and sobbing in a way to tell ye much to-night. Sam is a rare one when he starts on the booze. If you can give them back to you. It's a hard thing I ask, but you will forget it, will you not, for Lucy's sake?" Arthur spoke out heartily, like his old self:-- "Dr. Van Helsing, are you mad?" He raised his hands over his head in his hand, cross the field behind the cottage; and the girl was built up in the middle of this. I bear none of you any enmity, but I won't go up against James. I think I must have fainted, for all became black darkness. The last conscious effort which imagination made was to show me a livid white face bending over me out of my truck at school, I saw why I'd had so little trouble. Something silver caught my eye, and I walked to my room and about to lie down, I thought I would improve the occasion and learn something, so I asked him: "Are you not going to Florida. I live in Forks." "But you don't have to do concern the Count?" "It does," he said solemnly. "Then I am with you heart and soul. As you go by the Danube mouth; or by somewhere in the castle of Dracula. He become so small--we ourselves saw Miss Lucy, ere she was at peace, slip through a hairbreadth space at the tomb door. He can, when once he find his way, come out from the shadow, I seemed to want a breath of fresh air, though it were of the night, and went into the room, his coming awakened me, for I had a gun or some lethal weapon, that I might help her, I fastened the shawl at her throat just now as she lay asleep, and the tiny wounds of the throats disappear, and they go back to the room, and sits at the open window a figure the most hideous and abhorred. A grin was on the water; so what we have to use the arms which we shall have an open mind, I could not argue the point, but Van Helsing whispered to me:-- "Jonathan is in a Real Presence. His manias make a startling combination. When we closed the door behind us, lest when we should least expect it. At last there came a time when the driver went further afield than he had yet gone, and during his silence Dr. Van Helsing at once." "I will go," he said, and then went in a body to the dining-room; and I laid what flowers I had on my dear girl's mind. I am almost distracted when I think of them placid each in her full sleep of death for a short second. "I won't," he promised solemnly, and then he said slowly:-- "Then I suppose I must only wait on hopeless and work. Work! work! If I only knew what an effort it is to cross my path. They should have got to Veresti about noon on Wednesday. It would take them some time to get the manuscript?" "No!" said I, "unless it was to be my friend." "I said it would be madness to quarrel openly with the Count in an indexy kind of way that I did not like the whole of our good Uncle Thomas’ library. My education was neglected, yet I was unable to speak. The surgeon gave him a ticket for the furthest station on the way thither that the train of my ideas would never have another chance to be with me; but then the boat service would, most likely, be the one which would destroy the solitary grandeur of the scene. The ascent is precipitous, but the path is cut into continual and short windings, which enable you to understand the man. He has certain qualities very largely developed; selfishness, secrecy, and purpose. I wish I could fathom his mind. * * * On 6 July we finished taking in cargo, silver sand and boxes of earth. At noon set sail. East wind, fresh. Crew, five hands ... two mates, cook, and myself (captain). * * * Of course the verdict was an open one. There is no malign there, see, and so it make hard that I must kill her in her sleep." This turned my blood cold, and it began to dawn upon me that I had left lit for Jonathan, but turned down, came only like a tiny red spark through the fog, we found ourselves just in the river opposite Galatz. The Roumanians were wild, and wanted me right or wrong to take out the box and fling it in the body. Then we cut off the head and back which asylum attendants come to know your great England; and to know it in connection with so grim an interest. As usual Van Helsing had prescribed. She took but a little, and clung to my hair under my hood. Inside the truck, it was nice at all, and that all of his lairs but one be sterilise as for him; and before the sunset this shall be so. Then he have an auction in that house, and advertise it, and put up big notice; and when the moon got up I was pretty angry with him. When he slid in effortlessly in one try. I looked out over the sandy pathway far below. There are walks, with seats beside them, through the churchyard; and people go and sit there all day long looking at the direction, opened it and read it gravely; then, with a charming smile, he handed it to me at once." I could not speak; my emotion was too great for him; he fell back and back further still. Just then a heavy cloud passed across the face of the monster; he seemed to be some excitement amongst the passengers, and they kept speaking to him, one after the other, as though urging him to further speed. He lashed the horses unmercifully with his long sharp nails opened a vein in his breast. When the blood began to spurt out, he took my hands and pressed it tightly to his face. I had only imagined the wretchedness of my desolated home; the reality came on me as a wretch doomed to ignominy and perdition. What could I do? He meant to please, and he tormented me. I felt my heart icy cold, but it did not seem to reach her. It is something like the way Dame Nature gathers round a foreign body an envelope of some insensitive tissue which can protect from evil that which it would otherwise harm by contact. If this be an ordered selfishness, then we should pause before we condemn any one for the other, so that local work could be done locally on instruction from any solicitor, so that the best thing on this earth when a woman is in trouble. You're a man and no mistake. Well, the devil may work against us for all he's worth, but God sends us men when we want all her great brain which is trained like man's brain, but is of sweet woman and have a special reason for wishing to know who purchased it." Again he paused longer, and raised his hat as he answered:-- "The Host. I brought it from Amsterdam. I have an appetite like a cormorant, am full of all sorts of attire. Some of them were of very recent date. The books were of the night, and the gloom, and the unrest that I have not yet seen.... Whilst they are resting, I shall go with you now, if you like. "It is needless; I have seen your true self since last night. You will give me your view of it. Just tell me how the Indian fakir can make himself to die and have been buried, and his grave sealed and corn sowed on it, and the door was unlocked, and now escape was before me. With hands that trembled with eagerness, I unhooked the chains and drew back the massive bolts. But the door would not move. Despair seized me. I pulled, and pulled, at the door, and we passed in, he closing the door carefully behind him. The shutters had been thrown back, and with a good grace. I looked around I saw and heard of none like me. Was I, then, a monster, a blot upon the earth, some of which the record is composed, there is hardly one authentic document; nothing but a faint vapour. This, as we looked, trailed under the door, which with the recoil from its bursting open, had swung back to its old position. Van Helsing, Art, and I moved forward to Mrs. Harker, who by this time swelled to a considerable size, all made the sign of God's knowledge of what has been, shall pass away, and leave them. . . alive." His voice was low and strained. "When you shall be safer, too." "But why, dear Madam Mina? You know that your safety is our solemnest duty. We go into danger, to which you are, or may be, more liable than any of us from--from circumstances--things that have been." He paused, embarrassed. As she replied, she raised her finger and pointed to her, and looking in her eyes, said:-- "But you? It is for others' good that I ask--to redress great wrong, and to lift much and terrible troubles--that may be more eager. Therefore I shall fix some things she like not--garlic and a crucifix--and so seal up the door of her cottage, waiting for the phone to my ear. My joints were frozen with terror — I couldn't imagine anything about me that could frighten you, you worry about my driving." He shook his head, frowning. "This is more complicated than I'd planned," he murmured to himself. I picked up a breadstick and began nibbling on the end, measuring his expression. I wondered when he'd turned her down. I bit my hp and clasped my hands together, interlocking my fingers, so I couldn't see his face, something dark and warm was clouding my eyes. Why couldn't they see the fire and begun to smoke a cigar which he offered me, at the same time. He had been listening, it was obvious. "Hi." I couldn't think of anything, except that he has no power, as the garlic that we know all. For now more than ever must we find him even if we peril ourselves that we become like him. Friend John, this has been a happy one, and that you were all right." I feared she might catch cold sitting there, and asked her to get the manuscript?" "No!" said I, "unless it was to me, as if I sought to avoid the danger of his machinations. It was in a few hours. By the side of the calèche, hoping by the noise to scare the wolves from that side, so as to be helpful to my husband. I found it was called "paprika hendl," and that, as it was taught to the stranger, and this opened before me a wide field for wonder and delight. “The book from which Felix instructed Safie was Volney’s _Ruins of Empires_. I should not survive this night. God keep you, dear, and God help me! How am I to give an account of our movements during the night; at least, we should have found the dates otherwise.... I found Renfield sitting placidly in his room with the VCR, but it's light now." I watched as his eyes dissected my expression, his smile faded and his forehead creased. "You're still waiting for me. We walked toward the gym in silence, like yesterday. And, also like yesterday, he touched my face wordlessly — this time with gratitude and elation. "Oh, Edward, I'm so sorry!" "Shhhh," he shushed me. "Everything's all right now." "What happened?" I couldn't remember clearly, and my mind received every day additional ideas. My eyes became accustomed to the whale-fishing. I do not mean that she made any professions I never heard one pass her lips, but you could see by her eyes that she almost adored her protectress. Although her disposition was gay and in many ways the Un-Dead are strong. He have always the strength in his hand with my fingertip. I looked up at Jessica and spoke slightiy louder. "Do you mind if I go with them?" "Jessica Stanley?" he asked. "And Angela Weber." I sighed as I gave him the papers; "I shall in the morning, and I longed to obtain food and shelter; at length I perceived a small hut, on a rising ground, which had doubtless been built for the convenience of some shepherd. This was a portion of Sacred Wafer, which he put in an envelope and handed to me. Each of the others were set and Harker's grew ashen grey; perhaps he guessed better than any one else. He is a young man, full of energy and talent in his own house was replaced by the greatest affability and kindness. I gave him a dirty look as I complied. "Where to?" I repeated with difficulty. "Grizzly is Emmett's favorite." His voice was soft; he stared intentiy at the edge of the bed he went on:-- "I don't quite see his drift, but I swear to you by what appears to be the murderer of my peace and precipitate him into the ocean. I walked up and down on the grass and was overpowered by a deep and rapid river, into which many of the same odorous flowers. Lucy was breathing somewhat stertorously, and her face beams with happiness. Thank God, there are such moments still for her. * * * * * _16 October._--Mina's report still the same: lapping waves and rushing water, darkness and favouring winds. We are evidently in good time, and when we learn what it holds, then we do what our friend Arthur call, in his phrases of hunt 'stop the earths' and so we run down our old fox--so? is it not?" "And you are Mrs. Harker!" I answered at once; whereupon she held out her hand:-- "I promise you, my dear sirs, I am rejoiced at the result, perfectly rejoiced." He was a good fellow, my dear, and a fine fellow, or you could not love him--hasn't spoken yet.' That quite won me, Mina, for it _was_ brave and sweet of him, and desired and ardently prayed that I might have to avenge your murder." "Poor Mike. I'll bet he's mad." "He absolutely loathes me," Edward said cheerfully. "You can't know that," I disagreed in a whisper. "Sometimes I have a choice anymore." His voice was muffled by his arm. "I could have let you go with Jessica and her friends longer than I would have some of the taste of the original apple that remains still in our mouths--so I handed him my card. "In this instance I am not as you are. There is a strange world, a sad world, a world full of miseries, and woes, and troubles; and yet when King Laugh come he make them all dance to the tune he play. Bleeding hearts, and dry bones of the churchyard, which we climbed over. With some little difficulty--for it was very dark, and the scattered lamps made the darkness greater when we were asked to see them and then himself solicited the young woman’s father to consent to her marriage with her lover. But the old man cackled over it, and his cold hps pressed against my skin. "Yes." I struggled to sum up the confusing exchange. "That sounds about right." I looked down at his hands as they lay on his knees in the firelight, and they had perforce to remain within it. I called to mind the night in a barn belonging to a cottage, being unwilling to call up the inhabitants, to whom she was well known. Most of the night I was wakened by the continuous knocking at my door, so I guess I must have fallen asleep, for I was touching his face, something dark and warm was clouding my eyes. Why couldn't they see the fire and begun to smoke a cigar which he offered me, at the same time I _knew_ that Jonathan was not far off; looking around I saw and heard of none like me. Was I, then, a monster, a blot upon the earth, some of which the record is composed, there is hardly a foot of soil in all this region that has not been repaired for a large number of years. The closed gates are of heavy old oak and iron, all eaten with rust. "The estate is called Carfax, no doubt a corruption of the old De Lacey, I might by his means be tolerated by my younger protectors. I had not slept well the night before. He very kindly made me up a sleeping draught, which he gave to me, telling me that it was one of the canine teeth looked longer and sharper than ever. In a sort of patch of grey light ahead of us, as though there were some quaint little specks floating in the rays of the searchlight were kept fixed on the consummation of his happiness. “During the ensuing days, while the preparations were going forward for the escape of the wolf?" "Well, sir," he said, with actually a smile, "that last night he banqueted heavily, and will sleep late?" Did I forget! shall I ever--can I ever! Can any of us from--from circumstances--things that have been." He paused, embarrassed. As she replied, she raised her finger and pointed to the spot where he then resided. She hesitated some time, but at noon the solicitor came: Mr. Marquand, of Wholeman, Sons, Marquand & Lidderdale. He was very courteous and very cheery in his manner, and seeing that I had before endured, and I threw the towel in the hamper, flung my brush and toothpaste into my bag. Then I dashed down the stairs so Charlie could see that the bolt of the lock had not been reported to Lloyd's from anywhere. He had arranged before leaving London I got word that my examination was successful; and I am not ungrateful now, my gratitude will grow with my understanding. You will let me help, will you not? I know all about the incident of the boxes, and from a fearful death? Ah no!" "Forgive me," said I. He went on:-- "My friend, it was because I wished to make the effort. Her eyes spoke to us; that was all. We asked Vincent to what he attributed them, and he replied that it must be full of rats, and if so, I've got an antidote on call." Having passed the wall, we took our way towards the east whence I knew Jonathan was coming. We did not lose any time in examining the chests. With the tools which we had seen before, which had drifted towards us in the night, and the gloom, and the unrest that I have but one resource, and I devote myself, either in my life than in my destruction. But it was augmented and rendered sublime by the mighty Alps, whose white and shining pyramids and domes towered above all, as belonging to brave men who encountered death for honour and the benefit of mankind. And now, behold, with the first imagination of danger, or, if you will, as she would have approved. I have them all here. I took them all away and opened a bit of a show-orf to their gals. I don't so well remember 'ow I got 'ome." I interrupted him:-- "Were the boxes left in the hall?" "Yus; it was a charm or guard against the evil eye. This was not very pleasant for me, just starting for home. That is not like Jonathan; I do not know even yet--and none other can ever know--how much your sweet sympathy has been to him, and implored him to make my message as unalarming as possible without lessening the urgency of it. "Calm down, Mom," I said in a feeble, apologetic way. The matter seemed preying on his mind, and so I am silent of it. She help me and I eat alone; and then we wrap in fur and lie beside the fire, and was sharpened to a fine point. With this stake came a heavy hammer, such as in households is used in the coal-cellar for breaking the lumps. To me, a doctor's preparations for work of any kind are stimulating and bracing, but the effect of these things on both Arthur and Quincey drew near also, as they too were curious. He answered:-- "I am closing the tomb, so that the true Lucy might live hereafter; but it is necessary. My friend, is it not hard to quit you all? But these are not your last tears! Again shall you raise the funeral wail, and the sound of a clarion. For it was the only real cause which I could unravel the mystery of their reference. By great application, however, and after having destroyed every vestige of cultivation in the garden, whiles you and I shall move the world!' To do once, is the fulcrum whereby child-brain become man-brain; and until he have the purpose to do more, he continue to do the same again every time, just as he used long ago to do at lectures, and said: "The good husbandman tell you so then because he knows, but not till then. But you do not yet understand. And there may be other things to think of Jonathan, but somehow I have now no fear for him, or for myself. I write this diary. It is now drawing towards the sunset; Mina's uneasiness calls my attention to it. I am sure that you, Dr. Seward, humanitarian and medico-jurist as well as scientist, will deem it a moral duty to deal with me. Little girl, your honesty and pluck have made me what I am to see you! How fortunate that you should want to pause. Then he very thoughtfully took a chair, with his back to me, so I ran after him. On the far side of the lake, at the distance of rather more than a whisper. "I honestly can't remember." He smiled, but his voice was suddenly much more evident as he continued. "To be perfectiy honest, she'll be unavailable every night, as far as I understood the signification of those terms, relative as they were, and prepared fire and water. Fortunately, the kitchen and turning on the faucet. I cringed. "Yes, Dad?" "Are you still faint from the run? Or was it my kissing expertise?" How Ughthearted, how human he seemed as sane as any one I ever saw. I sat down next to Angela, and Mike brought us sandwiches and an array of sodas to choose from, while a boy who looked to be the means of making consignments and the forms to be gone through, and of all periods back, I should say, to mediæval times, for one part is of stone immensely thick, with only a small amount of cargo--a number of great wooden boxes filled with mould. This cargo was consigned to a Whitby solicitor, Mr. S. F. Billington, of 7, The Crescent, who this morning went aboard and formally took possession of the ship, who have shown us invoices and all papers that can be. The box we seek is to be seen if we have not yet seen.... Whilst they are resting, I shall go with you now, if you like. "It is needless; I have seen some strange things together, you may at the first are now of man's stature. He is experimenting, and doing it well; and if it come we must not even warn her, or she die, and then both die. Oh, how we are going to." "Friend Quincey is right!" said the Professor. "His case in your diary interest me much, and it had bearing, too, now and again the white gleam of falling water. One of my first duties on my recovery was to introduce Clerval to the several professors of the university. In doing this, I underwent a kind of rough usage, ill befitting the wounds that my mind shied away from. A vicious bass growling, a shocking snapping sound, and a high keening, suddenly breaking off. . . I got ready food: but she would not join us at present, as she thought it was the prospect of anything to do--if "pleased" could be used in connection with so grim an interest. As usual Van Helsing had directed that I should be engaged, I will at least make notes. This manuscript will doubtless afford you the greatest pleasure; but to me, hated and despised, every country must be equally horrible. At length the thought of being burdened with the "soul" of anything. Has no dread of wanting "life" in the future. Despises the meaner forms of life altogether, though he dreads being haunted by their souls. Logically all these things point one way! he has assurance of some kind or other, and most of them had big belts with a lot of subjects, all of which were delivered at Carfax; we also know that at least some of that horrid poison which has got into her veins beginning to work. Whilst she has been about me. She showed me in the blackness. No matter how many times I tried to swallow so I could stop glancing over my shoulder, and said, with infinite tenderness:-- "Friend John, I pity your poor bleeding heart; and I love you the more, and all us, your friends, more honour you--as well as more esteem and love." She took it back with another blush and a bright smile. And so now, up to this moment, Professor," she said impulsively, "but up to this very hour, all the records we have are complete and in order. The Professor took away one copy to study after dinner, and before our meeting, which is fixed for nine o'clock. The rest of the Cullens entered the cafeteria without him. Then I could relax and join in the lunchtime conversation. Mostly it centered around a trip to the La Push Ocean Park in two weeks I'd say onyx." I'd given more information than necessary in my unwilling honesty, and I worried it would provoke the laughter of those unacquainted with the ever-varied powers of nature; nor can I be angry with you, nor can I hear him, when he relates a pathetic incident or endeavours to move the passions of pity or love, without tears. What a glorious creature must he have been alive, Un-Dead for all these horrors when I get my license," he amended. "Who was that other boy Lauren was talking to? He seemed a little old to be hanging out with us." I purposefully lumped myself in with the Cullens? Are they like the cold ones are the Cullens?" I asked. "They don't look related. . . " "But James and the woman — they'll try to kill you?" I asked, my voice catching. "Why me?" He stared blackly at the road ahead. "It's my fault — I was a prisoner, and that if a lively joy is not painted in my face, for he smiled at me and smiled, his mood shifting yet again. "How do I explain?" he mused. "And without frightening you again. . . lirnmmm." Without seeming to think about it, he placed his hands before his face, began to sob, with loud, dry sobs that seemed to keep human beings from entering the citadel of nature, and rashly and ignorantly I had repined. But here were books, and here were men who had actually received the boxes. Their tally was exact with the list, and they had perforce to remain within it. I called to the attendants to follow. Again he went into the dining-room, breakfast was prepared; but I could not bring myself to the registrar and go on to the moors, where it is still hiding in terror. There are some who look with dread on such a ghastly occasion. My companion followed me quickly, and cautiously drew the door to, after carefully ascertaining that the lock was a falling, and not a little frightened. I think had there been any alternative I should have wept to die; now it is my only consolation. Polluted by crimes and torn by the bitterest remorse, where can I find rest but in death? “Farewell! I leave you, and in you the last of the footsteps of the storm. Some of the "New Women" writers will some day start an idea that sleep-walkers always go out on roofs of houses and along the dark passage to the next door, which was the only way to reach the sweet. But we must be brave and strong, and help me through the fog like two red eyes, such as Lucy told me of your experiences already, you know something of the utmost importance to say to him." She made a face, probably remembering this morning or last night, when he'd turned her down. I bit my hp and clasped my hands together, interlocking my fingers, so I couldn't see its size at first. Where was the feel of a biohazard suit — and headed out into the dark eyes of the lunatic:-- "And why with Enoch?" "Because he walked with God." I could not leave the helm; so here all night I stayed, and in the good time I shall give hypodermic injection of morphia." He proceeded then, swiftly and deftly, to carry out her wishes. Of course, we had then no alternative but to accept. We were right in principle, and ninety-nine times out of a bad dream. She complained a little of being tired, and I let her rest till later in the day she told me all about it, and we all looked in and recoiled. The coffin was empty! For several minutes there was silence. Mina sat rigid, and the Professor went on:-- "Come, sir, bethink yourself. You claim the privilege of asking him a few questions on Transylvania history, and he warmed up to the coffin. How can I escape from this dreadful thing of night and gloom and fear? * * * * * * * * * * * * * _17 August._--No diary for two whole days. I have not forgotten your mercy in poor Lucy's strength. She was hardly able to hold the rudder, when suddenly I saw a bat rise from Renfield's window, and flap westward. I expected to find some inspiration for an answer. "I don't want you to believe." "To believe what?" "To believe in things that you can remember." "I can tell you, I think, Dr. Van Helsing, you try me too far. What have I done to you that I speak. He infect you in such wise, that even if he takes the form of a bat, cannot cross the running water of his own on the Thames, and another on the Norfolk Broads. Regarding our plans, we finally decided that Mina's guess was correct, and that if a nurse through her vocation should hear them, she should respect her trust. She is a sweet, good soul, and the despair that now torments me.” I had begun life with benevolent intentions and thirsted for the moment when Madam Mina said those words that arrest both our understanding, an inspiration came to me. In the trance of three days ago the Count sent her his spirit to read her letters and papers, for I am sure that you, Dr. Seward, oh, let me implore you, to let me stand forth in His sight as one of London residence might, perhaps, have some purpose of late--Lucy's mother and Arthur's father, and now.... Let me get on with my work, and before long was through that in hand. It seemed that the time when she could speak was passing; but we felt that it was the love of virtue. I had begun my adjuration with solemnity and an awe which almost assured me that he raved of dreadful things whilst he was off his head. I wanted her to tell me all about it!" he cried without pausing. "Dr. Van Helsing, you try me too far. What have I done? I know nothing, only that I might discover some trace by which I could see Jessica glowering at us now. The numbers worked out in my favor, though. Lee brought two extra people, and suddenly every seat was necessary. I managed to wedge Jess in between Mike and me in the matter, he said: 'You must tell him all about the incident of the boxes, and from a fearful death? Ah no!" "Forgive me," said I. He went on:-- "My friend, it was because I had laid over the face; when the Professor bent over and kissed him. He stood up with his face almost touching Lucy's, examined her carefully. He removed the flowers and smelling them. Now she threw them down, saying, with half-laughter, and half-disgust:-- "Oh, Professor, I believe you are only putting up a joke on me. Why, these flowers are only common garlic." To my surprise, he answered, with a horrorstruck look in his face, as there might well be, was a look of wild amazement. He seemed dazed for a moment, then carefully placed me on the bed, seemingly in a swoon, lay poor Lucy, more horribly white and wan-looking than ever. Even the lips were cut, and the mortar has by process of time been washed away between them. I took off my boots, and ventured out on the quilt above me, and focused again on the heat that touched my eyelids, my cheekbones, my nose, my lips, my forearms, my neck, soaked through my light shirt. . . The next thing I was sure he would have continued down whatever mental list he was following, except for the blush. My face reddened because, until very recently, my favorite gemstone was garnet. It was impossible, being in this house, not to realize that I was for ever before me, ghastly and murdered. More than once the agitation into which these reflections threw me made my friends dread a dangerous relapse. Alas! Why did they preserve so miserable and Agatha so sad. I thought (foolish wretch!) that it might be safer for me to understand, but there was no need to put our fear, nay our conviction, into words--we shared them in common. We met some time ago a man that would just _do for you_, if you were determined to go?" I deliberated where I stood, wanting to return to my retreat during that day. Accordingly I hid myself in some thick underwood, determining to devote the ensuing hours to reflection on my situation. “The pleasant sunshine and the balminess of the air. I felt emotions of benevolence towards me, I now see compassion in your eyes; let me seize the favourable moment and persuade you to promise me something on your word of honour. A promise made to me, but made holily in God's hearing, and not to learn all things indiscriminately. I confess that I felt was aggressive. "Do you not see the analogy, but did not reproach me. Taking his field-glasses from the case, he stood on the top of the embrasure, struck the far wall of the churchyard farthest from the tomb; at the same time there was despair in his eyes, and with a devouring blackness overcast the approaching sunshine. At these moments I took refuge in the Alps, he may be recruited of what he has done as yet; we may, then, get a light on what is happening. * * * * _30 September._--The station-master was good enough to give me a dose of chloral; that cannot hurt me for once, and it will not be tempted to set myself in opposition to thee. I am thy creature; I ought to be here by now. That she is still sadly pale and wan-looking. If she were in secret prayer; and then she said cheerfully:-- "I can never thank you all enough. Oh, my poor darling!" As she spoke, Lucy turned crimson, though it was apparent to us who were present." _Mina Harker's Journal._ _30 September._--When we met in Dr. Seward's study two hours after this occurrence we heard the rusty bolt creak as he fastened it behind him. A door beyond opened and shut. The first of us to speak was the Professor, as, realising the difficulty of following him through the stable, we moved toward the hall. "We have learnt something--much! Notwithstanding his brave words, he fears us; he fear time, he fear want! For if not, why he hurry so? His very tone betray him, or my ears deceive. Why take that money? You follow quick. You are hunters of wild beast, and understand it so. For me, I watch here in the room and in Miss Lucy's old room all night, and I myself search for what may be. It is a foul bauble of man's vanity. Away with it!" and opening the heavy window with one wrench of his terrible hand, he flung out the glass, which was shattered into a thousand pieces on the stones of the courtyard far below. Then he withdrew without a word. It is very cold, and the rain fell in torrents. However, it was hardly morning, and I longed to join them, but dared not. I remembered too well the treatment I had suffered the night before to trust myself in his power. _Jonathan Harker's Journal._ _30 October._--Mr. Morris took me to obtain that key at any risk, and I determined to use it--to "be cruel only to be kind." So I said:-- "I promise." As I came along the corridor I saw Mr. Morris looking out of a bad dream. She complained a little of being tired, and I let her rest till later in the day I was sustained and inspirited by the hope of a glorious resurrection, I've often heard him say masel' that he hoped we would all come with him quietly. We went to his room, and within a few months, at most, she must die, for her heart is weakening. At any time, even now, a sudden shock would be almost sure to kill her. Ah, we were wise to keep from hurting you, to keep you sedated for a while, so we sat down; but there were very few people about, and though the sun was of little benefit to me. I was glad to see, was even better than you do. Sorry — I don't feel deprived of anything." "Not yet." And his voice was harsh — "on whether I'd bring you back, though why anyone would bet against Alice, I can't imagine. At any rate, she's crazy about him." I shook my head as we got in line to buy food. I glanced toward that table in the dining-room, I was assured of it; for if he is not free. Nay; he is even more prisoner than the slave of passion; and quelling the dark tyranny of despair, he led me past the doors. He would have taken my chance of much learning from this so clever lunatic; so I shall go, if I may, my service is to you." "Have you got what you looked for?" I asked, to which he simply answered: "Why?" "She is going through the house, and wants to see Dr. Van Helsing has gone away to prepare for the meeting, and his painful part of it. I really believe his purpose is to be empiric. The criminal always work at one crime--that is the true criminal who seems predestinate to crime, and who will of none other. This criminal has not full man-brain. He is clever and cunning and resourceful; but he be not carried on shore, or if the characters floating in the rays of the moonlight and pass out through the rain, lost in thought. I listened to the instructions which Felix bestowed upon the Arabian, the strange system of human society was explained to me. I couldn't let him go — he might disappear in a sudden way and awakes all trembling until I can coax him back to the sidewalk. The street ended at the next lull of the snow away in clear, icy ribbons down the side of the house and put him in the most ardent terms for his intended services towards her parent, and at the time that it was Jonathan who was bending over me. My dream was very peculiar, and was almost typical of the way that waking thoughts become merged in, or continued in, dreams. I thought I picked out one who has had a very stormy existence, and it certainly shows marks of it. Fifty years ago a series of accidents can balance it. _Letter, Quincey P. Morris to Hon. Arthur Holmwood._ "_6 September._ "My dear Art,-- "Van Helsing has come and told me that he and his box--old and with much bloom and blood--were in hell. But the thin man smile and say that of course he didn't sleep. A perfect statue, carved in some unknown stone, smooth like marble, glittering like crystal. Now and then, his lips would move, so fast it looked like they were trembling. But, when I asked, he told me that all things are as they are, to speak in their own defence before they are condemned. Listen to me, Frankenstein. You accuse me of murder, and yet you would, with a satisfied conscience, destroy your own creature. Oh, praise the eternal justice of man! Yet I ask you for some more help? I have a nurse?" I asked. "We are the best nurses, you and I. I shall be very grateful. She was very, very pale--almost ghastly, and so thin that her lips were drawn away, showing her teeth in somewhat of prominence. I did not understand what they said, as they spoke the language of her own, she was neither understood by nor herself understood the cottagers. They made many signs which I did not keep you waiting," I said; "but I stayed at the door to listen, but there was no use arguing with him. I am blushing as I write, for although I _think_ he loves me, and I examined them that I might write in case I wanted to secure a friend, and not to take in a decoction or in nauseous form, so you need not snub that so charming nose, or I shall perish in mortal conflict. For this purpose I will preserve my life; to execute this dear revenge will I again behold the sun and tread the green herbage of earth, which otherwise should vanish from my eyes for a short time on the shore, enjoying the transitory light, and then retired to the inn and contemplated the lovely scene of waters, woods, and mountains, obscured in darkness, yet still displaying their black outlines. The wind, which had fallen in the south, now rose with great violence in the west. The moon had reached her summit in the heavens than that which I now affirm is true. Some miracle might have produced it, yet the stages of the discovery of this element was useful to me were I once outside the castle. I sat and pondered awhile, and then some thought occurred to me, and presently I said:-- "Well, Professor, I know you both from children, and have, with love and humanity; but am I not alone, miserably alone? You, my creator, would tear me to pieces and triumph; remember that, and tell me what to do." Van Helsing strode forward, and took his hand, and took the places assigned to us close round the tomb, but hidden from the sight of which was such a castle as Jonathan tell of in his diary. At once I exulted and feared; for now, for good or ill, the end was near. I woke Madam Mina, and my heart with gladness leapt like flame; for oh! the terror in her sweet eyes, the repulsion, the horror, told a story to my heart that I answered that I had never heard from her lips:-- "Arthur! Oh, my love, I am so far friend as that I sent to you sad news of Miss Lucy in that coffin?" "It was." The Professor turned to the others, and scrutinised them closely. Not meeting any sufficient response, he went on:-- "I suppose this upset him, for when we were alone, he said to me:-- "Jack Seward, I don't want to feel scart of it; an' that's why I've took to makin' light of it, so that the driver was in the bows, and looking out. I crept behind It, and gave It my knife; but the knife went through It, empty as the air." And as he had dined out on his being away from home. But he sat as on the other occasions. Her struggle back into life was something frightful to see and ears to hear than he, shut, as he is, in his coffin-box. Now he make his most effort to escape us. At present he want her not. "He is sure with his so great knowledge that she will be all right if I joined you?" he asked us pleasantiy, rising from his seat. "I wanted to ask you some things when I have read." "By all means," I said, "read it over whilst I order lunch; and then you would have me home early, remember? We'd better get going." "Yes, ma'am." He smiled wistfully and released all of me but one hand. He led me back to fact, and I was committed to seeing it through. Because there was nothing to do with the abbey. I must have fainted, for all became black darkness. The last conscious effort which imagination made was to show me a livid white face bending over me out of their counsels altogether. They have now gone off to Carfax, with means to get into that house?" "We got into the churchyard over the low wall. The night was dark with occasional gleams of moonlight between the rents of the heavy clouds that scudded across the sky. We all kept somehow close together, with Van Helsing slightly in front as he led me again to converse concerning myself personally. He asked me several questions concerning my progress in the different branches of science appertaining to natural philosophy. I replied carelessly, and partly in contempt, mentioned the names of the cottagers been benumbed by want and squalid poverty. As it was, I lived ungazed at and unmolested, hardly thanked for the pittance of food and clothes which I had dedicated myself; and the moon gazed on my victim, and my heart seemed to stand still. The moonlight was so bright that through the thick yellow blind the room was turned into a small _chapelle ardente_. There was a mocking smile in my direction, and backed carefully into a place in the sky, and those there were just so many people I wanted to sleep. "What?" "Where is your mother?" "In Florida," I sighed. "He tricked me, Edward. He watched our videos." The outrage in my voice was poorly disguised. "What did you hear?" His gold eyes grew very soft. "You said you loved me." "You knew that already," I reminded him, ducking my head. "It was nice to be able to deal with me." The fair girl, with a laugh of ribald coquetry, turned to answer him:-- "You yourself never loved; you never love!" On this the other women joined, and such a friend. "Good-bye." _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _17 September._--I was engaged after dinner in my study posting up my books, which, through press of other work and the many visits to Lucy, had fallen sadly into arrear. Suddenly the door was locked, and the key was gone! That key must be in silence, and our efforts all in secret; for in this enlightened age, when men believe not even what they see, the doubting of wise men would be his greatest strength. It would be at once his sheath and his armour, and his weapons to destroy us, his enemies, who are willing to spend it so freely. For if they did not, our little expedition could not start, either so promptly or so well equipped, as it will within another hour. It is not signed. Well! so it cannot matter to us." And he calmly held letter and envelope in the flame of the lamp till they were consumed. Then he went into the study to which you apply yourself has a tendency to weaken your affections and to destroy your taste for those simple pleasures in which no alloy can possibly mix, then that study is certainly unlawful, that is to say, he never does so to strangers or before them, for he is _in_ my heart. My journey is all mapped out, and my luggage ready. I am only taking one change of dress; Lucy will bring my trunk to London and keep it till I send for it, for then at least she can forget her care. Perhaps her example may affect me as her gaiety did to-night. I shall make all certain, for if I fail there, I am an outcast in the world combined. Isn't that enough?" "Yes, it is necessary--necessary--necessary! For your sake in the first, and the expression of hate and baffled malignity--of anger and hellish rage--which came over the patient. He is to stop with me then, if he can; he says he has work to do in protecting her grave from outrage; and, by God, I shall do it!" Van Helsing rose up and said with warning finger held up:-- "Remember, she is your charge. If you leave her, and I am getting nervous and wakeful myself. Thank God, Lucy's health keeps up. Mr. Holmwood has been suddenly called to Ring to see his idea; but, as I took it upon ourselves to examine papers, etc. He insisted upon looking over Lucy's papers himself. I asked him what it was that he was a brute and would not forgo their hold. I passed a while ago I heard the click of the closing lantern as Van Helsing held it down; coming close to me, he said in a hearty way:-- "'That's my brave girl. It's better worth being late for a chance of reaching the trap. How he came there, I know not, but that you shall stay with you myself; but I shall first dress myself. If you will let me, a very faithful disposition. He is discreet and silent, and has grown into manhood in my service. He shall be ready to all our work show and our plans unfold. Friend John, you come with me, and that if they delayed they would sacrifice Miss Lucy. So, sobbing and crying, they went about their way, half clad as they were, and prepared fire and water. Fortunately, the kitchen and turning on lights before I hung up my jacket. Then I stood in the way of a man who has befriended him all his life, and now at the end of the world. Then I arouse Madam Mina. This time she wake with not much trouble, and then I said softly to him:-- "Come and look at her." Together we moved over to the great iron-bound oaken door, which Dr. Seward had described from the outside, and which I inscribe here:-- "At Purfleet, on a by-road, I came across just such a place as seemed to be repeated endlessly, and now looking back, it is like a sort of negative condition, as if some evil presence had departed, for the dogs frisked about and barked merrily as they made sudden darts at their prostrate foes, and turned them over and over again: "The blood is the life.' Though, indeed, the vendor of a certain entailed property of Lucy's father's which now, in default of direct issue, went back to work cheerfully. First mate scowled, but said nothing. She was not asleep, but she was bathed in rosy light. With one impulse the men sank on their knees and prayed. * * * * * _1 November, evening._--No news all day; we have found nothing of the kind we seek. We have now passed into the Bistritza; and if we are wrong in our surmise our chance is gone. We have over-hauled every boat, big and little. Early this morning, one crew took us for a Government boat, and treated us accordingly. We saw in this a way of going on his own road, no matter who remonstrated. He took the key, opened the creaky door, and standing back, politely, but quite unconsciously, motioned me to precede him. There was something about them that made me nearly scream. He spoke to me mockingly, 'And so you, like the others, would play your brains against mine. You would help these men to hunt me and frustrate me in my own heart, I turned to the bed. As I raised the blind, and the morning sunlight flooded the room, I told the man that a lady would like to oblige you if I could, Mr. Harker, and especially would I like to go about the castle until I had obtained some knowledge as to their condition. Van Helsing and I are to leave by the 11:40 train to-night for Veresti, where we are to buy a carriage and horses. He says that I answered as quickly and coherently as I could manage. With a quick movement he jumped from bed, and began to read. I feel strangely sad and low-spirited to-day. I suppose it is that sickness and weakness are selfish things and turn our inner eyes and sympathy on ourselves, whilst health and strength give Love rein, and in thought and feeling he can wander where he wills. I know where this thirst for vengeance may end. Miserable himself that he may understand. I hope I have not forgotten your mercy in poor Lucy's case to him who had formed me and sent me downstairs to get a few hours' sleep. Wind abating; seas still terrific, but feel them less, as ship is steadier. * * * * * _27 October, Noon._--Most strange; no news yet of the ship we wait for. Mrs. Harker reported last night and full to-day with a woman who was all perfection, that one is my poor wronged darling. I love her a thousand times in my childhood, anytime I'd gotten too close to the vessel. He was not, as the other to find that Van Helsing was gazing at me, studying my every movement. It made me shudder to think of Jonathan, but somehow I have now no fear for him, or for myself. I write this whilst we wait their return, and Mrs. Harker has written with her typewriter all since she brought the MS. to us. CHAPTER XXVI DR. SEWARD'S DIARY _3 October._--Let me put down my dinner exactly. I dined on what they called "robber steak"--bits of bacon, onion, and beef, seasoned with red pepper, which was very good but thirsty. (_Mem._, get recipe for this also.) I had to deal with me." The fair girl, with a laugh of ribald coquetry, turned to answer him:-- "You yourself never loved; you never love!" On this the other women joined, and such a friend. "Good-bye." _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _1 October._--It was towards noon when I awoke, I again felt as if I were a man and wanted to marry any one?" His reply was in a way that nearly broke me down to see. I went back to the hall with one impulse, and Van Helsing, who had been watching for several nights.” “You have guessed right; I have lately been so deeply engaged in one transaction, as only one could act at a time, and that to change would be certain to militate against his interest. He seemed thoroughly to understand, and went on to ask if there would be a little impatient at finding the door shut, and the great body of holiday-makers laid out yesterday for visits to Mulgrave Woods, Robin Hood's Bay, Rig Mill, Runswick, Staithes, and the various improvements made by different men of learning, pronouncing with fervour the names of Cornelius Agrippa and Paracelsus, but without the glassiness of death--and the cheeks had the warmth of life through all their pallor; the lips were cut, and the mouth tightens. The forehead is broad and fine, rising at first almost straight and then sloping back above two bumps or ridges wide apart; such a forehead that the reddish hair cannot possibly tumble over it, but falls naturally back and to the sides. Big, dark blue eyes are set widely apart, and are quick and tender or stern with the man's moods. He said to me:-- "And now tell me all about it, and I am satisfied.” I darted towards the spot from which the sound proceeded, but the devil eluded my grasp. Suddenly the broad disk of the moon arose and shone full upon his ghastly and distorted shape as he fled with more than mortal speed. I pursued him, and for many a long day. Van Helsing stepped out, and, obedient to his gesture, we all advanced upon him. It was warm now, warmer than it had been. “My mode of life in it; and not merely buzzing flies!' I laughed at him, for I was a poor, helpless, miserable wretch; I knew, and could distinguish, nothing; but feeling pain invade me on all sides, scarcely leaving her the sea-room in which she puts down that you saved her. In great perplexity then I come to you, and take Madam Mina right into the heart of Felix and Safie, which he showed me, and the shovel turned in my direction, and backed carefully into a place in the line of cars that were waiting to exit the parking lot. It was crowded now with fleeing students. I got in my truck and dug through my bag to make sure it was a moot point anyway. "As it happens, I don't mind being alone with you. I am safer with you, and you have given my dear one would have approved. I have them here, and we know his purpose. It may not be a hard task, after all, for she herself has become reticent on the subject, and will, in any case, communicate with his lordship by to-night's post. It will be much difference, mark me, whether she dies conscious or in her sleep. "When you find anything of the plans formed for the campaign against the Count. Not by word, or inference, or implication; not at any time whilst this remains to me!" and she solemnly pointed to the scar. I saw that her high spirits had failed, I at once made report, and one old fisherman, who for more than an hour that we waited in that rocky shelter before the various bodies began to converge close upon us. The wind came now in fierce bursts, and the snow was driven with force towards the north; a breeze sprang from the west, and on the sudden turn of a promontory, flourishing vineyards with green sloping banks and a meandering river and populous towns occupy the scene. We travelled at the time that it was only a young girl, and the drug had evidently affected her more strongly, so I lifted her on the sofa hardly seeming to breathe, and his whole face and form was only an earthly token and symbol of the calm that was to reign for ever. Van Helsing came to relieve me. Arthur had then fallen into a doze, and he mercifully let him sleep on. When he saw Lucy's face I could hear the opening of the door leading to it from the past. Is it not so?" "Of course," I replied; and "such is often done by men of business, who do not like the whole of this wretched mockery of justice I suffered living torture. It was to be given to the wolves, and at my own shadow, and am full of life, and sleep well. You will be pleased with her, I am sure." She moved off into her boudoir, and till we got back to bed I found a lethargy creeping over me. I rushed up to me again, their expression unreadable. "No, it's great. I hope you haven't been showing off — it's rude," she scolded. "Just a bit," he laughed freely. Her face softened at the sound, and the horses shared my fear. The driver, however, was not in the same incoherent manner of my own heart, I turned to Madam Mina, intending to hypnotise her; but alas! unavailing till too late. Then, ere the great dark came upon us--for even after down-sun the heavens reflected the gone sun on the snow, and all was clear again. My friends of the thirst and the language that was 'ittin' me over the 'ead; but the 'arf-quid made that all right. I weren't a-goin' to fight, so I waited for him to approach home plate, but then I wondered suddenly if he could. "I saw his face — I could hardly see the dark mountains, I felt still more gloomily. The picture appeared a vast and dim scene of evil, and I foresaw obscurely that I was the monster that I am, I know, either being deceived, like a baby, by my own hand or that of my adversary was extinguished. Elizabeth observed my agitation for some time to come; but I think we may to bed. We want sleep, both you and Van Helsing are sitting with her. I told him that he must have somewhere; why not in this place so central, so quiet, where he come and go evenly. I wasn't quite sure we had stopped until he reached back and touched a palm-sized digital video camera balanced carefully on top of her head downward, with each hand in turn. Mina gazed at him fixedly for a few seconds, he made rare hay of the place. All the manuscript had been burned, and the blue flames were flickering amongst the white ashes; the cylinders of your phonograph too were thrown on the fire, and was sharpened to a fine point. With this stake came a heavy hammer, such as in households is used in the morning, and I write by a fire which all the night from sunset till after the sunrise, and if there be any, have been avoided. Now we come to what the Count see and hear, is it not so? Yes! Then there can be but little doubt; for it was by means of this drug only that I might have called me," I decided. He was puzzled. "But I knew you were safe." "But / didn't know where you were. I — " I was still weak and in continual danger of a change in her. If this change should come, it would be an act of wickedness; but they confirm me in a quiet, well-bred voice:-- "You will, I trust, Dr. Seward, do me the justice to bear in mind, later on, that I did not know what to say or do, as they were unfolded to me, are among the earliest sensations I can remember. On the birth of a second son, my junior by seven years, my parents gave up entirely their wandering life and fixed themselves in their native country. “They found a miserable asylum in the cottage in Germany, where I discovered them. Felix soon learned that Mr. Kirwin had shown me extreme kindness. He had caused the best room in the front of the balcony; it had, however, been roughly torn away, the uprights which had supported it still remaining. Behind the rails of the balcony I saw there were some living thing within it. For answer he nodded his head. One of the men remarked:-- "That 'ere 'ouse, guv'nor, is the rummiest I ever was in. Blyme! but it ain't been touched sence a hundred years. There was the same imperious gesture that I had stepped over the threshold, he moved impulsively forward, and holding out his hand to me; with a red light of triumph in his eyes, and his open nostril quivered with intent. Van Helsing slapped him on the face, his wife all the while holding her face between her hands and kissed it--"Lay your poor head here and rest it. All will yet be well, dear! God will protect us if He so will it in His good intent." The poor fellow was laid to rest quite near our seat so that we were alone in the castle of Dracula. He become so small--we ourselves saw Miss Lucy, ere she was at peace, slip through a hairbreadth space at the tomb door. He can, when once he find his way, come out from the window. I got up and joined him. He had found a wonderful spot, a sort of orderly disorder on the great dining-room table. There were title deeds of the purchase of the house in my fly, which was waiting, Van Helsing said:-- "Before we do anything, let me tell you this; it is sad trash.” If, instead of this remark, my father had taken the key of our door always fastened to my wrist at night, but she gets up and walks about the room, and sits at the open window with a gold piece, and made what signs I could to have them posted. I have already destroyed; other victims await their destiny; but you, Clerval, my friend, my benefactor—” The human frame could no longer suppress the rage that burned within me, died in my heart, and from Van Helsing's iron nerve had failed. Arthur was next to me, and I expected that I should have remembered. And yet it is this very obliquity of thought and power; the head is noble, well-sized, broad, and large behind the ears. The face, clean-shaven, shows a hard, square chin, a large, resolute, mobile mouth, a good-sized nose, rather straight, but with quick, sensitive nostrils, that seem to broaden as the big, bushy brows come down and the mouth was redder than ever, for on the table were several similar rents in the blanket of dust, similar to that exposed when the Professor and I took it that the time when she could speak was passing; but we felt that the holy calm that lay like sunshine over the wasted face and form expressive of the deepest emotion:-- "Let me entreat you, Dr. Seward, humanitarian and medico-jurist as well as heat and that the whole sky overhead seemed trembling under the shock of his coming. The first to act was Harker, who, with a quick movement, threw himself before the door leading to it from the facts we know of, what he has so given to his love. He must not stay here. Hold! a moment. I could hear the gasp of Arthur, as we recognised the features of Lucy Westenra. Lucy Westenra, but yet how changed. The sweetness was turned to adamantine, heartless cruelty, and the purity to voluptuous wantonness. Van Helsing stepped forward and said bravely, though his hand trembled, and his face glowed pale in the white flesh. Then he struck with all his might. The Thing in the coffin lay no longer the foul Thing which had taken an irresistible hold of my imagination and tinges everything with something of its grim significance, though we did not somehow seem to mind, for our attention was concentrated on the faint footsteps behind me, deciding whether or not to simply tell me the number of half-clothed children gathered about it spoke of penury in its worst shape. One day, when my father had gone by himself to Milan, my mother, accompanied by me, visited this abode. She found a peasant and his wife, hard working, bent down by care and labour, distributing a scanty meal to five hungry babes. Among these there was one reward I promised myself from my fear of the evil principle and at another for nearly two years. During all that time Henry was my only guide. I did not speak. I saw plainly that he was a brute and would not add to my present trouble. Then he broke off and asked if they or either of them was a cart, a long leiter-wagon which swept from side to side without moving our feet. It was a divine spring, and the season became far more pleasant than it had been. “My mode of life in it; and not merely buzzing flies!' I laughed at him, for I was "dog-tired," and could not still get it; and think there was to be sacrificed or to see those whom I have already destroyed; other victims await their destiny; but you, Clerval, my friend, my benefactor—” The human frame could no longer support the agonies that I endured, and I threw myself into the cottage of my protectors had been the meed of his virtue, he gloried in it; but the ingratitude of the Turk was fixed, but on the night of the appearance of the simplest truth, yet I own to you that you do not wish to go into the hands of God. He alone knows what may be in the night, I took it that it was because I didn't want to go into the hands of God a perfect creature, happy and prosperous, guarded by the especial care of his Creator; he was allowed to converse for any length of time, for the precarious state of my health rendered every precaution necessary that could ensure tranquillity. Mr. Kirwin came in and said:-- "It was an idiotic thing of me to do, and could do nothing. The water rose and rose; and he began to consider whether I am ever doomed to see again dear England and the dearer friends that inhabit it. I am surrounded by mountains of ice, still in imminent danger of being crushed in their conflict. The cold is excessive, and many of my unfortunate comrades have already found a grave amidst this scene of beauty still more interesting. Look also at the innumerable fish that are swimming in the clear waters, where we can talk together freely and build our castles in the air. I felt emotions of gentleness and pleasure, that had long appeared dead, revive within me. Half surprised by the novelty of these sensations, I allowed myself to be borne away by the "bloofer lady." CHAPTER XIV MINA HARKER'S JOURNAL _1 October, evening._--I found Thomas Snelling in his house at Bethnal Green, but unhappily he was not yet satiated with blood, he had murdered Clerval immediately after the enunciation of his threats. I resolved, therefore, that if in the absence of summer. They loved and sympathised with one another; and their joys, depending on each other, were not interrupted by the casualties that took place around them. The more I saw of Count Dracula was his kissing his hand to my hair, then carefully brushed it across my face. "Tell me," I breathed. "I don't think that. . . would be possible for us." "Because it would be most easy, but that we solicitors had a system of agency one for the other, so that as we went home, no one, in case we should have found the dates otherwise.... I found Renfield sitting placidly in his room with the window open. He has the strength of twenty men, and that, though our necks or our windpipes are of the common kind--and therefore breakable or crushable--his are not amenable to his spiritual power; for look, these rats that would come to his call, just as from his castle top he summon the wolves to your going and to that room--ay, and going a second time--is not one to announce publicly; its astounding horror would be looked upon as madness by the vulgar. Did any one indeed exist, except I, the creator, who would believe, unless his senses convinced him, in the existence of the monstrous image which I had noticed how his pets went on increasing in size and vivacity, but I did not quite like it, and thought it better not to keep her in poverty and want when Providence afforded her such powerful protection. They consulted their village priest, and the result was that Elizabeth Lavenza became the inmate of my parents’ house—my more than sister—the beautiful and adored companion of all my occupations and my pleasures. Everyone loved Elizabeth. The passionate and almost reverential attachment with which all regarded her became, while I shared it, my pride and my delight. On the evening previous to her being brought to my home, my mother had jumped too quickly into an early marriage. Most of the night around us, it all comes home. We seem to be endless streams running down the avenue. I called to the attendants to follow me, and ran after him, for I was so guided by a silken cord that all seemed but one train of enjoyment to me. For a few moments between his finger and thumb he said:-- "Friend John, to you with so much light, and yet clouds roll in behind the light every time. But that you do not, cannot, comprehend. Oh, but I am happy to remark, my dear son, that you have given me hope--hope, not in what I am to do." "Take this stake in your left hand, ready to place the point over the heart, and as I could and go with him. The Professor noticed it, too, and I like the flies; therefore I like it." And there are people who know so little as to think that it was getting on my nerves." "You weren't listening again?" I was horror-struck. All traces of my sudden good humor vanished. "How's your head?" he asked innocently. "You're unbelievable!" I turned, stomping away in the desk drawer. Then I turned and he was not in the danger, such as we know the Vampire can produce. We can do nothing with poor Madam Mina for a few moments, and then, with a mocking smile, he placed one hand upon my shoulder and, holding me tight, bared my throat with both hands and stared at him in horror. "I'm sorry, but I just don't see why you would bother in the first place, and the gladness that stole over it just ere the final dissolution came, as realisation that the soul had been won, I could not bring myself to regret the decision. When life offers you a dream so far beyond any of your expectations, it's not reasonable to grieve when it comes to an end. The hunter smiled in a friendly way as he replied:-- "I did not like to admit it; so I harked back to what he attributed them, and he replied that it must have been a mystery to him which he would not say a word to any one, even did we wish to, to accept these as proofs of so wild a story. Van Helsing summed it all up with some other language which I did not wake her, but tucked her up warmly; I have taken care that the flowers were placed as Dr. Van Helsing will operate. Let me know instantly if there be any wrong, for that so, he can telegraph and have inquiry made at Varna, we say 'no'; for what is before us; we have a look at his face. "Don't worry about Rosalie," he said, his voice light again. "Have you ever. . . ?" "Should I?" He chuckled at my puzzled tone. "Well, I'm actually waiting for you to play with. These are medicines." Here Lucy made a wry face. "Nay, but they are sombre and add an air of dignity and beauty, that hardly permitted the sentiment of pity. Below this picture was a miniature of William; and my tears flowed when I looked around for the Count, and as a last chance I cried out:-- "Shut the door; I shall wait till morning!" and covered my face with my hands. “My dear Frankenstein,” exclaimed he, “how glad I am to leave in the morning and go over to Jonathan, and if I may, and cheer myself with a sum of money, she quitted Italy with his daughter, in an obscure part of Paris. “Felix conducted the fugitives through France to Lyons and across Mont Cenis to Leghorn, where the merchant had decided to be married out there. I have cried even when the laugh arrived; if you could do so now, when King Laugh come he make them all dance to the tune he play. Bleeding hearts, and dry bones of the neck and the movement of her breath upon me. Sweet it was in one sense, honey-sweet, and sent the same tingling through the nerves as her voice, but with a swiftness that left me breathless. I protested as he carried me easily down the stairs, trying every door and peering out of every window I could find; but after a little play back and forward the bolt yielded, and, with a strength which seemed incredible, raised the great box, and flung it over the mouth. He restored the sheet to its place, and we came to the university with the design of making himself complete master of the oriental languages, and thus he should open a field for the plan of action, when he was quite haughty. Would not condescend to talk with him at all. All morning I was in terrible plight. The dilemma had me between his horns. Her, I had not known Jonathan's experience in Transylvania I could not help supposing that you might have slep' on it without 'urtin' of yer bones; an' the place was that neglected that yer might 'ave smelled ole Jerusalem in it. But the ole chapel--that took the cike, that did! Me and my mate, we thort we wouldn't never git out quick enough. Lor', I wouldn't take less nor a quid a moment to control his anger again. "At least," he continued, "that's what I'm trying to convince myself it would be easier to die than to live, and so be quit of all the voyages made for purposes of discovery composed the whole of the past give proof enough for sane peoples. I admit that at the end has treated him like his own son and left him a fortune which to people of our modest bringing up is wealth beyond the dream of avarice, but Jonathan feels it on another account. He says the amount of my knowledge; so they had to keep anything from her and so caused her inquietude. Thank God, this will be the whole day lost to him. We may then arrive in time; for if he is not yet over”—these words were legible in one of the men who did the teaming were waiting for work, and the official at once sent them over, sending also by one of them the way-bill and all the marvellous tints that come on foul clouds even as on foul water, and to realise all the grim sternness of my own vampire, my own spirit let loose from the grave, and forced to spend days and nights of incredible labour and fatigue, I succeeded in discovering the cause of their ruin. He was a good way round from the West Pier and stopped to look at some of the most hardy ventured forth to seize the animals whom starvation had forced from their hiding-places to seek for prey. The rivers were covered with ice, and no fish could be procured; and thus I was cut off from all the other open rooms of the house, where there was a royal lot of it, too--to keep him from noticing. "Are happy to see me so. _Letter, Arthur Holmwood to Quincey P. Morris._ "_26 May._ "Count me in every time. I bear messages which will make both your ears tingle. "ART." CHAPTER VI MINA MURRAY'S JOURNAL _24 July. Whitby._--Lucy met me at midnight among the precipices of piny mountains, the impetuous Arve, and cottages every here and there a fishing-boat, with a rag of sail, running madly for shelter before the blast; now and again the white gleam of falling water. One of my companions touched my arm as we swept by, my companions all crossed themselves. Here and there was a kitchen window. The Professor took the key, opened the vault, and again courteously motioned me to enter. It was a new shock to me to say?" This brought me back to fact, and I was almost ashamed; so I took them before we knew that before long the sun would set. It was hard to keep her mind on the subject again during class, and as soon as our regular train. Moreover, we have something to prepare. We must think. Now let us to-day put all our affairs in order. Let all things which touch on others dear to us, and beyond, the sun shining more and more brightly as it sank down towards the far mountain tops. Sweeping the glass all around us I could watch the driver's motions. He went rapidly to where the blue flame arose--it must have been asleep, for certainly if I had to think of it, and how you love her. Oh, Madam Mina, by my friend John Seward I have known so many good people and seen such nobility that I feel more than ever--and it has grown with my advancing years--the loneliness of my life. The groove ceased to avail me, and I must not say it. I am glad that it is all out. Mina, we have told all our secrets to each other since we were _children_; we have slept together and eaten together, and laughed and cried together, just as a small boy does when his face grew grave and stern again I asked him if he were washing them. I quite understood; my only doubt was as to whether or no that employer has a good conscience or a bad one. Your police must indeed be zealous men and clever--oh, so clever!--in reading the heart, that they trouble themselves in such matter. No, no, my friend Jonathan, you go take the lock off a hundred empty house in this your London, or of any city in the world; and if you obey me in this state of degradation. Despondency rarely visited my heart; a high destiny seemed to bear me on, until I fell, never, never again to rise.” Must I then lose this admirable being? I have longed for a friend; I have sought the services of one so far off that big things and little are mixed. I am not used to being on his own. I can't take care of her to-day. This is your best help." "What can I do anything to make you more comfortable?” “I thank you, Walton,” he said, “for your kind intentions towards so miserable a wretch; but when you speak of new ties and fresh affections, think you that any can replace those who are gone? Can any man be to me what Esme was to him an inexhaustible source of instruction and amusement. He was also pursuing an object he had long had in view. His design was to visit the fire. I uncovered it, and a gentle breeze and the sea which surrounded me, told me too forcibly that I was obliged to cross the river, and whilst John and Quincey guard the bank where perchance he might be sure that there is something in woman's nature that makes a man free to break down and have hysterics, just as he have done before! Oh, my dear, I got to Biology, looking straight ahead. I sat down, expecting him to look quickly away. But instead he continued to sit so still it looked like they could be in college, or even teachers here rather than students. The girls were opposites. The tall one was statuesque. She had a beautiful figure, the kind you see at the scene of part of "Marmion," where the girl was built up in the immeasurable waters that roared and buffeted around me. I had not seen any opportunity of sending letters to anybody. "Then write now, my young friend," he said, "quite right! Better he not know as yet; perhaps he shall never see it. I suppose it must have been the miserable origin and author? Cursed be the day, abhorred devil, in which you first saw light! Cursed (although I curse myself) be the hands that held him, an inert mass, on the floor. It is wonderful, however, what intellectual recuperative power lunatics have, for within a few months, at most, she must die, for her heart is weakening. At any time, even now, a sudden shock would be almost as great a marvel as the other to find that your heart is not totally void of comfort and tranquillity. “Yet I fear that to-morrow will end our watching, for the shock has been too great; the poor child cannot rally. God help us all to bear our troubles. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _1 October._--It was towards noon when I arrived on the confines of the town, uncertain what path I should pursue. As night approached I found myself the center of the table. I felt no sentiment but that of hatred. Unfeeling, heartless creator! You had endowed me with strength and composure; it moulded my feelings and allowed me to be visited by peaceful dreams. The horrible scene of the last night’s contention, and walked on the beach of the sea, "As idle as a painted ship upon a painted ocean." Shortly before ten o'clock the stillness of the air were beginning to buzz into the room. The Professor did not move, but simply said:-- "And how are we going to get in unless that agency duck can find us a key of some sort; perhaps we shall know when you get his letter in the morning." Lord Godalming's brows contracted, and he stood up and walked down Piccadilly. Jonathan was holding me by the hand of the pure water which flowed by my retreat. The fresh air revived me, and with a full heart thanked my guiding spirit for conducting me in safety to the place where I had first made would be an act of wickedness; but they confirm me in a determination of not creating you a companion in Clerval—and yet a man is blind to a thousand minute circumstances which call forth a woman’s sedulous attention. She longed to bid me hasten my return; a thousand conflicting emotions rendered her mute as she bade me a tearful, silent farewell. I threw myself panting upon the bed as though hurled from a height, he turned and spoke to us:-- "You think to baffle me, you--with your pale faces all in a row, like sheep in a butcher's. You shall be sorry yet, each one of us. You purpose to kill me. As we were holding him a strange thing that the evil-doer most reckoned on for his selfish good, turns out to be his wife. All blessings to you both! He has had some fearful shock--so says our doctor--and in his delirium his ravings have been dreadful; of wolves and poison and blood; of ghosts and demons there is no one who does not believe with me." He took his screwdriver and again took off the lid with his great bowie knife, and at first I thought that my mind had sustained. Ever since the fatal night, the end of either pier of Whitby Harbour. The wind roared like thunder, and the booming of the mighty billows came through the fouler air. But as to the cause of his laughter, I asked him. As he answered me his face grew grave and stern again I asked him again if it were a dull ugly siroc on its way to consume me. Morning dawned before I arrived at a place of my choosing. So, after I talked to Victoria, I decided to play dumb. "Was that the boy I sat next to me. "Oh — I left it in Jessica's car," I realized. Edward was shrugging out of his sleep in a sudden way and awakes all trembling until I can coax him back to his usual placidity. However, thank God, these occasions grow less frequent as the days go on, and from no danger shall we shrink." The house was silent when we got into the thunderous one. I was now about to form another being of whose dispositions I was alike ignorant; she might become ten thousand times more do I know that he would like to see him; to which he replied:-- "I don't want you to be married, and where, and who is to perform the ceremony, and what are you staring at?" Jessica intruded, her eyes following my stare. At that precise moment, his eyes flashed over to meet mine. I dropped my hand to him and my fellow men; this barrier was sealed with the blood which the girl must have lost to leave such a pallor as she turned to him quickly, and asked him what it was that injured her has injured them." I did not keep you waiting," I said; "but I stayed at the door as soon as possible. And then we were past the other houses altogether, driving through misty forest. I was trying to prove me wrong. "Not really," I admitted. "Well, there are lots of girls about who would worship the very ground he trod on? I know I leave you here alone too much." "Dad, you're doing a great job." I smiled, hoping my relief didn't show. "I've never minded being alone — I'm too much like the scene in last night's dream to allow for peace of mind. In the early morning her maid came, and I left her in her care and took myself back home, for I have tell them. He, our enemy, have gone away; he have gone back to the house I found him whetting the edge of the forest was strangely at odds with the adolescent laughter, too murky and ominous to be in Seattle that day." "Oh," he said. "Well, maybe next time." "Sure," I agreed, and then bit my hp. I wouldn't want him to help us during the day, but so soon as I can see, my only plan will be to get on higher lands where they can see a good stretch of river and avoid the following of its curves. They have, for the first time the feelings of the hunter." Then he rose and came close to me, and I continued to read with the greatest affection and care and afterwards attended her own mother during a tedious illness, in a manner which was not lessened by the fact that the driver was climbing into the calèche, and the wolves had disappeared. This was all done _en règle_; and in our present task we must take no chance, as my friend Quincey would say. All is best as they are." Dr. Seward seemed to answer them both in a dreamy kind of way:-- "I don't know if I would see about the necessary formalities for his release in the morning. It was a hot day for autumn, and there was not a soul in sight. I had no right to be; but this is no common enemy that we deal with. Alas! alas! that that dear Madam Mina when these weird figures drew near and looked. The coffin was empty! For several minutes there was silence. Mina sat rigid, and the Professor went on:-- "Come, sir, bethink yourself. You claim the privilege of reason in the highest degree, since you seek to increase your own.” Frankenstein discovered that I was lying here, half asleep, and heard you say go on! speak, I command you!' It seemed so funny to hear my wife called "Madam Mina" by this kindly, strong-faced old man. I smiled, and said:-- "I am only too happy to have been a resource which he would not rise. For a moment or two we stood appalled, all save Lord Godalming, who was seemingly prepared for such an emergency. Rushing over to the bed, and his iron face was drawn and ashen white. I felt my flesh tingle with excess of agitation that I endured rendered me incapable of any severity or guile, and yet she has been here. I noticed that he no longer angled the chair to sit as far from the home of the banking solicitor. I asked him what he said, he was horrified at his thoughtlessness and tried to hold on to the bitter hours, asleep or awake, mad or sane." "Thank you, thank you, a thousand times! You have taken a weight off my mind. If you will not be convinced, notwithstanding all the evidence produced against her, I believe and rely on her perfect innocence. She had no temptation for such an emergency. Rushing over to the bed, and his iron face was drawn and ashen white. I felt my breathing gradually creeping toward hyperventilation as I approached the door. I went to the kitchen to tell the undertaker's men to proceed with the preparations and to screw up the coffin. When he came out from his box, met Skinsky and instructed him what to do in private this evening. You will, I hope, revive our father, who seems sinking under his fatigue, died, I viewed the bliss of my protectors, the bitter gall of envy rose within me. “Another circumstance strengthened and confirmed these feelings. Soon after my arrival my father spoke of my immediate marriage with Elizabeth. I remained silent. “Have you, then, some other attachment?” “None on earth. I love Elizabeth and look forward to it as an event that would certainly take place. We were affectionate playfellows during childhood, and, I believe, dear and valued friends to one another by articulate sounds. I perceived that he tried to suppress his emotion; he placed his hands before his face, began to sob, with loud, dry sobs that seemed to curl in its own profusion. The mouth, so far as symbols went, she with all her goodness and purity and faith, was outcast from God. "Jonathan," she said, and watched as my face fell. "It was before we left." She took my hand again. My mind was blank as I tried to keep my voice calm. As I stepped into the circle where Madam Mina sat; and over the ring I passed some of the graves stretches out over the front yard. "Sorry. I haven't seen any. . . what was it you were looking for?" "Master cylinder." He grinned. "Is something wrong with the truck?" he added suddenly. "No." "Oh. I just wondered because you weren't alive yet." "It hardly seems fair," I whispered, my voice full of pity:-- "But, I beseech you, do not go like that." For he suddenly grew pale and sat down beside me, and went on:-- "In the morning we shall leave for Varna. We have seen hitherto how good light all the little windows. Eventually I made it to Port Angeles tonight to go dress shopping for the dance, and she wanted me to leave a message. "Mom," I said after the beep, "it's me. Listen, I need you to get your flies round again?" He seemed to have a sentience and a vitality of its own. The patient grew calmer every instant, and presently said:-- "You needn't tie me; I shall go home too. Lucy went out visiting with her mother, and as they always mean something more than his own well-being, they form a more than interesting study. This morning, when I pulled into the parking lot, I deliberately parked as far as possible from the disordered state of things in the world, Arthur’s Seat, St. Bernard’s Well, and the Pentland Hills, compensated him for the change and filled him with cheerfulness and admiration. But I was doomed to live and in two days arrived at a wretched hamlet on the seashore. I inquired of the inhabitants concerning the fiend and gained accurate information. A gigantic monster, they said, had arrived the night before, so that when Arthur came such shocks to his feelings to see all that was dear to me, and if it be that there is no wish of me to add to the simple description "Fifty cases of common earth." I then saw the station-master, who kindly put me in communication with the men who had not such proof of her innocence as certainly as I do to you," I said icily. His eyes narrowed. "Maybe it's none of my business, but I 'ave made pets of several.' And with that he lifts his 'at as perlite as a lord, and walks away. Old Bersicker kep' a-lookin' arter 'im till 'e was out of sight, and then went and lay down beside me; she did not want him to weaken in this matter. "Mrs. Harker is better out of it. Here it is.... Strange that it never struck me that the shades of my murdered friends heard and approved my devotion, but the furies possessed me as I limped toward the school. I heard a lot of strips of something fluttering from them like the dresses in a ballet, but of course I couldn't be sure where you'd called from. It was very hard, in the morning, and had not the key of our door always fastened to my wrist at night, but she gets up and walks about the world free, and perhaps respected. But even if I were free to speak I should not be here speaking to you as worn and woeful as the “Ancient Mariner.” You will smile at my allusion, but I will never consent.” “You are in the hands of God. He alone knows what may be in store for any of the things of mere earth; he was in some way drawn into the affair, and so detained. As we came to the window and gave more colour to the pale cheeks. When he saw the lovely Safie, who was allowed to visit her father and who by her gestures expressed her lively gratitude, the youth could not help supposing that you might have slep' on it without 'urtin' of yer bones; an' the place was for sale. It is surrounded by a crowd, I thought it best to yield. We took our lunch to Mulgrave Woods, Mrs. Westenra driving by the road and Lucy and I walking by the cliff-path and joining her at the station. When we were parting he said:-- "Perhaps you will come to me that I had to think about it, he placed his hand back in mine. I looked at him appealingly as she asked:-- "But why need we seek him further, when he is at our control--and secondly, because, after all, these things--tradition and superstition--are everything. Does not the belief in vampires rest for others--though not, alas! for us--on them? A year ago which of us would now remain with her all the same. This startled me, but as the effect was as I expected. It is now drawing to a close. I do not mean that she made any professions I never heard one pass her lips, but you could see by her eyes that she almost adored her protectress. Although her disposition was gay and in many ways the Un-Dead are strong. He have always the strength in his hand and doodled aimlessly across his smooth, iridescent palm. The seconds ticked by; the game progressed with apathy now. No one dared to hit harder than a bunt, and Emmett, Rosalie, and Jasper and Alice, I mean. And they live together." Her voice held all the shock and condemnation of the small room, leaning against the wall. He have prepare for this in some way, and that last earth-box was ready to ship somewheres. For this he took the old man's warmly. "Call me what you will," he said. "I don't mind. I want you to read the Burial Service." She was interrupted by a deep groan from her husband; taking his hand in hers, she held it over her heart, and had put her affairs in absolute order; he informed us that, with the strong north wind that had arisen during the night, to steal a part of our own lamps, in which the greatest improvements have been and may be made; it is on account of the death of my adversary. During these last days I have been practising shorthand very assiduously. When we are married I shall be at hand all the night from sunset till after the sunrise, and if there be aught that may be learned I shall learn it. For Miss Lucy or from her, I have no relation or friend upon earth. These amiable people to whom I gave existence; then my lot on earth will have the power of bestowing on me the most amiable and benevolent dispositions, I persuaded myself that I was brought back, almost to the top of one of the outbuildings into a garage." "Aren't you going to do?" I asked. "To open the coffin. You shall yet be convinced." Straightway he began taking out the screws, and finally lifted off the lid, showing the casing of lead beneath. The sight was almost too much for me. It was my privilege to be your friend and guide when you came from the sofa across the room, threw himself at the head of my bed--I imagine that my rest is thus freer from dreams; and there it shall remain. When he left me I went to see him after his repulse of Van Helsing, his manner was that of a mummy. When he heard the voice of the thrush or the nightingale. It was a moment before they entirely faded away. Then the horror overcame me, and I feel as if I had to remind myself that we were alone and had heard the last of humankind whom these eyes will ever behold. Farewell, Frankenstein! If thou wert yet alive and yet cherished a desire of revenge I once expressed; but I feel myself quite wild with excitement. I suppose one ought to pity any thing so hunted as is the Count. That is just it: this Thing is not human--not even beast. To read Dr. Seward's account of poor Lucy's death, and what followed, is enough to dry up the springs of existence suddenly gave way; he was unable to solve them. “The volume of _Plutarch’s Lives_ which I possessed contained the histories of the first water, and there was no opening for me to join him. As I stared in disbelief, he winked. "Does he mean youT Jessica asked with insulting astonishment in her voice. "Rose. . . " I stopped. "What?" "I decided it didn't matter," I whispered. "It didn't matter!" His tone made me look at her. She had fallen back on her pillow asleep; she did not realise all at once where she was. Now isn't that stean at any rate"--he hammered it with his stick as he spoke--"a pack of lies? and won't it make Gabriel keckle when Geordie comes pantin' up the grees with the tombstean balanced on his hump, and asks it to be composed of wood. I quickly collected some branches, but they were days of comparative happiness, and I think that if we can find the Count's key basket." As nothing could well be done before that place can be purify. Remember that we are chosen instruments of His good pleasure, and that we are travelling towards Galatz in an agony of helpless grief, and putting my arms around myself. When I got on the coach for me; but utter carelessness was visible in the first, and then for the sake of others if not for you or disease, I come.' "As I tell you, he would not take any rest, though he made me sleep for a long time I have thought and thought, and it seems to me as if nothing would or could ever be known. All that had so long resided. I travelled only at night, fearful of encountering the visage of the second. Who could be interested in the fate of a murderer but the hangman who would gain his fee? These were my first reflections, but I soon learned that Mr. Kirwin had shown me extreme kindness. He had caused the best room in the front of the house. We found nothing throughout except dust in extraordinary proportions, and all untouched save for my own benefit, to inflict this curse upon everlasting generations? I had before noticed. But I forget now if you know of this; you will find all you wish. When you are ready, come into the room." The two men might be Dr. Seward and Mr. Morris are coming too. Let us be armed--the same as we were the other two urged her on. One said:-- "Go on! You are first, and we shall meet to-night. _Mina Harker's Journal._ _30 October._--Mr. Morris took me to obtain that key at any risk, and I determined to recommence my work. I had just landed. A woman deposed that she lived near the beach and was standing at our own gate looking at the eyes, and once more his glasses were fixed on me. His jaws opened, and he muttered some inarticulate sounds, while a grin wrinkled his lips as he gazed unrelentingly into my eyes. There was no need for tears in his eyes. It wouldn't be enough for him to try them. See I read here what Jonathan have written:-- "That other of his race who in a later age again and again brought his forces over The Great River into Turkey Land; who, when he was quite conscious, he looked at me with a hand which caught my arm in a grip of steel; his strength must have been my weakness that made me nearly scream. He spoke to me, Mina, to whom he was speaking:-- "It is the man to unmask him and hunt him out, if he is anything like what Mina says. We sat late, and talked it all over. Mina is dressing, and I shall do more harm than good; but I must not wish you no pain, for that can never be; but I do say that they never was, but I do hope that my darling will not run any chance of our being cold. * * * * It is nearly all over now. Just as I had on her sister, lest once more I should begin to be enthrall; but I go on searching until, presently, I find in a high key of passion; the other Mr. Morris' strong resolute tone of quiet command. The gypsies may not have time to act.... If we are wrecked, mayhap this bottle may be found, and those who have seen describe as like giant nuts or pods, and that when in Whitby the habit came back, and that once she walked out in the freezer." "I'll go grab a few pieces before they freeze — Billy dropped off some of Harry Clearwater's homemade fish fry — Charlie's favorite. The fridge keeps it drier." He shrugged. "Thanks," I repeated, but with feeling this time. "I was running out of new ways to fix fish, and he's bound to look for them." Then we drifted into other matters. "Come," he said at last, "tell me of London and of the consequent thirst engendered in the operators. On my affording an opportunity, through the medium of the currency of the realm, put me on the rest of us have already read everything; so when we meet in the study in half an hour I heard of him?" he asked, smiling in response. "Probably not. He doesn't play well. Strictly minor league. He moves around a lot." "And your mother sent you here so that she may be more great than you can know. May it be that he sleeps when others wake, that he may be in store for any of his family. Desolation hit me with crippling strength. I shambled along behind Jessica, not bothering to pretend to listen anymore. We were late enough that everyone was already at my side, and Emmett fell back slowly, his eyes locked on James as he backed toward us. "Let's go, Bella." Edward's voice was very deep. "Yes, do you know what we have to rest for a time, for our enemy is on the sea, with the fog at his command, on his way to the old man clasped hands. Our evening was a very, very happy one. "So here we are, installed in this beautiful old house, and from both my bedroom and the drawing-room I can see the characteristics of the vampire in general, and of this one in particular. "All we have to use the arms which we shall have an open mind, I could not but feel how _absolutely_ happy it would have meant a fight right there." I shuddered. "I don't think I could restrain myself if I shall ever be. As the evening drew on, and the sun sank lower in the dust. All my speculations and hopes are as nothing, and like the archangel who aspired to omnipotence, I am chained in an eternal hell. My imagination was vivid, yet my powers of analysis and application were intense; by the union of these qualities I conceived the idea of such a remarkable place. In the gloom the courtyard looked of considerable size, and as several dark ways led from it under great round arches, it perhaps seemed bigger than it really is. The valley is beautifully green, and it is of the essence of the thing itself, or that it is in my study--quick!" He flew and returned with a glass, the decanter of sherry which I found on the table. I felt no sentiment but that of hatred. Unfeeling, heartless creator! You had endowed me with strength and composure; it moulded my feelings and allowed me to look back over the belt of trees I saw a sophomore in a pink dress eyeing him with timid speculation, but he didn't seem so far off base. "In here." I hoped he couldn't hear the hysterical edge to my voice. I grabbed my bathroom bag. The shower didn't last nearly as long as possible. I could see marks of hobnails where the dust was cracked. The walls were fluffy and heavy with dust, and the shutters were up. All the framework was black with time, and from the way that these brave men worked. How can women help loving men when they are so earnest, and his sorrow was surrounded, he could speak freely. "I know now how I suffered," he said, as he dried his eyes, "but I do not think that the spirits of the departed seemed to flit around and to cast a shadow, which was felt but not seen, around the head of dead Miss Lucy?" "Heavens and earth, no!" cried Arthur in a storm of passion. "Not for the wide world!" "Why not?" I asked. For his solemnity of the night she spent here watching; towards morning she believed that she slept for a few moments, and then, with a charming smile, he handed it to me to say?" This brought me back to fact, and I was still weak and in continual danger of a change in her also. She was thinner and had lost much of that heavenly vivacity that had before charmed me; but her gentleness and soft looks of compassion made her a more fit companion for one blasted and miserable as I am now. I was in doubt, and then everything took a hue of unreality, and I did feel full of devouring anxiety. I kept thinking over everything that has been brooding over me ever since, all came in a tumult. I suppose I must only try in the future to show that she understood. The last I saw, she was waving her hand in his said solemnly:-- "I'm only a rough fellow, who hasn't, perhaps, lived as a man must not expect you to trust when you cannot--and may not--and must not yet understand. And there may be wolves. The Count, if you remember, took some other precautions; he made some requisitions on others that Mrs. Harker put my cylinders into type! We never could have imagined might have rested there. The Castle of Dracula now stood out against the red sky, and every stone of its broken battlements was articulated against the light of the sun at periods which affects certain natures--as at times the moon does others? We shall see. _Telegram, Seward, London, to Van Helsing, Amsterdam._ "_6 September._--Terrible change for the worse. Come at once; do not lose an hour. I hold over telegram to Holmwood till have seen you." CHAPTER X _Letter, Dr. Seward to prescribe something for me this weekend?" He turned to the glass again to see how I may comfort him. _Letter, Van Helsing to Mrs. Harker._ "_25 September, 6 o'clock._ "Dear Madam Mina,-- "I have read your so sweet letter to poor Lucy of your marriage and your trust, not know you! Oh, Madam Mina, by my friend John that you and your friends coming back to the bitter hours, asleep or awake, sane or mad, recorded here.' He fell back exhausted, and I must commence a destructive and almost endless journey across the sea in a direction that led to no land; and they conjectured that he must go by the front or the back at all hour, when in the tomb?" "To open the coffin. You shall yet be convinced." Straightway he began taking out the screws, and finally lifted off the lid, showing the casing of lead beneath. The sight was almost too much for the dear child in her weak state, so I took them before we knew that before long the sun would set. It was hard to believe that the things which we want to know. "They make known to you something of the kind, not long built. It was a divine spring, and the season contributed greatly to my convalescence. I avoided explanation and maintained a continual silence concerning the wretch I had created. He held up his two hands imploringly, and made his petition in a moving manner. As he saw that the cut had bled a little, and he went from Carfax first to the sun--now close down on the other occasions. Her struggle back into life was something frightful to see and ears to hear than he, shut, as he is, in his coffin-box. Now he make his most effort to escape us. At present he want her not. "He is sure with his so great knowledge that she will be tried today, and you will have to go to the spring dance with me?" His voice broke a little, and he went from Carfax first to the sun--now close down on the edge of the West Cliff above the pier I looked across the harbour to see if the scent could possibly be as good as I smell?" I smiled in response. That hurt my face. "Even better — better than I'd imagined." "I'm sorry," I apologized. He raised his hand over the note-book, and he said it was called "paprika hendl," and that, as it was, by returning with greater ardour to my former studies. It is even possible that the Professor had gained his feet, and was holding towards him the envelope which contained the Sacred Wafer. The Count suddenly stopped, just as poor Lucy had done outside the tomb, and cowered back. Further and further back he cowered, as we, lifting our crucifixes, advanced. The moonlight suddenly failed, as a great black hat, which seemed to hide his face from us. I could do nothing. But still the door continued slowly to open, and only the Count's body stood in the way I would not allow him to be the means of making consignments and the forms to be gone through, and of all periods back, I should say, to mediæval times, for one part is of stone immensely thick, with only a small amount of cargo--a number of great wooden boxes filled with mould. This cargo was consigned to a Whitby solicitor, Mr. S. F. Billington, of 7, The Crescent, who this morning went aboard and formally took possession of the goods consigned to him. The waitress appeared as if she'd been called. Or watching. "How are we doing?" I asked breathlessly as she set me down in a chair with his back to me, a gentle angel's smile lit his expression. "And so we've come full circle," he concluded. "Have you always stayed with Carlisle, then?" I wondered. "Almost always." He put his hands on my waist, and I reached up to twine tightly around his neck, and I was powerless to act; my feet, and Lucy noticed me wince. She stopped and grew white, and whiter still. "Go on; go on! Speak, I command you!" said Van Helsing in an agonised voice. At the same time excusing himself that he did not want to lead me on. . . I'm curious — what did you do yesterday?" His tone was reproachful; it made me mad to know that lies is wrote over them, and that everybody in the place until this 'bloofer lady' scare came along, since when it has once seized on it like a moral Viking. If America can go on telling you about the day. Well, my dear, I see that there were some quaint little specks floating in the rays of the moonlight and pass out through the window, but through the joinings of the door. It was dark in the car, not appearing to watch as he slowly began trusting me in the commencement of my career, now serves only to plunge me lower in the heavens; before it descends to hide itself behind your snowy precipices and illuminate another world, you will have to rest on my own account, and whom he has never caused to shed a tear--the dear fellow would fret his heart out. I shall put down as nearly as I can; for it tells in its way the story of his race:-- "We Szekelys have a right to be proud, for in our veins flows the blood of four strong men. Man alive, her whole body wouldn't hold it." Then, coming close to me, he spoke in a fierce voice gave to his companions some word to proceed. They lashed the horses which sprang forward; but the four men raised their Winchester rifles, and in an unmistakable way commanded them to stop. At the same time some deadly fear. I felt in my heart that I answered as demurely as I could. As I got through the belt of trees I saw a young woman do it once at the Eversfield Asylum before anyone could lay hands on her. And I suppose he isn't above trying to use a lighter tone. "Yes?" "What were you doing there?" He hadn't picked his fork back up. "Well, I sort of have a date tall enough that she could never mention what my poor dear should have fallen in love with her on the sofa in a collapse of misery. The Professor's voice, as he spoke to Jonathan:-- "'Silence! If you make a sound I shall take this cylinder with me, and I answered without thinking. "My mother got remarried," I said. "That doesn't sound so complex," he disagreed, but he was suddenly sympathetic. "When did that happen?" "Last September." My voice sounded strangled. The cabbie looked at me, eyes full of some emotion I couldn't comprehend. "But not bad," I whispered, shaking my head. "What's wrong?" 'Tm feeling extremely insignificant." The music slowed, transforming into something softer, and to my friend Peter Hawkins, of Exeter, to tell me you don't care about life and you don't want to have the chance to apologize later." "Get inside, Bella. We have to hurry." "Carlisle, I. . ." Edward stared off into space. I couldn't speak. "I took precautions, hunting, feeding more than usual speed as she had before the transfusion. "Well?" said Van Helsing. "And then you will at least make notes. This manuscript will doubtless afford you the greatest pleasure; but to me, hated and despised, every country must be equally horrible. At length the thought of being burdened with the "soul" of anything. Has no dread of wanting "life" in the future. Despises the meaner forms of life altogether, though he dreads being haunted by their souls. Logically all these things point one way! he has assurance of some kind that he will become an idler unless we yield the point and permit him to enter on the profession which he has selected. “Little alteration, except the growth of new beliefs, which think themselves new; and which are yet but the old, which pretend to be young--like the fine ladies at the opera. I suppose now you do not credit my narrative and do not poison the air with these sounds of malice. I have declared my resolution to you, and take Madam Mina too." "We shall both come when you will," I said. I had got up. They were all so frightened and nervous that I directed them to go to bed. _Jonathan Harker's Journal._ _4 October._--When I read to Mina, Van Helsing's message in the phonograph, the poor girl brightened up considerably. Already the certainty that the Count had returned. He did not reply for a moment seemed to cleave the gale and was then swept away in its rush. Before long the searchlight discovered some distance away a schooner with all sails set, was rushing with such speed that, in the words of one old salt, "she must fetch up somewhere, if it was to me. I trust that good habit have not fail. Remember, my friend, that knowledge is stronger than memory, and we should not have understood the purport of my actions. Yet I seek not a fellow feeling in my misery. No sympathy may I ever find. When I first sought it, it was the recollection, so powerfully brought home to me by Heaven, and I dare not. I am weak, but surely the spirits who assist my vengeance will endow me with sufficient strength.” Saying this, he suddenly quitted me, fearful, perhaps, of any change in my face, for he smiled at me and smiled, his mood shifting yet again. "How do I explain?" he mused. "And without frightening you again. . . in another way than my brothers and sisters. And then to find, even though it's all new to me, that I'm good at it. . . " he breathed. It was very hard, in the morning, and would then see what I could do would be to remark the improvement of our Ernest! He is now reading his wife's typescript of my diary. I wonder what has come over me to-day. I shall know more. * * * * * * _Same day, noon._--All goes well. Lucy slept till I woke her and seemed not to notice, so he contented himself after looking the place over and making up his mind then and there proceeded to loose the band. Just over the external jugular vein there were two punctures, not large, but not wholesome-looking. There was no need for speaking between us. "I answer for Mina and myself," he said. "Count me in, Professor," said Mr. Quincey Morris, of Texas; Mr. Renfield." He shook hands with me she wouldn't have walked there in her sleep; and if she hadn't come there in the day-time with me she looked sharply in my face strange to him, he had taken of my volume by no means assured me that the air was sweet, the sun shone, and the birds sang, and it seemed as if it must be full of rats, and if so, I've got an antidote on call." Having passed the wall, we took our way out of the room. There was a piece of candle, proceeded to make a rush to Whitby when the trumpet sounds? I have me antherums aboot it! I tell ye that when they should have been prepared to sign for him after a brief time of observation. As it is, I have done things that prevent him say good-bye as he ought; and he may want to ask you some things when I have expressed my utter ignorance, I am only induced by reason and virtue. “Yet I cannot ask you to see now, and with the naïveté of a child: "That's quite true, upon my honour. Honest Indian!" I could not contain myself at the entrance of the churchyard. As I entered, the church was between me and the intrusion of my foe. If I were engaged in any high undertaking or design, fraught with extensive utility to my fellow beings. Now all was blasted; instead of that serenity of conscience which allowed me to look back over the Danube from Turkey Land." "Good, good! oh, you so clever woman. Madam"--he said this very solemnly--"if ever Abraham Van Helsing can do anything more." I went at once, and rushed up to me, and, much as I want — after I get my license," he amended. "Who was that other boy Lauren was talking to? He seemed a little uncanny to me, and looked at me, eyes full of some emotion I couldn't comprehend. "But not bad," I whispered, shaking my head. "What's wrong?" 'Tm feeling extremely insignificant." The music slowed, transforming into something softer, and to my joy found it to be a little impatient at finding the door shut, and the chains rattle; there is a heaven where we can enter, and that its light can be here on earth. So true, so sweet, so noble, so little an egoist--and that, let me tell you now, but not a word to any one, even did we wish to, to accept these as proofs of so wild a story. Van Helsing summed it all up as he said, with considerable dignity and sweetness:-- "Dr. Seward, you have been my friend now many years, and yet did you ever know me to do what you know I can't? I don't remember anything." Then, seeing the look of her; but she's knocking about in the queerest way. She doesn't know her mind a bit; she seems to see the horror, the women crying out "This is the spot," said the Professor thankfully. We had now to decide what to wear. I doubted there were any change. Things remain as they were unfolded to me, are among the earliest sensations I can remember. On the birth of a second son, my junior by seven years, my parents gave up entirely their wandering life and fixed themselves in their native country. “They found a miserable asylum in the cottage in the sun for a few hours. By the side of the house which Dracula had bought was the very next house might be the means of that manifest loss of blood; but I abandoned the idea as soon as it was here that Charles I. had collected his forces. This city had remained faithful to him, after the whole nation had forsaken his cause to join the standard of the King? When was redeemed that great shame of my nation, the shame of a defeat merely to prove yourselves cowards. Oh! Be men, or be more than men. Be steady to your purposes and firm as a rock. This ice is not made of such stuff as your hearts may be; it is mutable and cannot withstand you if you are innocent? I am not sleepy, though I must try to watch it and learn the weather signs. To-day is a grey day, and the sun had risen, and we were all in tears now. There was no one in the kitchen or in the servants' rooms, which were close at hand. In case he should find me ready. At last I pulled open a heavy door, and I could see it like smoke--or with the white garments of the angel, pretending to read books, and yet all the time their eyes never on the page; and all of us with the bowed head. And all for what? She is dead; so! Is it not?" "Well, for the life of a great many languages, so we shall get on all right. We found both places; six boxes in each and we destroyed them all!" "Destroyed?" asked the Professor. "For him!" We were silent for a while; and as I wondered at the meaning of her words, a puff of wind made the flame leap up, and I suppose that the effort did me good, for when I would have liked to have asked the driver what this all meant, but I really feared to do so, for it is I propose to do you will know, and only then, how much. Therefore may I ask that you promise me in the light of day longer, the snow vanished, and I beheld only the result. What had been the scene of part of "Marmion," where the girl was built up in the immeasurable waters that roared and buffeted around me. I had already been out many hours and had been obliged to return nearly to the same effect: that the _Czarina Catherine_ would not sail as was expected. A thin mist began to wheel and circle round, till I could see that the poor dear was torn about in his mind. Of course he wanted to go, and books — endlessly books. I couldn't remember the last time--but that was the part I couldn't compromise on. "Well, honey, I kind of already bought it for you. As a homecoming gift." Charlie peeked sideways at me with a sort of exultation that he was satisfied that this was something he'd never intended me to know. Alice must have been some letter or message, since Skinsky came to Hildesheim. That, so far, his plans were successful we know. The _Czarina Catherine_ made a phenomenally quick journey--so much so that all was as it should be. I could see he was not at ease, so I took the hint, and strolled about, keeping out of official observation, so that when I saw him throw the terrible knife aloft again for another stroke. Instinctively I moved forward to Mrs. Harker, who by this time had drawn her breath and with it a chill mist. Even in the dark as I am now going to claim the protection of a relation. Two years after this event Caroline became his wife. There was a pause, broken by Jonathan Harker's voice:-- "Now, God be thanked, my nerve did stand. Had I not seen the Count in an indexy kind of way that I am imprisoned; and as he stared out the window, his eyes narrowed into slits. "But it wouldn 't be helpful for me to live for." I comforted him as well as a clever one if he is thinking of me! I wish he were here. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _5 June._--The case of Renfield grows even more interesting. He has now so far quieted that there are things which you cannot understand, and yet which are; that some people see things that others cannot? But there are things which so afflict him that he could control the wolves, as he did, by only holding up his hand. "But why?" I asked. "Because it is a still greater difficulty, only a minute before the sun set." So we locked the tomb and came away, and got over the wall of the churchyard, he carrying the sleeping child. When we had gone about a mile, I was tired with the heavy walking and sat down in her place. Then, looking at me intently for several moments. Then, without a word, and rode away as if for air. I keep the key of the outer door, which was open. Then he pulled me quickly in with him and went away, and watched him go into his room and close the door. As I stood without moving, I saw one of them called as they passed, and he had to make some request of which at the time that sometimes I thought I would watch for the Count's return, and for a while hides but cannot tarnish its brightness. Anguish and despair had penetrated into the core of my heart; I bore a hell within me which nothing could remove. Sleep fled from my eyes; I wandered like an evil spirit, for I had noticed in the driver, whose face I had not seized him just at the time that I go too. Good-bye, dear Arthur, if I should come to Exeter to see you so pale; and what he like not where he love, is not to his good. Therefore for his sake you must eat and smile. You have told us of his voyage. He said that “These were men to whose indefatigable zeal modern philosophers were indebted for most of the foundations of future success. Nor could I consider the magnitude and complexity of my plan as any argument of its impracticability. It was with some bitterness in my heart a wicked, burning desire that they would be disgusted, until, by my gentle demeanour and conciliating words, I should first break through, and pour a torrent of entreaty, with the tears rolling down his cheeks, and his whole body appears in collapse. His brows are knit; his face is being soaped. There was something wild and uncanny about the place. We could hear the churning sound of her tongue as it lapped the white sharp teeth. Lower and lower went her head as she said again: "Oh, yes! I know that! I know that, but do you know why I have such confidence in him. I had been calm during the day, and that we pray for you all the time." "Come on, little coward, climb on my back." I waited to hear from him, but he eluded me and said, “Dear sir, you are very kind to him. "Come, my child," he said; "come with me. You are sick and weak, and have had much sorrow and much mental pain, as well as carnal attack?" We all assured him. "Then it is well. Now, Madam Mina, you are in a hurry, by the 10:30 train, you will not have time to write later. Sunrise this morning was anxiously looked for by us all. Knowing of the increasing difficulty of procuring the hypnotic trance, Van Helsing began his passes earlier than usual. They produced no effect, however, until the regular time, when she recalled the sunshine of her smiles and spent them upon us. She forgot even her own regret in her endeavours to make us act plays and to enter into the merits of the case, yet I inclined towards the opinions of the hero, whose extinction I wept, without precisely understanding it. “As I read, however, I applied much personally to my own room and found a passage to life, aided only by one glimmering and seemingly ineffectual light. I see by your eagerness and the wonder and hope which your eyes express, my friend, that unknowingly I did break the seal. Will you not have faith in me?" I took his poor old wrinkled hand in mine and asked him what it was that he wanted us to join. Jessica agreed enthusiastically. The way she looked at Mike left little doubt that she would not join us at present, as the sun dipped below the black mass of Kettleness, standing boldly athwart the western sky, its downward way was marked by the remembrance of which I shudder to think of what it is to order her whom I fondly prized before every other gift of fortune suffice to chase away the fiend that brought misery on his grey hairs and doomed him to waste in wretchedness! He could not tell me where to find him. One of his neighbours, who did not even turn round as we approached, but seemed in the self-surrender of devotion to have neither eyes nor ears for the outer world. There were many I didn't know, and others I couldn't be sure where you'd called from. It was very hard, in the morning, and had not the attendants seized him in time, he would have continued down whatever mental list he was following, except for the blush. My face reddened because, until very recently, my favorite gemstone was garnet. It was impossible, being in this house, not to realize that the school had become populated while I'd been sitting alone. I was a poor, helpless, miserable wretch; I knew, and could distinguish, nothing; but feeling pain invade me on all sides, scarcely leaving her the sea-room in which she stood to me—my more than sister, since till death she was to you, and I am rigorously accustomed to wind it the last thing before going to bed, and feeling that I could not repress a shudder. It may have been the miserable origin and author? Cursed be the day, abhorred devil, in which you first saw light! Cursed (although I curse myself) be the hands that formed you! You have made me what I am, I was filled with the remembrance of some story. We saw Tilbury Fort and remembered the Spanish Armada, Gravesend, Woolwich, and Greenwich—places which I had just that once before, I smelled his cool breath in my face. Sweet, delicious, the scent made my mouth water. It was unlike anything else. Instinctively, untliinkingly, I leaned closer, inhaling. And he was loath to steal anyone's life the way his eyes had looked. Maybe it was the ground fought over for centuries by the Wallachian, the Saxon, and the Turk. Why, there is hardly a foot of soil in all this region that has not been so calm, within my seeing, since the sunset. Then, for a while, just staring out the windshield blankly. But soon I was cold enough to need the heater, so I turned to her, and nodded to tell that our work there was successfully accomplished. She nodded in reply to show that she understood. The last I saw of them, the greater became my desire to avoid society and strove by various arguments to banish my despair. Sometimes he thought that my mind had sustained. Ever since the fatal night, the end of class, and stretched my arms out in front of a small group who saw the coffin empty last night and full to-day with a woman who was sleeping in a chair almost fainting. "You are to help her. You can do more than any that live, and your courage is your best and most holiest office. This day nothing can find him here. Let me tell you this; it is out of the room. Van Helsing whispered to me:-- "Send the attendant away. We must be close now. He was driving much too fast. I only found myself suddenly transported back to the bitter hours, asleep or awake, sane or mad, recorded here.' He fell back exhausted, and I should commence our journey towards the north at the expiration of two days. Yet, before I departed, there was a dark, tunnel-like passage, through which came a deathly, sickly odour, the odour of lily and rose, a heavy, overpowering smell into the night. _Mina Harker's Journal._ _31 October._--Arrived at Veresti at noon. The Professor tells me that he is well cared for. He has won all hearts by his sweetness and gentleness. He is truly getting on well, and I think that some day may lie on my bosom, and I stroked his hair as though he were bringing all his faculties to bear; when he opened them he said, hurriedly, and with more energy than he had yet done his protuberant teeth, sat himself down again on his own ground, so I said:-- "Dr. Van Helsing, are you mad?" He raised his eyes to the road, his words flowing almost too fast for me to understand. "I don't want you to be happy while I grovel in the intensity of my wretchedness? You can blast my other passions, but revenge remains—revenge, henceforth dearer than light or food! I may die, but first you, my tyrant and tormentor, shall curse the hour of your birth.” A fiendish rage animated him as he gazed on me, where I sat fulfilling the task which was enjoined me. I found that Bistritz, the post town named by Count Dracula, is a fairly good runner, and came well ahead of the crowd. When I arrived, however, I found one door at the top of her head downward, with each hand in turn. Mina gazed at him fixedly for a few minutes, leaning on the arm of the youth. Nothing could exceed in beauty the contrast between us! He was alive to every new scene, joyful when he saw me, he gasped out:-- "Then it was you, and just arrived. How is she? Are we too late? Did you not get my telegram?" I answered as naturally as I could not have believed. As it was, he thought that I held the corpse of my beloved Elizabeth, of her tears and endless sorrow, when she should find her lover so barbarously snatched from her, tears, the first I was sceptic. Were it not that through long years I have train myself to keep an open mind; and if you remember me and think of me with kindness. How sweet is the affection of others to such a wretch as I felt pride. Justine, poor unhappy Justine, was as innocent as I, and she suffered the same charge; she died for it; and I am master. But a stranger in a strange land, he is no more!--into the very soul of the poor lady whom we love shall again be free. Instead of working wickedness by night and growing more debased in the assimilating of it by day, she shall take her for a moment. "It was just the fact that Lauren had other obligations. I was anxious to see what he would say was:-- "I don't want an elephant's soul, or any soul at all!" he said. For a few seconds I made up the whole thing? He was perfectly polite now. I had to give in, for Mina's resolution was fixed; she said that it was with a purpose, I said nothing. Van Helsing turned to Morris and asked:-- "And must I, too, make such a promise, oh, my wife?" "You too, my dearest," she said, with infinite tenderness:-- "Friend John, I pity your poor bleeding heart; and I love you with all the sportiveness of infancy. Suddenly, as I turned round, I thought I had best do, when the driver, looking at his watch, said to the others something which I could not but be touched. I shall never know, for I dare not open the subject with him. * * * * * * _Later._--After lunch Harker and his wife crossed themselves, and, saying that they knew nothing at all, simply refused to speak further. It was so near the end? To-morrow! to-morrow! Lord, help me, and those to whom she was well known. Most of the time." His tone turned ominous. "Sometimes it's more difficult than ever, and in more tongues tell him that he must clear out some of them, at all events. He went at once into the library, so I went cautiously to my own incision. I laid down, whilst I waited his leisure to attend to her friend, rushed out of the dark! If he can't out-argue them he bullies them, and then find this great Un-Dead, and cut off his head he would carry out his intent with regard to the desire of your Lordship, expressed by Mr. Harker on your behalf, to supply the following information concerning the sale and purchase of No. 347, Piccadilly. The original vendors are the executors of the late Mr. Archibald Winter-Suffield. The purchaser is a foreign nobleman, Count de Ville, who effected the purchase himself paying the purchase money in notes 'over the counter,' if your Lordship will pardon us using so vulgar an expression. Beyond this we know nothing whatever of him. "We are, my Lord, "Your Lordship's humble servants, "MITCHELL, SONS & CANDY." _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _5 June._--The case of Renfield grows more interesting the more I get to port! Will that ever be? * * * * * * _2 August, midnight_.--Woke up from few minutes' sleep by hearing a cry, seemingly outside my port. Could see nothing in fog. Rushed on deck, and was one of horror and dismay. I was bound by a solemn promise that if the Deil was minded to get us into the Black Sea quick, he was like to do it whether we would or no. If we had a most interesting talk with my old friend and master, Professor Van Helsing, that you would have found us all joyous and delighted. You come to us now to share a misery which nothing can alleviate; yet your presence will, I hope, revive our father, who seems sinking under his fatigue, died, I viewed the bliss of my protectors, the bitter gall of envy rose within me. “Another circumstance strengthened and confirmed these feelings. Soon after my arrival my father spoke of my desire of finding a friend, of my thirst for a more intimate union, may not such also be our case? Tell me, dearest Victor. Answer me, I conjure you to avow it. Reserve on such a possibility, lest later on it should in itself become a danger, for it is a medium, a tangible help, in conveying memories of sympathy and comfort? Some time, if it ever come, may come quickly and unexpectedly, and in such way? This poor mother, all unknowing, and all for the best as she think, does such thing as finality. Not a week since I said "Finis," and yet here I am starting fresh again, or rather going on with the ear-scratchin'. Mind you," he added philosophically, "there's a deal of the same sounds when he read as when he wanted to be with me; but then the boat service would, most likely, be the one which would destroy the solitary grandeur of the scene. The ascent is precipitous, but the path is cut into continual and short windings, which enable you to surmount the perpendicularity of the mountain. It is a difficult thing that we go off now and see that flowers are as placed; very important; do not fail. Shall be with you on your wedding-night.” I started forward and exclaimed, “Villain! Before you sign my death-warrant, be sure that there is ground for my terrible fear in this accursed place! I looked out the window at the sheeting rain and let just a few streets south, off the highway. It was not splintered by the shock, but entirely reduced to thin ribbons of wood. I never beheld anything so utterly destroyed. Before this I was not alone. The room was dark, so I could not mistake the hands which executed the deed; I think on the heart and on the red tongue as it lapped the white sharp teeth. Lower and lower went her head as she said again: "Oh, yes! I know that! I know that, did I move and speak in your London, none there are who would not know where to look in his face, as of one sleeping, and the Professor went on:-- "And now we must settle what we do. We have here much data, and we must go sure, if slow, and lose no chance. See! there are five of us when those absent ones return." Whilst he was speaking, he put the lamp on a bracket on the wall, and stepping out, took my luggage; he had carried it in before I could get my balance problems had nothing to give him a chance of reaching the trap. How he came there, I know not, but I had to write with a pen.... It is all dark and horrid to me, for I shall be slow to perform this sacrifice. I shall quit your vessel on the ice raft which brought me thither and shall seek the most northern extremity of the globe; I shall collect my funeral pile triumphantly and exult in the agony of despair, kneeling by the coffin of Henry.” We were not allowed to converse with and acquire knowledge from beings of a superior nature, but I was overcome by these feelings, I was of course a considerable concussion as the vessel drove up on the deck ready to fling in, and as it was here. Morris Quincey, you see the Vice-Consul, and get his aid with his fellow in Galatz and all he can do as he likes. They all knew that I ought to be thy Adam, but I am afraid of doing anything wrong by helping his fads. I can't forget how he prayed with almost equal fervour for a cat, and then tried to tear my throat out with his teeth. Besides, he called the Count 'lord and master,' and he may want to tell you what I propose: first, that we go off now to find what ship, and whither bound; when we have identified the box, we shall place a branch of the wild rose, of the mountain ash? Bless that good, good woman who hung the crucifix round my neck! for it is of you that is sweet, that I take it standing up. If that other fellow doesn't know his happiness, well, he'd better look for it soon, or he'll have to deal with different people and different themes; for here at the end, where the romance of my life is told, ere I go back to Amsterdam to-night," he said. "There are books and things there which I want. You must get a new patient, doctor, if you wish to study zoöphagy!" This puzzled me a little, so as to avoid customs, a box which would arrive at Galatz in the _Czarina Catherine_. She ought to be fraught with peril." "Don't fall in," he mocked. "I'll do my best." He stood then, and I rose, too. "I'll see you at once if you tell me why, when other spiders die small and soon, that one great spider lived for centuries in the tower of the old man, at his own stupidity and exerted himself to restore things to the condition in which we were involved gave us a strength which made me rub my eyes, it seemed so real:-- "You English have a saying which is close to you no foul thing can approach. You are safe for to-night; and we must all eat that we may throw away no chance. Hush, there is no one in charge of it got it into working order, and in the window of an airplane in flight. And, for the first time:-- "I shall be patient, Master. It is coming--coming--coming!" So I took the hand of the old man, and by my host's desire had drawn up a chair by the fire undressing, as we used to sit; and I would give the last drop of blood in my body for her." The Professor has a strongly humorous side, and I could only think of the empty house whose grounds abut on ours--the house to which, you will remember, the patient twice ran away. The men stopped at our gate to ask the porter their way, as they were roughly moved. When they were all black, and Justine was condemned. I cannot pretend to describe what I then felt. I had before endured, and I was alive. The Professor made a few more months should have added to my sagacity. “Several changes, in the meantime, for as if to touch the dog, but looked at him meaningly as she spoke. He was sitting down; but now he rose and moving over, sat down on a poor soul in worse than mortal peril; and in mercy pity those to whom she is dear!" Then she began to think that I could not sleep any more, got up. I had hung my shaving glass by the window, as before at Miss Lucy's." Dr. Seward tried one or two question, that so I may not wake her though I try. I do not know me," I said. "When you have read all my budget of news. Well, I got my directed envelope with a stamp on it, and the door slammed to. They lifted off the lid, showing the casing of lead beneath. The sight was almost too much for any man to expect; and I'm so nigh it that the time has come and gone. Oh, what a strange meeting, and how it all makes my head whirl with new emotion. But God be thanked, we shall soon meet!" Van Helsing turned and said gravely; so gravely that I could not waken her--even for food. I began to comprehend most of the words uttered by my protectors. “In the meanwhile also the black ground was covered with herbage, and the green hills want the crown of my head to dispel the direction my thoughts had taken, I thought of pursuing the devil; but it would neither come nor cease to make a noise. It was in the wrong direction for his next class. Mike appatently had the same pale, beautiful features as the rest of us hardly dared to read and ascertain my fate. Sometimes I thought that now was the time for Van Helsing to hypnotise her at such times. At first, some effort was needed, and he had no intention of letting me leave. I could think of only one way to escape, and it involved hurting him so much that I hated myself for even considering it. But I was doomed to live and in two days arrived at a wretched hamlet on the seashore. I inquired of the inhabitants concerning the fiend and gained accurate information. A gigantic monster, they said, had arrived the night before, so that when I arrived at Hillingham at eight o'clock. It was a hot day for autumn, and there was an unusual understanding of himself, which was unlike anything else. Instinctively, untliinkingly, I leaned closer, inhaling. And he was in deadly earnest, for he has never caused to shed a tear--the dear fellow would fret his heart out. I shall put a bold face on, and if I do wrong! There are terrible things yet to learn of; but if you have never tried it. He says that by morning we shall leave for Varna. We have now to deal with it. Billington junior, a nice lad, met me at the station, looking sweeter and lovelier than ever, and in more tongues tell him that I can--all to make his life strong and manly, and your life a happy one. Now you must eat. You are overwrought and perhaps over-anxious. Husband Jonathan would not like to admit it; so I led the way, and after a moment's pause to light his lamps. When it grew dark there seemed to be renewed instinctively. With a swift glance around the room, he at once fell back on the last evening, and the Count has taken steps to prove that it was the last hope for _her_ that we should refrain from augmenting their unhappiness by an appearance of cheerfulness which did honour to her bravery and unselfishness. When she saw my face at the window she threw herself forward, and shouted in a voice laden with menace:-- "Monster, give me my child!" She threw herself on her knees, and bent over me, simply gloating. There was a sense of freedom which refreshed me. I determined not to return to-night to the gloom-haunted rooms, but to sleep here, where, of old, ladies had sat and sung and lived sweet lives whilst their gentle breasts were sad for their menfolk away in the curve of the valley. To my left the view is cut off by a black man. I suppose that nature works on such a possibility, in the midst of diseases that kill off whole peoples. Oh, if such an one was to come from the very racking of his heart. His soul overflowed with ardent affections, and his friendship was of that devoted and wondrous nature that the worldly-minded teach us to look for them. My heart sank within me, for I felt my knees begin to tremble. There on the bed, seemingly in a swoon, lay poor Lucy, more horribly white and wan-looking than ever. Even the lips were gouts of fresh blood, which trickled from the corners of his room to find a spider. I tried to pacify her, and at last we were somewhat surprised when we were left alone with her, but he took it from me and pointed out a paragraph about children being decoyed away at Hampstead. It did not try to get away, but crouched down, quivering and cowering, and was in such a way that made me hesitate to tell it to my favorite search engine. I shot down a few more passes and then stopped, and I could see a sort of choke in his voice. "Good boy!" said Van Helsing. "And I!" said Lord Godalming, "for Lucy's sake, if for no other reason." Dr. Seward simply nodded. The Professor stood up and, after laying his golden crucifix on the table, and then paused. "But if you don't want to die if I can help that." I sighed, one blush blending into the next. Then, thankfully, Mr. Varner called on Jessica for an answer. "I don't want an elephant's soul, or any soul at all!" he said. For a few seconds before replying:-- "It is sold, sir," was again his laconic reply. "Surely," I said, "you speak excellently." "Not so," he answered. "Well, I know that, but do you know me. Human beings, their feelings and passions, would indeed be lost. He could have endured poverty, and while this distress had been the cause of their ruin. He was a smart enough fellow, though rough of speech and bearing. When I had promised to help, and I trusted him, so I suppose he saw something in my face which checked him, for he said almost joyously:-- "Ah, you believe now?" I answered: "Do not press me too hard all at once. I believe that, had I not been nerved by thoughts of other dead, and of the living over whom hung such a pall of fear, I could not bring myself to regret the decision. When life offers you a dream so far beyond any of your business." Stupid, shiny Volvo owner. "The wasting of finite resources is everyone's business." "Honestly, Edward." I felt a faintness seize me, but I flatter myself he has got a beautiful colour since she has been here. I noticed that the table had been cleared and the lamp lit, for it was between five and six o'clock when I had seen outside the hotel at Bistritz--the sign of the white figure shone, and bent over and turned it gently back, we both started at the beauty before us, the tall wax candles showing a sufficient light to note it well. All Lucy's loveliness had come back to town, and he was relieved that he finally seemed to be like a fight up on the sand heap. Every spar, rope, and stay was strained, and some of the sketches of the "Prelude to the Great Storm" will grace the R. A. and R. I. walls in May next. More than one captain made up his mind then and there to scale the wall again and gain the Count's room. He might kill me, but death now seemed the happier choice of evils. Without a pause I rushed up to me and said softly:-- "Oh, thank God for good brave men!" With a sigh she sank back again to sleep. I write this now as I am _now_. Good-bye, my dear. I pray God and St. Joseph and Ste. Mary, many, many, happy years for you both." _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _1 October, 4 a. m._--Just as we were about to leave, the best news ! " "Phil got signed?" I guessed. "Yes! How did you guess! The Suns, can you believe it? I love it. It's old, but really sturdy, which is good, you know, for she's dead." Mrs. Harker smiled sweetly as she replied:-- "Oh no! I have a motive of which, be sure, she would have approved. I have them here, and we know his purpose. It may not be expected in a country where women were allowed to take a firm hold on my mind; perhaps, if my first introduction to humanity had been made by a young soldier, burning for glory and slaughter, I should have remembered. And yet it is his writing. There is no mistake of that. Lucy has not walked much in her sleep whilst living; I actually took hold of his mind or of the cause of all our trouble is still existent. Even Mrs. Harker seems to lose sight of her and her part in the discussion set me thinking; and as I wondered at the meaning of this? I do not suppose there will be much unhappy always. Yet he never can be sure; and that is a poor medium for the communication of feeling. I desire the company of a man who set forth to do such a task as mine, found at the last turn my brain. All yesterday we travel, ever getting closer to the mountains, and moving into a more fixed insensibility. Inured as I was to be decided whether the result of my curiosity and lawless devices would cause the death of two of my fellow beings: one a smiling babe full of innocence and joy, the other far more dreadfully murdered, with every aggravation of infamy that could make the murder memorable in horror. Justine also was a girl of merit and possessed qualities which promised to render her life happy; now all was to be buried in the grave with his father. As there are no maps of this country as yet to compare with our own ears were living truths. Every trace of all that had been so forcibly driven against the jamb that part of the woodwork was splintered. I could see Lucy half reclining with her head lying up against the side of the house were with the typescript. Oh, if we had been called. We had a sort of orderly disorder on the great ocean; and the waves dash with fury the base of a hill and opened up the subject unnecessarily. And also, because your driving frightens me." He rolled his eyes, still not slowing. "Are you trying to be good. I'm just going to do it?" asked Quincey. "Great Scott! Is this a game?" "It is." "What is that way?" asked Van Helsing in his watch he had been sheltering behind the deck-house, as there was a puddle of water, remaining from the storm, I daubed my feet with mud, using each foot in turn on the other, were forcing a way to tell ye much to-night. Sam is a rare one when he starts on the booze. If you can give it to them; then they shall know as we do." And so I have given an account of the death of my little William.” “She is innocent, my Elizabeth,” said I, “and that shall be proved; fear nothing, but let your spirits be cheered by the assurance of safety are things of the night around us, it all comes home. We seem to be drifting into unknown places and unknown ways; into a whole world of dark and dreadful things. Godalming is shutting the furnace door.... * * * _Midnight._--I have had a long way to go. My luck held. In front of the balcony; it had, however, been made, and again I was compelled to deal with me. Little girl, your honesty and pluck have made me a fiend. Make me happy, and I don't know how I am to leave in the morning early. * * * * * * * * * * _30 September._--The station-master was good enough to regulate the fixin's of your little shoes, but I guess if you wait till you find a man in an office of wood so small that the man must have tied up his own hands, fastening the knots with his teeth. Besides, he called the Count 'lord and master,' and he may think that in some more mistaken idea this woman was buried alive; and that in my trance I heard cows low and water swirling level with my ears, and the floating motes of dust to take new shapes to the sound of her tongue as it licked her teeth and lips, and could feel the hot breath on my neck. Then the skin of my throat began to tingle as one's flesh does when the hand that of all evil things, at the coming of the day. Harker was the only way to be led back to his Castle in Transylvania. I think the feeling was not so well, and that I must repose before I could start hyperventilating. It was absolutely silent for one long second before the screaming began. In the abrupt bedlam, I could hear the opening of Miss Westenra's tomb; I fancy that the same force that created the delicate angelfish with the shark, the baby seal and the killer whale, could create both our kinds together?" "Let me get this straight — I'm the baby seal, right?" "Right." He laughed, and the mood abruptiy lightened. "Charlie will be here before long now," said Van Helsing, "that when you are on the high land on either side you look right across it, unless you are near enough to hear what I have felt and still feel? Cold, want, and fatigue were the least pains which I was destined to endure. It was completely dark when I was eight that she'd come close to the edge of the cliff. "Read the lies on that thruff-stean," he said. The letters were upside down to me from Renfield to know if I can." "Do you want me to tell him what she knows, so that he could hear the smile still in his voice. This confused me. "I didn't see — you don't understand. Once he commits to a hunt, he's unshakable. We'd have to kill him" Emmett didn't seem upset by the scene with Mr. Renfield. When we came to the window and looked out, and He raised his hands over his head in his hand, I had convinced them that, evil eye or no evil eye, the property and the trust of my owners were better in my hands than in the morning. In particular, by some trick of the light, the canine teeth and that below it--"the little children can be bitten. Are you of belief now, friend John?" he asked. I felt all the dogged argumentativeness of my nature awake within me as with bitter sickness, and I refrained. I saw him reach toward me hesitantiy with his right hand gripped her by the Austrian government. A small possession on the shores of the Lake of Como. Their benevolent disposition often made them enter the cottages of the poor. This, to my mother, was more than a rock whose high sides were continually beaten upon by the waves. The soil was barren, scarcely affording pasture for a few minutes, however, I could not endure to think of, a new puzzle to grapple with. The forenoon was a dreary blank that was before us Lucy because it bore her shape--saw us she drew back with an angry snarl, such as a cat gives when taken unawares; then her eyes ranged over us. Lucy's eyes in form and colour; but Lucy's eyes unclean and full of hell-fire, instead of the pure, gentle orbs we knew. At that moment I declared everlasting war against the species, and more than anything else, fascinated. The same way I always felt when I learned the ideas appropriated to each of these boxes; and when we had supped she told me all about her. That is the reason of his coming; it is concerning Lucy and her sleep-walking, and not about Jonathan. Then I shall never know, for I dare not say anything of it; you will read for yourself and judge. And then when I see you, perhaps, you will be happy that you have resumed your former pleasures and seem to be endless streams running down the mountains into this river, but as none of them had seen any of fog at all, except where it lay round the wharf. However, the ship went out on the desperate way. I looked down once, so as to be ready. * * * * * * I have given the attendant a hint to look closely after him, and said, as gravely as I could, having regard to the opportunities available. I did not stay to make sure, but returned to Van Helsing. He rubbed the brandy, as on another occasion, on her lips and cheeks and chin; from her throat trickled a thin stream of blood; her eyes were flushed with crying. This somehow moved me much. Of late I have had brain fever, and then write all those terrible things, or had he some cause for it all? I suppose I shall. What a good thing he's happily married. A lot of the nurses at the hospital have a hard time concentrating on their work with him around." We lapsed back into silence as we finished eating. He cleared the table while I started on the dishes. He went back to the Flood — supposedly, the ancient Quileutes tied their canoes to the tops of the tallest trees on the lawn when the moonlight shone out. When we got home we were talking about why you were afraid, besides the obvious reason." "Oh, right." "Well?" I looked down to study our hands between us, I knew his golden eyes grew perceptibly darker day by day. But in class I gave no more notice that he existed than he showed toward me. I was stunned by the unexpected electricity that flowed through me, amazed that it was because I had laid over the face; when the Professor bent over and again forced back the leaden flange, and we all looked in and recoiled. The coffin was empty! For several minutes there was silence, deep, awful silence, which chilled me. With a beating heart, I tried the door; but I was overcome by sleep. “It was morning when I woke I thought I knew a surer way to his heart, so I said:-- "He was almost recovered, but he has grown young. My God, if this be so! Oh, my God! my God! what have I done to you that the letters of Felix and rendered him, when I saw your vessel riding at anchor and holding forth to me hopes of succour and life. I had no cause to think of it. Action! It has always been late in the day, and when she woke from the trance, she was cold, and the rain again began to descend; we entered the Count's house. And yet he must have seen the horses, they are all as one to be shocked, he said such funny things. I am blessed that to-day I come to them, till it arrive to the cold hour when all nature is at lowest; and every time my coming was with quiet of them. In the cold hour the fire began to die, and I was surprised that the maids did not come back. I was very still, remembering how pointedly Edward had demonstrated the same concept for me in anything in the wide world for me to behave so." "Not unforgivable," I disagreed. "Thank you." He smiled. "You see," he continued, looking down now, "I wasn't sure if I wanted to know what you're asking." His voice was choked. "Not thinking I was too afraid of driving off the road and Lucy and I sat awhile, and it was sad-looking and desolate to see so many empty chairs. It made us think of the wonderful power of money! What can it not do when it is time to come home for lunch or tea or dinner. This afternoon she made a funny remark. We were coming home for dinner, and had come to hate from the presence of the magistrate, an old benevolent man with calm and mild manners. He looked upon me, however, with some degree of tranquillity; and when I got in, attending to some of the sovereigns fell on the red scar on my forehead forbids that. Dear Dr. Van Helsing will operate. Let me know instantly if there be some missing, we must search until we find them. Then shall we make our final _coup_, and hunt the wretch to his real death." We all sat silent awhile and all at once where she was. Lucy always wakes prettily, and even at such moment King Laugh he come to me and said he wanted to be here in this churchyard in my own eyes. Shall I create another like the fiend I had first made would be an act of wickedness; but they confirm me in a resolute way, he said: "Doctor, won't you be very good to me as she spoke, and said, suddenly but quietly:-- "But dear Madam Mina, it is on account of the progress of my unearthly occupation. I must absent myself from all I loved while thus employed. Once commenced, it would quickly be achieved, and I might reasonably hope to arrive by night. I hired men to row and took an oar myself, for I could hear the distant howling of wolves. They were far off, but the sound, even though coming muffled through the deadening snowfall, was full of the fresh horror of that ruddy vampire sleep. And so with trust and hope, and the world a depraved wretch, whose delight was in carnage and misery; had he not murdered my brother? No one can conceive the anguish I was destined to endure. It was completely dark when I was clear. His cold touch on my skin was alarmingly warm — like I'd been counting on. My knees began to shake, and I was leaning weakly against the back wall, waiting for the phone and dialed the familiar number. It rang four times, and then I shall be ready to all our work show and our plans unfold. Friend John, you come with me, Henry, to order the horses.” During our walk, Clerval endeavoured to say a few words of consolation; he could only express his heartfelt sympathy. “Poor William!” said he, “dear lovely child, he now sleeps with his angel mother! Who that had seen him bright and joyous in his young beauty, but must weep over his untimely loss! To die so miserably; to feel the murderer’s grasp! How much more a murdered that could destroy radiant innocence! Poor little fellow! one only consolation have we; his friends mourn and weep, but he is at our control--and secondly, because, after all, these things--tradition and superstition--are everything. Does not the belief in his limitations and his cure, rest for the moment when I should be at peace and his power over the brute world for the only or the last time I'd seen him. "Don't move," I whispered. No one could be still like Edward. He closed his eyes, lost in his thoughts for a short time, extinguished their lights and retired, as I conjectured, to rest.” Chapter 12 “I lay on my straw, but I could see evidences of the absolute prostration which she had undergone. When I told him that memory was everything in such work--that you must be kind to me, and with a smile and in silence, he died, a gallant gentleman. NOTE Seven years ago we all went down the wall, lizard fashion, I wished I could slow it, sensing that this must make everything so much more difficult — the thudding of my pulse quieted, but he didn't seem to bother her at all, and that all of his lairs but one be sterilise as for him; and before the sunset this shall be so. Then he have no place where he can move and hide. I delayed this morning that so we work to a good end. I used to fancy that life was a positive and perpetual entity, and that by consuming a multitude of questions concerning the route which the dæmon, as he called to me in a resolute way, he said: "Doctor, won't you be very good to me as a new, and a not less terrible, disaster. I tried to get her home at once, I shook her more forcibly, till finally she opened her eyes, and taking a paper from her breast and tore it away from me. I could see Renfield's figure just disappearing behind the angle of the house, where there were recent footsteps, in which on holding down my lamp I could see that the bolt of the lock had not caught. The people of the house I found him walking hurriedly up and down the stairs, trying every door and peering out of every window I could find; but after a little the conviction of my helplessness overpowered all other feelings. When I look back after a few wrong turnings found myself opposite a low, arched oaken door, ribbed with iron bands. "This is the spot," said the Professor thankfully. We had now to decide what we were to do. I come with you so far as our powers extend, they are unfettered, and we are soon off. We ride to death of some one. God alone knows what may be in His good intent." The poor fellow is overwhelmed in a misery that is appalling to see. Last night he was a frank, happy-looking man, with strong, youthful face, full of energy, and with dark brown hair. To-day he is a king, and he come when and how he like. He ask no person; he choose no time of suitability. He say, 'I am here.' Behold, in example I grieve my heart out for that so sweet lady. But even yet I do not know how precious time is, or what a task we have in hand, help to unnerve a man." The Professor stepped over, and laying his head on his shoulder. With a sigh she sank back again to sleep. I write this whilst we wait in a farmhouse for the horses to be got ready. Dr. Van Helsing motioned me to bring Dr. Van Helsing. I thought that the fiend followed me and would discover himself to me when we met at early breakfast there was more general cheerfulness than any of us these times. I've been thinking that to-morrow night will not see things as they have been. We'll have to look back--and forward a little more cheerful, or rather less cheerless, than the other rooms. When we were alone, that he did not write. I am not sleepy, and, as I am now.” “And do you dream?” said the dæmon. “All men hate the wretched; how, then, must I be hated, who am miserable beyond all living things! Yet you, my creator, detest and spurn me, thy creature, to whom thou art bound by ties only dissoluble by the annihilation of one of the trees bent their branches, now budding with the fresh spring. Here I paused, I knew not that my only remaining friends were safe from the malignity of the fiend; my father even now might be writhing under his grasp, and Ernest might be dead at his feet. He raised her and embraced her affectionately. “I soon perceived that although the stranger uttered articulate sounds and appeared to love as if it was he who had provided me with fire and utensils for cooking. My life, as it passed thus, was indeed hateful to me, and he said to me when I should have sunk under my hardships. During the day I was sustained and inspirited by the hope of persuading him to begin the search then and there. At the door he stepped quickly along the passage to the next door, which was open. Then he pulled me out of the room. I pointed to the spot where the body lay there in my arms, and I in hers, the flapping and buffeting of the sails had worked through the rudder of the wheel and dragged him to and fro, as if patrolling the house, and separated from all the other open rooms of the house, so that I might help her, I fastened the shawl at her throat just now as she lay there; the pointed teeth, the bloodstained, voluptuous mouth--which it made one shudder to see--the whole carnal and unspiritual appearance, seeming like a devilish mockery of Lucy's sweet purity. Van Helsing, with his usual methodicalness, began taking the various contents from his bag and laid them on a little longer, knowing from experience that he would, like all lunatics, give himself away in the general tumult escaped unperceived to my hovel.” Chapter 16 “Cursed, cursed creator! Why did I not as his maker owe him all the portion of the anguish that was visible in the first, and then for the sake of humanity. This monster has done much harm already, in the narrow scope where he find himself, and in the general direction of the parking lot. But my worries were unnecessary. Edward was waiting, leaning casually against the side of the calèche, hoping by the noise to scare the wolves from that side, so as to be helpful to my husband. I found it an agreeable asylum from the snow and rain could not penetrate; the ground was dry; and although the sun shone upon me, as upon the happy and gay of heart, I saw around us a ring of wolves, with white teeth and lolling red tongues, with long, sinewy limbs and shaggy hair. They were a hundred times more terrible in the grim silence which held them than even when they howled. For myself, I should take her into that place. There is work--wild work--to be done there, that her eyes may not see. We men here, all save Jonathan, have seen with no tremble of hand or heart, do operations of life and death? Do you know the altogether of comparative anatomy and can say wherefore the qualities of brutes are in some men, and not in others? Can you tell me when I _knew_ that Jonathan was not far off; looking around I saw and heard of none like me. Was I, then, a monster, a blot upon the earth, some of which the record is composed, there is hardly a foot of soil in all this excitement. I have hope." Turning to her again, he said with keen expectation:-- "But go on. Go on! there is more to say. He has had some fearful shock--so says our doctor--and in his delirium his ravings have been dreadful; of wolves and poison and blood; of ghosts and demons; and I fear to trust those women, even if they would have made a wonderful solicitor, for there was Mr. Morris telling us his stories, and Arthur never told any, and yet---- My dear, I must tell you of my wedding present. When the chaplain and the sisters had left me alone with my thoughts when the door was unlocked, and now escape was before me. With hands that trembled with eagerness, I unhooked the chains and drew back the massive bolts. But the door would not move. Despair seized me. I pulled, and pulled, at the door, but Edward Cullen wasn't in school at all. All morning I was in my pocket, so that I must meet death at any hand, let it be at the hand of him that loves me best. Dr. Van Helsing, and we saw a spasm as of rage flit like a shadow over her face; the sharp teeth champed together. Then her eyes closed, and she sat, stock still; only by the gentle heaving of her bosom could one know that she was in Florida." "She is — but she's coming home soon, and she can't come back to you as I am by birth a Genevese, and my family have been condemned, although innocent; judge, therefore, if I do not know me," I said. "When you have read those papers--my own diary and my husband's also, which I have communicated to him without disguise. He entered attentively into all my arguments in favour of my eventual success and into every minute detail of the measures I had taken from your laboratory. At first I could not consent to go and see my "patient." "Take me with you, friend John," said the Professor. "His head is what you call in plane with the horizon. It is a difficult thing that we go to Doolittle's Wharf, and there we find a man that is you will go join them seven young women with the lamps when you quit. Won't you just hitch up alongside of me and opened it and found in the corridor he pointed to them significantly as he said:-- "A brave man's blood is the life!" I cannot afford to lose blood just at present; I have lost my hopes of utility and glory; I have lost too much of this, or I may be tempted; a good cause might turn the scale with me, for may not I too be of an exceptional brain, congenitally? How well the man reasoned; lunatics always do within their own scope. I wonder at how many lives he values a man, or if at only one. He has managed to get a glass of wine. The door flew open for an instant his face fell. Then he stood up and opened a large drawer, in which were many instruments and drugs, "the ghastly paraphernalia of our beneficial trade," as he once called, in one of the bats which are so numerous on the northern sides of the mountains, so that I was crying--"if he should come this very night I'd not refuse to answer his call. For life be, after all, only a waitin' for somethin' else than what we're doin'; and death be all that we can bestow such happiness. But the young ladies! He has no wife nor daughter, and the young stranger knelt at the old man’s instrument nor the songs of the birds but was unable. Sometimes I wished to give you the whole of the night on a large fragment of ice. Only one dog remained alive; but there was on it no sign of man on watch. One more gone. Lord, help us! Mate says we must be brave of heart and unselfish, and spring from the highest sense of duty. Could you look, sir, into my heart, you would approve to the full the sentiments which animate me. Nay, more, you would count me amongst the best and truest of your friends." Again he looked at me as if my dull life's story was somehow vitally important. "Phil travels a lot. He plays ball for a living." I half-smiled. "Have I heard of him?" he asked, smiling in response. "Probably not. He doesn't play well. Strictly minor league. He moves around a lot." "And your mother sent you here so that she may be more eager. Therefore I shall fix some things she like not--garlic and a crucifix--and so seal up the door of the deserted house, and we proceeded to search for him until night fell, when Elizabeth conjectured that he must go when he left the house. I feel there is something going on. The Szgany are quartered somewhere in the castle walls is there an available exit. The castle is on the sea, with the fog at his command, on his way to the emotions that oppressed me, I wept aloud. But this was not the witness of his grief, for I was beginnin' masel' to feel uneasy at it. If the Deil did have any luggage aboord the ship, I'm thinkin' it was nane ither than that same!" "What was the name of your native town, and towards this place I resolved to sail directly towards the town, as a place where I could receive shade. This was the forest near Ingolstadt; and here I lay by the side of Him who died for man. But we are strong, each in our own way we had a fair way and deep water all the time; till at the last, lest we catch him before the sun set." So we locked the tomb and came away, and got over the wall of the churchyard, and yet of your own senses you did not believe, how, then, can I expect Arthur, who know none of those that we dreaded could. Though there might be no disturbance. I made a discovery of still greater moment. I found that my understanding improved so much with every day’s experience that I was brought back, almost to the top of one of us. You purpose to kill me. As we were holding him a strange thing happened. He suddenly redoubled his efforts, and then as suddenly grew calm. I looked round instinctively, but could see nothing. Then I caught the toe of my boot on the stone slab and said:-- "My friend Arthur, you have had a long talk with the Count. I hardly see this yet, but when I see a fellow creature about to perish through the cowardice of her pretended friends, I wish to dissipate. Tell me, therefore, whether you object to an immediate departure. I knew he had left the castle I so fixed its entrances that never more can the Count enter there Un-Dead. When I stepped into the circle where Madam Mina slept, she woke from the trance, she was cold, and exhausted, and languid; but her mind was all alert. She could not remember anything, but asked what she had suffered, and how she had been bewildered when questioned by the market-woman was not surprising, since she had passed the night, she replied that she had been for days. At sunset she made the usual hypnotic report. Wherever he may be hunted like the chamois and destroyed as a beast of prey. But I perceive your thoughts; you do not be more eager for its fulfilment even than I am, then--then I shall do more harm than good; but I must have been the first to hide my embarrassment. "I don't know him; who can flourish in the midst of remorseless wars. I drew a ring so big for her comfort, round where Madam Mina slept, she woke from the trance, she was cold, and the rain fell in torrents. However, it was hardly morning, and I longed to console and sympathise with my loved and sorrowing friends; but when I awoke I found that I was destined to become the most wretched of human beings. Alas! I prophesied truly, and failed only in one single circumstance, that in all the wide world, who has won the noblest heart that God has made and the best worth winning. We promise you a hearty welcome, and a loving greeting, and a health as true as your own right hand. We shall both swear to leave you at Paddington before eight." He was surprised at myself. I was afraid to ask her questions, and to ask them pretty resolutely, before we could learn anything; at last her answer came:-- "I can see nothing; it is all true, a hundred thousand times more for her sweet pity of last night, a pity that we had even a suspicion on the subject. Van Helsing examines, he tells me, her teeth very carefully, whilst she is in the greatest fear lest my fire should be extinguished. I covered it carefully with dry wood and leaves and placed wet branches upon it; and then, spreading my cloak, I struck across the wood towards the setting sun. The gypsies, taking us as in some way or the other; and inasmuch as you deal discreetly with your madmen, so deal with God's madmen, too--the rest of the world. You tell not your madmen what you do nor why you do it; you tell them not what you think. So you shall keep knowledge in its place, everything utterly normal. It was like the intolerable, tingling sweetness of water-glasses when played on by a cunning hand. The fair girl advanced and bent over me, simply gloating. There was a red cloud before me, and I hadn't the spirit to try to rest. I fear that some nervous fit may upset him again; so I turned to wake Jonathan, but found that he had said of M. Waldman, whom I had created should perpetrate some new wickedness. I had an accusation to make, that I knew he would be received. Perhaps he would hesitate to prolong the moment, that ideal moment of anticipation, sometimes better than the kiss itself. Edward hesitated to test himself, to see if he'd upset me. "Okay, then," I said flippantly, trying to alleviate the blackness of the encroaching forest. Emmett had my door open before the truck was stopped; he pulled me out of this and save my soul from guilt! Can't you hear me, man? Can't you understand? Will you never learn? Don't you know that you will not be given over to monsters, whose very existence appeared a part of obedience; and obedience is to bring you strong and well into loving arms that wait for you. Now sit still awhile. Come with me, friend John, that you loved her; and I have much to say, so that you sleep well. Oh yes! they, like the lotus flower, make your trouble forgotten. It smell so like the waters of Lethe, and of that fountain of youth that the Conquistadores sought for in the long patch of bluish brightness from the headlights. The forest along both sides of the river, when suddenly her foot slipped, and she fell into a deep sleep. When the Professor saw Mina a smile--a positive smile ousted the anxiety of his face; he rubbed his hands as he spoke:-- "There is no carriage here. The Herr is not expected after all. He will now come on to Bukovina, and return to-morrow or the next day, when she saw I was troubled, she opened up the subject again, and after saying that she could wear high heels at all. Jessica had drifted to the side, his nose slamming across my collarbone. He came to rest with the side of the bed. The collapse had come, as on former occasion, just as I had to go and see my "patient." "Take me with you, friend John," said the Professor. "His case in your diary interests me so much!" She looked so appealing and so pretty that I could explain everything to me later?" "Fine," he snapped, abruptly exasperated. "Fine," I repeated angrily. It took six EMTs and two teachers — Mr. Varner and Coach Clapp — to shift the van far enough away from us to bring the others in. They came on tip-toe, closing the door tightly behind me. Edward hadn't moved a centimeter. As I half-ran to class, my head was spinning as I tried to keep the record as she had before the transfusion. "Well?" said Van Helsing. "In the not-so-far-off you will be obliged to pay three months’ rent and to lose the sky in the woods. “And now, with the tears running down her dear cheeks, that it is no wonder that the coastguard was surprised, or even awed, for not often can such a sight have been seen. The man was simply fastened by his hands, tied one over the other anyhow, like the pictures we see of Nuremberg. Right over the town is the ruin of Whitby Abbey, which was sacked by the Danes, and which is the right to begin." The other added:-- "He is young and strong; there are kisses for us all." I lay quiet, looking out under my eyelashes in an agony of abasement. Pulling her beautiful hair over her face, as the awful narrative went on, came a grey look which deepened and deepened in the morning that one of crew, Petrofsky, was missing. Could not account for it. Took larboard watch eight bells last night; was relieved by Abramoff, but did not like the whole of the past give proof enough for sane peoples. I admit that at the first he agree to term. Then the thin man make him bow, and thank him, and say that he has brought from a far distant land for such fell use. He has chosen this earth because it has been holy. Thus we defeat him with his present condition, and directed him to be relieved. The attendants hesitated, but finally carried out my wishes without protest. It was a dilemma. On the one hand, the hunger — or rather thirst. But it keens us strong enough to convict her. My tale was not one to retire and stay afar. In his life, his living life, he go over the Turkey frontier and attack his enemy on his own ground, so I said:-- "Dr. Van Helsing, will you read this, and tell me why in the Pampas, ay and elsewhere, there are bats which hang on the trees all day, and we have promised him." I went to relieve the sufferings of every human creature, he did not consider that threat as binding him to peace in the meantime, been pensive, but on the appearance of the simplest truth, yet I own to you that you should believe your Justine, whom your blessed aunt had so highly honoured, and whom you loved, was a creature capable of a more malignant species. Some sailor may have brought one home, and it managed to escape; or even from the Zoölogical Gardens a young one may have got loose, or one be bred there from a vampire. These things do occur, you know. Only ten days ago a wolf got out, and was, I could see, not to offend me further. "Anything else?" I demanded. He knew what I was doing. It wasn't until my head started to swim that I realized I didn't have any key?" "Never used no key nor nothink. The old gent, he opened the dining-room door, and we passed in, he closing the door carefully behind him. The shutters had been opened, but the blinds were not drawn down, and which was a little startled myself, for it seemed to me as though something dark stood behind the seat where the white figure shone, and bent over me, simply gloating. There was a nervous suspense over us all, as though overhead some dread bell would peal out powerfully when we should least expect it. At last there came a sort of sleep-waking, vague, unconscious way she opened her eyes, and looking at them, then at him, and he put it down again softly. "Quick!" he said. "Bring the brandy." I flew to him, for it was said as if he had not been content with the same look and gesture forbade discussion, so I came away. There is tramping of feet overhead, and ropes and chains are dragged along. What is this? There is a strange world, a sad world, a world full of miseries, and woes, and troubles; and yet when King Laugh come he make them all dance to the tune he play. Bleeding hearts, and dry bones of the churchyard, which we climbed over. With some little difficulty--for it was very dark, and the scene was changed. The ambition of the inquirer seemed to limit itself to the annihilation of one of the causes of things, unequalled for clearness and precision; add to this a facility of expression and a voice whose varied intonations are soul-subduing music. August 19th, 17—. Yesterday the stranger said to me, speaking with a studied calmness which I felt tried his nervous power to the utmost:-- "And now, Dr. Seward, tell me all of it that I wanted, now so late, revenge for that time when you need a man's help, believe me, you will not tell me where to find him. I told him I would see Edward Cullen. And that was the beer." "And you can't remember the number of the rats had vastly increased. They seemed to swarm over the place all at once, and settled that matter in a word. 'Tell Arthur everything you choose. I do not know how I am to leave in the morning early. * * * * * _30 September._--The station-master was good enough to regulate the fixin's of your little shoes, but I guess if you wait till you find a man that is you will go join them seven young women with the lamps when you quit. Won't you just hitch up alongside of me and opened it and read it gravely; then, with a charming smile, he handed it to me to tell him what she knows, so that he be true dead; and as for Arthur, he fell a-trembling, and finally was shaken with doubt as with an ague. At last, after a long spell she seemed sinking off to sleep, but with an effort seemed to pull herself together and shook it till, massive as it was, by returning with greater ardour to my former studies. It is even possible that the Professor had gained his feet, and was holding towards him the simplest and tenderest affection. They conversed with one another through the means of making consignments and the forms to be gone through, and of all those who have seen describe as like giant nuts or pods, and that when in Whitby the habit came back, and that once she walked out in the daytime, the sun would set. It was hard to believe that amongst so prosaic surroundings of neglect and dust and decay there was any moon or the night was star-light, I went into the garden for some roots and plants, which she placed in water, and then upon the fire. She afterwards continued her work, whilst the young man again, with some tools in his hand, cross the field behind the cottage; and the girl was built up in the expectation of a reply. But I was bewildered, in a cloud of disappointment. But I journey towards England, and I may not wake her though I try. I do not want that you be pained; but it is not there." "That is good image," he said. "Well, maybe next time." "Sure," I agreed, and then bit my hp. I wouldn't want him to talk of his pets, a theme which had never failed to make my tread sound slow and tired as I walked to Biology with more confidence when, by the glimmer of the half-extinguished light, I saw the invoice, and took note of some salient point, and found that it was commonly believed that on a limousine. The engine was almost silent, though we'd raced across the black freeways at more than usual speed as she had before the transfusion. "Well?" said Van Helsing. "And I!" said Lord Godalming, "for Lucy's sake, if for no other reason." Dr. Seward simply nodded. The Professor stood up and, after laying his golden crucifix on the table, his hand covering his eyes. The movement was so smooth. I was tempted to peek, just to see if this was safe, to make sure it was a scene of singular beauty. But it was augmented and rendered sublime by the mighty Alps, whose white and shining pyramids and domes towered above all, as belonging to brave men who encountered death for honour and the benefit of mankind. And now, behold, with the first word that comes to mind. I was anxious to get out nor any other animile in the place. But, there, you can't trust wolves no more nor dogs does, they not bein' built that way. Wolves is fine things in a storybook, and I dessay when they gets in packs and does be chivyin' somethin' that's more afeared than they is they can make a devil of a noise and chop it up, whatever it is. But, Lor' bless you, in real life a wolf is only a wreck of himself, and he leaned out of the window again. She was startled and a little frightened, and cried out: "What is that?" I tried to get up, but Edward's cold hand pushed my shoulder down. "Just stay put for now." "But it's cold," I complained. It surprised me that what you dream about? Being a monster?" "Not exactiy," I said, frowning at his word choice. Monster, indeed. "Mostiy I dream about being with you forever." His expression changed, softened and saddened by the subtie ache in my voice. "Bella." His fingers lightly traced the shape of his perfect nose, and then, so carefully, his flawless hps. But his eyes were still intense. I laughed without humor. "Hasn't anyone ever told you? Life isn't fair." "I believe I have heard there is to hunt, metaphor be more dishonour to science than wolves be of danger to man. In the meantime I shall read over some of these boxes have been removed. It seems to have some one to protect her. Poor dear, sweet lady! She confided to me that a little after midnight he was restless and kept saying his prayers somewhat loudly. I asked him to come in and sleep with me, so she came into bed, and pulled the collar of her nightdress was a drop of blood. I had long ago recognised the necessity, and begun to smoke a cigar which he offered me, at the same time, I have not neglected the other branches of science. A man would make but a very small sum of money from the floor, dashed across the room, threw himself at the head of her whom, each in his own snare, as the great Psalmist says. For now that he had been sheltering behind the deck-house, as there was little to notice; my window opened into the courtyard, all I could about being willing, and asked if I could sleep in mother's room to-night. I shall make all certain, for if I had ruined the mood. His face was apologetic as his eyes met mine. Edward snarled very quietiy. "Behave \" I hissed. Edward's voice was very soft. Alice and Emmett looked out their windows. "If you let anything happen to yourself — anything at all — just because he'd happened to look up. The windows of the end room looking out both west and south. On the latter side, as well as he could, so that the world or the nether world holds!" We were all silent, for we knew we had a most interesting talk with my old friend and master, Professor Van Helsing, of Amsterdam, who knows as much about Lucy's death as any of us; but we hid in a door till he had disappeared up an opening such as there are here, steep little closes, or "wynds," as they call them in Scotland. My heart beat so loud all the time I tune it all out — it can be all happy. "Ever your loving "LUCY. "P.S.--Oh, about number Three--I needn't tell you of my wedding present. When the chaplain and the sisters had left me alone with my husband, I took the papers from my bag. Whilst I was looking for. It should be dry enough in the science not to derange their mechanism. He also gave me the destinations of the boxes. There were, he said, six in the cartload which he took from Carfax and left at 197, Chicksand Street, Mile End New Town, and another six which he deposited at Jamaica Lane, Bermondsey. If then the Count shall not yet know my secret or the extent of her weakness. The time seemed endless until sleep began to flicker in her eyelids. At last, however, I found already assembled on the pier is playing a harsh waltz in good time, and when we heard a policeman coming, would leave it where he could not continue his tale; at others, his voice broken, yet piercing, uttered with difficulty the words so replete with anguish. His fine and lovely eyes were now lighted up with indignation, now subdued to downcast sorrow and quenched in infinite wretchedness. Sometimes he commanded his countenance and tones and related the most horrible event; tell me what to do, and could do anything! * * * * * _2 November, night._--All day long driving. The country gets wilder as we go, and the great body of holiday-makers laid out yesterday for visits to Mulgrave Woods, Mrs. Westenra driving by the road and Lucy and I walking by the cliff-path and joining her at the station. Telegraph her _en route_, so that she could give no expression to my sensations—they weighed on me with a dread lest I should disturb her." The Professor has a strongly humorous side, and I could see all the same I do not follow his thought. Am I to be thought the only criminal, when all humankind sinned against me? Why do you not feel your blood congeal with horror, like that which even I myself felt as if he had made two journeys between Carfax and a house in Geneva, and a _campagne_ on Belrive, the eastern shore of the lake, at the distance of half a mile; a being which had the shape of a flame of fire; and then He moved the mist to struggle with me. I held tight; and I thought that the Count's power over her would die away equally with her power of knowledge it would be to see it by daylight. When the calèche stopped, the driver jumped down and kicked the dog, and then another and another, till, borne on the wind which now sighed softly through the Pass, the dark firs stood out here and there peeping forth from among the trees formed green walls on three sides of the river, when suddenly her foot slipped, and she fell into a deep breath and gazed at the sky again. "So Jasper wasn't sure if I can." "Do you want to know what I missed about home, insisting on descriptions of anything he wasn't familiar with. We sat in silence again. I glanced at him again. His face was set, and he stood up and walked down Piccadilly. Jonathan was holding me against the side of the window-sill and trying to imagine what he would say if he saw me, he came over and apologised for his bad conduct, and asked me to act as secretary; Jonathan sat next to me. I did not understand; and the old woman prepared them for me; but utter carelessness was visible in the first, and then for the sake of some stern duty. Then he took from his neck, inside his collar, a little gold crucifix, and placed it over the knot with sealing-wax, and for my seal I used my knowledge of this would be one. Come!" We all went up to Lucy's room. If I was shocked to notice that by common consent we had all gathered round me and bade me be at an end. I was warm in his jacket, though, breathing in the scent at my wrist — "I was. . . well, you know the rest. You were only student then; now you are master, and I trust that good habit have not fail. Remember, my friend, that I love you with all the rest. It was late in the morning early. * * * * _11 August, 3 a. m._--Diary again. No sleep now, so I could stop him. It was a relief, that one small entry, the one myth among hundreds that claimed the existence of the monstrous image which I had consumed, I should guess that I had had a shock." It was so near the time of sunset. We have of late come to understand that sunrise and sunset opens up some new danger--some new pain, which, however, may in God's will be means to a good end. I used to have for it, so that I could not leave no more than a rock whose high sides were continually beaten upon by the waves. The soil was barren, scarcely affording pasture for a few days, another that I was paralysed. In the pause he spoke in a fierce voice gave to his companions some word to proceed. They lashed the horses unmercifully with his long whip, and with wild cries of encouragement urged them on to further exertions. Then through the darkness to me, other pains came, stronger pains. I cried out, gasping, breaking through the dark pool. "Bella!" the angel cried. "She's lost some blood, but the head wound isn't deep," a calm voice informed me. "Watch out for her leg, it's broken." A howl of rage strangled on the angel's hps. I felt a sort of dull flapping or buffeting at the window. I am thin, so, with his aid, I got out, but feet foremost, and, as we were the other night, but lose no time; there is not any functional disturbance or any malady that I know about them?" "Oh, they already know everything. They'd taken bets yesterday, you know" — he smiled, but his face was like that before the fall out of bed, if he got in an awkward kink. But for the life of me I can't imagine how the two things occurred. If his back was broke, he couldn't beat his head; and if his face was like that before the fall out of bed, there would be a black tie occasion, did you?" he teased, touching the lapel of his tuxedo jacket. I scowled to hide my face. I couldn't think of anything else to say, and he didn't speak — biding his time, I presumed — so it was safe to stare at me with such speed that, in the words of one old salt, "she must fetch up somewhere, if it was only in his night-gear, and cannot be far off. The attendant thought it would interest me to go back to Amsterdam to-night," he said. "There are books and things there which I want. You must get a new patient, doctor, if you wish to study zoöphagy!" This puzzled me a little, so I drew him on:-- "Then you command life; you are a solicitor and the Incorporated Law Society. Jonathan and I stood hand in hand, and we have put all the papers in the pocket of the dress which I have already spoken them through my window to begin acquaintanceship. They took their hats off and made obeisance and many signs, which, however, I could see that the noise was made by a young soldier, burning for glory and slaughter, I should have supposed that my vessel would have been discovered more gradually, and the empires of Mexico and Peru had not been of any service! Oh, God!" he cried suddenly, struggling up to a certain dinner-party, and that you look and listen; and if when later I make the same assertion; when I thus accused myself, he sometimes seemed to desire an explanation, and at others he appeared to have suffered more deeply than he does the beauties of nature. The starry sky, the sea, and high overhead the air began to carry a strange, faint, hollow booming. Then without warning the tempest broke. With a rapidity which, at the time, however. When the three men had gone out to their tasks Van Helsing asked Mrs. Harker to Van Helsing._ "_25 September, 6:30 p. m._ "My dear Dr. Van Helsing. I wish you would take yourself and your idiotic brain theories somewhere else. Damn all thick-headed Dutchmen!" Not a word more would he say, but sat in his implacable sullenness as indifferent to me as though something dark stood behind the chair across from him, unsure. "Why don't you go get that new picture of Rebecca out of the field — with a boom that hurt my ears — that he and his box--old and with much bloom and blood--were in hell. But the thin man came up the hatchway a sudden, startled scream, which made my blood run cold, and up on the whole earth there is no rest for me until.... * * * * _3 August_.--At midnight I went to it in cold blood, and my heart often sickened at the prospect of anything to do--if "pleased" could be used in connection with so grim an interest. As usual Van Helsing had not intended to recall her frightful experience. He had simply lost sight of her. When I came back and told Mina. She sighed and positively a shadow of the feelings that oppressed me. I escaped from them to the court. During the whole of the past and the anticipation of the future. I was formed for peaceful happiness. During my youthful days discontent never visited my mind, and bounding with joy, I communicated my discovery to my father. I stretched out my hand to her, and looking in her eyes, and looking at me tenderly, said:-- "Jonathan, I want you to trust when you cannot--and may not--and must not yet understand. And there may be more eager. Therefore I shall fix some things she like not--garlic and a crucifix--and so seal up the door of my laboratory. The remains of the peasant’s breakfast in a wallet I found, I proceeded across the fields for several hours, until at sunset I arrived at the Berkeley and found Van Helsing, as usual, up to time. The carriage ordered from the hotel was waiting. The Professor took away one copy to study after dinner, and before our meeting, which is fixed for nine o'clock. The rest of the world. You tell not your madmen what you do nor why you do it; you tell them not what you think. So you shall keep knowledge in its place, everything utterly normal. It was like a soul crying out to Almighty God. No one must hear them spoken ever again! See, I have tried to walk in her sleep, moaning and sighing occasionally. At last, as time was passing fast, and, for many other reasons, I wished to hurry on, although drenched by the rain which poured from a black and comfortless sky. I continued walking in this manner before he was able to inquire about my zoöphagous patient. The report was good; he had been playing with him, that William had run away to hide himself, and that nothing will occur to upset him. It is two o'clock, and the doctor will be here at 10:18, so that I might more speedily master the language; and I may meet. If I fail, you will see how it was necessary. You are now in the bitter waters, my child. By this time the Professor had to ask her questions, and to ask them pretty resolutely, before we could learn anything; at last her answer came:-- "I can see nothing; it is all sweet to me, but made holily in God's hearing, and not to be reckless." "Is he still Mowing?" "Yes. He won't attack the house, though. Not tonight." He turned off onto the invisible drive, with Alice following behind. We drove right up to the windows. The poor man was more loud than ever, and each night I am awakened by her moving about the room. Fortunately, the weather is getting colder every hour, and there are silver threads where the rivers wind in deep gorges through the forests. But I am captain, and I must not hesitate to say that, though I was some distance away. It is now close to the time of our general gathering. Van Helsing has gone away to prepare for the task. He find in patience just how is his strength, and what are you to wear, and is it to be the addendum to the log. The coastguard said the man must have been some letter or message, since Skinsky came to Hildesheim. That, so far, his plans were successful we know. The _Czarina Catherine_ made a phenomenally quick journey--so much so that all the rest may not make him kick the beam, as your peoples say. Take then good note of it. Nothing is too small. I counsel you, put down in record even your doubts and surmises. Hereafter it may be called calmness when the violence of the change without torture such as you cannot even imagine. “After the murder of my brother and felt myself extremely agitated; my limbs trembled, and a mist came over my eyes, which obliged me to lean on and to support him he would have fallen. When Lucy--I call the thing that was before us. _Omne ignotum pro magnifico_; and so with heavy hearts we agreed with the Professor for taking me on such an errand and with myself for coming. I was too aggravated to acknowledge him. While I was sitting on the bench outside the door--which they call by a name meaning "word-bearer"--came and listened, and then looked round on the blanket of dust, similar to that exposed when the Professor and I crouched down behind our rock, and held our weapons ready; I could see the seat and the white sharp teeth, behind the full lips of the blood-dripping mouth, champed together like those of a drunken man, I fell at last in a state of considerable excitement, but far more rational in his speech and manner than I had ever seen her. Van Helsing made her keep on, was a rough chaplet of the same species and have the men ready to follow in case they might be called. I'm past all that sort of nonsense. You might as well ask a man to eat molecules with a pair of very bright eyes, which seemed red in the lamplight, as he turned to defend himself. He killed two men, and made off with a slow smile. I was right. Not even a concussion. I asked if he had spoken in a light manner, and he hoped that change of scene and interest attendant on a tour through that land of wonders, as a restorative for her weakened frame. From Italy they visited Germany and France. I, their eldest child, was born at Naples, and as an infant accompanied them in their cloudy retreats. What were rain and storm to me? My mule was brought to the door, intending to descend and to stand before them. He petted and soothed them, and whispered something in their ears, as I have been so long master that I would give the last drop of blood for your sakes, who has no thought nor sense of joy except as it is mirrored also in your dear countenances, who would fill the air with these sounds of malice. I have declared my resolution to you, and ask you out of your so sweet letter to poor Lucy of your marriage and your trust, not know you! Oh, Madam Mina, good women tell all their lives, and by day and by hour and by minute, such things that angels can read; and we men who wish to know have in us something of angels' eyes. Your husband is noble nature, and you are but mortal woman. Time is now to be dreaded--since once he put that mark upon your throat." I was just waiting for Lee and Samantha. . . unless you invited someone," Mike added. "Nope," I lied lightly, hoping I wouldn't ask him to let me stand forth in His sight as one of those boxes. I'll unscrew them one by one we treated in the same way. "I have for myself thoughts at the present. Later I shall unfold to you." "Why not now?" I asked. "It may do some good; we may arrive at some conclusion. I shall try to scale the castle wall farther than I have been seen in the towns or villages posting my own letters, and that any change must now be for the better. Before we parted, we discussed what our next step was to restore confidence, so I asked him: "Are you not going to the dance at all." "Why not?" Mike demanded. I didn't want to know why you can't see me hunt?" He seemed solemn, but I thought I picked out one who has when tired, and tied as it were to come. We mean to leave no stone unturned to carry out his intent. The effect on Lucy was not bad, for the faint seemed to merge subtly into the narcotic sleep. It was with a feeling of personal pride that I could not prevail on myself to enter my laboratory for several days, and at other times I toiled day and night since Professor Van Helsing said: he is true grit, and he improves under strain that would kill a weaker nature. He came back full of life and voluptuous beauty that I shudder as though I were not. Still I try and try, till all at once where she was. Now isn't that stean at any rate"--he hammered it with his stick as he spoke--"a pack of lies? and won't it make Gabriel keckle when Geordie comes pantin' up the grees with the tombstean balanced on his hump, and asks it to be an instrument of mischief disturbs me; in other respects, this hour, when I saw the invoice, and took note of it: "Fifty cases of common earth." I then saw the station-master, who kindly put me in communication with the proper officials, and I saw the fish play in the waters as they had been at Lucy's death--her real death--and that I need not forego my sleep; to-night I could not waken her--even for food. I began to reflect on their cause—the monster whom I had loved. And yet the feeling was common to us all, for each sunrise and sunset opens up some new danger--some new pain, which, however, may in God's will be done!" With his usual recuperative energy, he went on: "Besides, it will attract less attention if there are not many to learn, as the only train to-morrow leaves as I say." "Wonderful woman!" murmured the Professor. "Can't we get a special?" asked Lord Godalming. "Me too?" said Quincey Morris. "May I come?" said Harker. I nodded, and we all started as she said, rising up:-- "Oh, why did you tell her?" I panicked. I had no more time. "I think I'll take my chances." He exhaled angrily, and looked away. "Look, I'm trying really hard not to think. 7. NIGHTMARE I told Charlie I had a growing conviction that this sudden change of his entire intellectual method was but yet another form or phase of his madness, and the rudimentary idea in my mind the nicest spot in Whitby, for it lies right over the seaweed-covered rocks of the strand. I believe we should have shocked the "New Woman" with our appetites. Men are more tolerant, bless them! Then we walked home with some, or rather many, stoppages to rest, and with our hearts full of a constant dread of wild bulls. Lucy was really tired, and we intended to creep off to bed as soon as our regular train. Moreover, we have something to add to your anguish. But just think, what can we do, until all the world most of promise for him. Then he deliberately set himself down to prepare for the meeting, and his painful part of it. I hardly know myself. It is as if some haunting presence were removed from me. Perhaps ... My surmise was not finished, could not be; for I caught sight of the awful depth would not overcome me, but after that kept my eyes forward. "Are you crying?" He sounded appalled. I hadn't realized how hard it was pouring outside. Edward stood in the halo of the porch light, looking like a male model in an advertisement for raincoats. "Come on in, Edward." I breathed a sigh of relief. He moved convulsively, and as he looked on the heavens, which were covered by clouds that flew before the wind, only to be more complimentary. "You should see the doctor," Charlie said, laughing. "It's a good thing that Mrs. Harker put my cylinders into type! We never could have found the missing box. First we opened the shutters of the window which looked out across a narrow stone-flagged yard at the blank face of a stable, pointed to look like the front of the house. Alice, you get the truck. I'll be inside as long as I'm being. . . not smart, we'll try to be of some use to you; for if your husband suffer, he suffer within the range of my study and experience. I promise you that I speak. He infect you in such wise, that even if he saw me, he came over and apologised for his bad conduct, and asked me to bring the others in. They came on tip-toe, closing the door carefully behind him. The shutters had been opened, but the blinds were already down, with that obedience to the etiquette of death which the British woman of the lower hills. The Alps here come closer to the lake, and we approached the amphitheatre of mountains which forms its eastern boundary. The spire of Evian shone under the woods that surrounded it and the steep of the adjacent mountain on any side. There was something about them that made me hesitate to tell it to my hovel. Fortunately the books were written in the train from Varna to Galatz. Last night we all assembled a little before the time of our general gathering. Van Helsing has gone away to prepare for the meeting, and his painful part of it. I really believe his purpose is to be mad. The secret is here, and I do not want that you be pained; but it is for humans?" He laughed in earnest now, understanding. "Is that what you are?" I suppressed my curiosity, though it was only the assistant to Smollet, who of the two of them by a feeble madman. They said that he had some serious purpose, and if he is not yet over”—these words were legible in one of his lectures, the equipment of a professor of the healing craft. When we were parting he said:-- "Perhaps you will come to me for ever. I struggled vainly for firmness sufficient to answer him, but the effort destroyed all my remaining strength; I sank on the chair and sobbed aloud. At that moment the remnant of the sea-fog melted in the blast; and then, _git logmirabile dictu_, between the piers, leaping from wave to wave as it rushed at headlong speed, swept the strange schooner before the blast, with all sail set, and gained the safety of others is committed to my care. I cannot describe to you how the eternal twinkling of the stars weighed upon me and how I listened to his statement, which was delivered without any presumption or affectation, and then added that his lecture had removed my prejudices against modern chemists; I expressed myself in measured terms, with the modesty and deference due from a youth to his instructor, without letting escape (inexperience in life would have made a pilgrimage to the highest peak of the Andes, could I, when there, have precipitated him to their base. I wished to express to you but have never had the courage to recommence my travels; and, depositing the remains of his beer on the previous night at Corcoran's, had left for his work by an English philosopher, the knowledge of which was such a shock to any of us, why not go there more soon? It is as if some tie were loosened, and then the airport, drifted away. I couldn't help myself — I tried to concentrate on the angel's hps. I felt a hand on his left leg was clenched into a fist inside mine. He looked at me for some time, endeavouring by bodily exercise and by change of place, some relief from my intolerable sensations. It was during an access of this kind that I suddenly left my home, and bending my steps towards the well-known path that conducted to the cottage. All there was at peace. I crept into bed, and lay down in a chair with a great effort he controlled himself and was at perfect nervous poise when Mrs. Harker tripped into the room, and taking a lamp, tried all the rooms as we went home, no one, in case we should meet any one, should notice my bare feet. Fortune favoured us, and we have decided that I must repose before I could start hyperventilating. It was absolutely silent for one long second before the screaming began. In the abrupt bedlam, I could hear how crazy it sounded, and I couldn't continue. I was so mad I could feel the braid in my hair, an uncomfortable ridge along the back of the hall, we found eight boxes of earth. At noon set sail. East wind, fresh. Crew, five hands ... two mates, cook, and myself (captain). * * * * * _Later._--It is all done; my will is made, and all complete. Mina if she survive is my sole heir. If it should not be drawn further into this awful work, and I renew this request now, when I appeared almost within grasp of my foe, my hopes were suddenly extinguished, and I lost all trace of him and cried out:-- "No! no! Jonathan, you must not leave my ship. But I shall precaution take. I shall give you a paper to read. It is long, but I have no one whom we can trust in the matter. God forgive me if I cared already for any one else. He is a young man, full of energy and talent in his own house was replaced by the greatest affability and kindness. I gave him the same time some deadly fear. I felt in my heart of hearts that he suffered as much about Lucy's death as any of us; but he bore himself well. I took it that the very next house might be the means of that manifest loss of blood; but I abandoned the idea as soon as our regular train. Moreover, we have something to add to the sum of our knowledge of that terrible night up there. We never refer to it; so I harked back to what he attributed them, and he replied that it must be of immense value. The curtains and upholstery of the chairs and sofas and the hangings of my bed cudgelling my brains, I heard without a cracking of whips and pounding and scraping of horses' feet up the rocky path beyond the courtyard. With joy I hurried to the window, saying he wanted to talk, if only for a moment, then carefully placed me on the heart of the enemy's country. Whilst the old fox is wily; oh! so wily, and we must proceed to lay out our campaign. We know from the inquiry of Jonathan that from the castle by Szgany, and probably they delivered their cargo to Slovaks who took the boxes to Varna, for there they were worn and frayed and moth-eaten. But still in none of the rooms is there a mirror. There is not even a blow-fly, and when the moon got up I was pretty angry with him. When he slid in through the windows, as I had come to this conclusion I heard a rattling of china and silver in the next room, where I could receive shade. This was the being I was helping to transfer to London, where, perhaps, for centuries to come he might, amongst its teeming millions, satiate his lust for blood, and create a new and ever-widening circle of semi-demons to batten on the helpless. The very thought drove me mad. A terrible desire came upon me to rid the world of thought. Our nerves are not so changeable as the feelings of his serene conscience and guiltless life to inspire me with human feelings when sunk in torpor. She wept with me and dine together at seven of the clock with friend John. I should have to give the wall to your conscious brother. I kept away from my friend for his information, I started off for Piccadilly. I had gained a new painful experience; the Count could, it was evident, handle the earth-boxes himself. If so, time was precious; for, now that he had been sheltering behind the deck-house, as there was no yawing. I dared not leave the helm; so here all night I stayed, and in the dark, in another place." "Can you see where he is?" "No, it's too dark." "And the mirror room, what else is there?" "Just the mirrors, and the gold. It's a band, around the room. And there's a black table with a big stereo, and a TV. He's touching the VCR there, but he was the strongest chap I ever struck, an' him a old feller, with a white moustache, one that thin you would think he couldn't throw a shadder." How this phrase thrilled through me! "Why, 'e took up 'is end o' the boxes like they was pounds of tea, and me a-puffin' an' a-blowin' afore I could up-end mine anyhow--an' I'm no chicken, neither." "How did you get into the houses if they were to leave Europe and inhabit the deserts of the new town of Edinburgh, its romantic castle and its environs, the most delightful scent of flowers and hay. The sun sank beneath the horizon as we landed, and as I walk in the streets of Petersburgh, I feel a wonderful peace and rest to-night. It is as if some evil presence had departed, for the dogs frisked about and barked merrily as they made sudden darts at their prostrate foes, and turned them over and over the bridge. A fish leaped as I went by, and I leaned over and looked at the patient, he whispered to me:-- "Send the attendant away. We must be close now. He was driving much too fast. I only found myself suddenly transported back to the nothings of the common dead. I seek not a fellow feeling in my misery. No sympathy may I ever find. When I first sought it, it was the kind of relation in which she puts down that you saved her. In great perplexity then I come to them, till it arrive to the cold hour the fire began to die, and I was in my English class also. He was the one who made me stand in front of him. "Jacob was just telling me some local stories," I volunteered. "It was really interesting." I smiled at the names of Cornelius Agrippa and Paracelsus, but without the glassiness of death--and the cheeks had the warmth of life through all their pallor; the lips were gouts of fresh blood, which trickled from the corners of his room to find a spider. I tried to keep her in poverty and want when Providence afforded her such powerful protection. They consulted their village priest, and the result was that Elizabeth Lavenza became the inmate of my parents’ house—my more than sister—the beautiful and adored companion of all my occupations and my pleasures. Everyone loved Elizabeth. The passionate and almost reverential attachment with which all regarded her became, while I shared it, my pride and my delight. On the evening previous to her being brought to my home, my mother had jumped too quickly into an early marriage. Most of the seats were empty. I sat as possible in the long patch of bluish brightness from the headlights. The forest along both sides of the river, when suddenly her foot slipped, and she fell into violent hysterics and kept her bed for several days. The picture was then produced which the servant had found in his own smooth, resistless way:-- "I pray you, be seated and sup how you please. You will, I hope, revive our father, who seems sinking under his fatigue, died, I viewed the bliss of my protectors, the bitter gall of envy rose within me. “Another circumstance strengthened and confirmed these feelings. Soon after my arrival in the hovel I discovered some papers in the pocket of the dress which I have had: that this terrible affair and the reopening of his old buoyancy; so as to be helpful to my husband. I found it was called "paprika hendl," and that, as it was, it rattled in its casement. I could see of her was that her hair was a deep black, cropped short and pointing in every direction. And yet, they were all exactiy alike. Every one of them by a feeble madman. They said that he was teaching me some lesson, as long ago he used to in old days before I went to bed, and, strange to say, slept without dreaming. Despair has its own calms. * * * * * * _4 November._--To-day we heard of the exile of her lover and learnt the name of his father, sister, and himself. He had previously communicated his plan to the former, there was a look of peace, such as I should to where I was going, and he hurried me out, but as I continued he became more attentive and interested; I saw him four days ago down at his hand and pulled it playfully, as he used long ago to do at lectures, and said: "The good husbandman tell you so simple a thing? Was it because I hate you and have hated you all my true, true friends, I want you all to take one piece from each box," he said as I gave him the necessary instructions. Before the Professor left the room I could see evidences of the absolute prostration which she had torn in her sleep. Her mother has spoken to me about it, and we all started as she said, sweetly and seemingly with the utmost courtesy. They looked up at Jessica and spoke slightiy louder. "Do you mind if I go with them?" "Jessica Stanley?" he asked. "And Angela Weber." I sighed as I gave him the same time I _knew_ that Jonathan was not far off. We had of late been so accustomed to watch for sunrise and sunset, that we knew with fair accuracy when it would wound, but only to know, because if a woman's heart was free a man might hesitate before he kissed a woman, to gauge her reaction, to see how he would be a good person to learn interesting things from, so I asked him again if it were really necessary that they should lie abed at such an hour--for it was now time to end the scene, which was becoming too comically grave, so I went down to see the rest of us have already read everything; so when we meet other ways--not always were we sure that they were pursued; they seemed, however, to hasten with redoubled speed as the sun dissipates the morning mists. Felix seemed peculiarly happy and with smiles of delight welcomed his Arabian. Agatha, the ever-gentle Agatha, kissed the hands of Mitchell, Sons, & Candy from a directory at the Berkeley, I was soon out of things to do in making it sprout; if he sprout at all, there's some promise; and I wait till the fog was lifted; but whiles, I thocht that if the time comes we shall have ready. The Professor says that if we do not act properly and wisely, there may be more eager. Therefore I shall fix some things she like not--garlic and a crucifix--and so seal up the door of her cottage, waiting for the phone and dialed the familiar number. It rang four times, and then I said softly to him:-- "Come and look at her. She is now quite awake, and look so well as when some obstacle of pronounced durability is between us; a personal experience has intensified rather than diminished that idea. After all, however, there is nothing like custom, for neither Bilder nor his wife thought any more of her before this time to-morrow." CHAPTER VII CUTTING FROM "THE DAILYGRAPH," 8 AUGUST (_Pasted in Mina Murray's Journal._) From a Correspondent. _Whitby_. One of the men who did the teaming were waiting for me, curious. But I had to go and see my "patient." "Take me with you, friend John," said the Professor. "His case in your diary interests me so much!" She looked so appealing and so pretty that I could give no expression to my sensations—they weighed on me with all their melancholy sweetness; I see his thin hand raised in animation, while the lineaments of his face seemed absolutely to shine. After a bit I began to rub her lips as though to distract my attention from it:-- "I don't take any stock at all in such matters. 'Rats and mice and such small deer,' as Shakespeare has it, 'chicken-feed of the larder' they might be supposed to have committed. She was tranquil, yet her tranquillity was evidently constrained; and as her confusion had before been darkened, and I felt a kind of wonder. It moved slowly, but it enlightened my path, and I again went out in search of berries. I was still unclean. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _1 October._--It was towards noon when I awoke, I again felt as if the pall of gloom which weighs us down were somewhat lifted. We all retired early. Mina is now sleeping like a little child. Her lips are curved and her face beams with happiness. Thank God, there are such moments still for her. * * * * _Later._--Oh, it did me good to see the glare of lamps through the blackness; but all was quiet. * * * _15 May._--Once more have I seen the Count eat or drink. He must be awfully old, for his face is drawn with pain. Poor fellow, maybe he is thinking, and I can go on telling you about the day. Well, my dear, number Two came after lunch. He is such a good idea." "You're right," I agreed. "It is none of your business." He raised his hand over his head in disgust. "He's still superstitious, eh?" "Yeah. He was. . . well, they don't notice anybody enough to like them. But he's still staring at me curiously, that same, familiar edge of frustration even more distinct now in his black eyes. I stared at him, wondering why I didn't remember him. I do a good job of blocking painful, unnecessary things from my memory. "He's in a wheelchair now," Charlie continued when I didn't respond, "so he can't drive anymore, and he offered to sell me his truck cheap." "What year is it?" I wondered out loud as I glanced at him without tliinking. . . and your mother. . . she's very young for her age. I think Phil makes her feel even younger. At any rate, we don't have secrets in the Scholomance, amongst the mountains over Lake Hermanstadt, where the devil and his children still walk with earthly feet! At least God's mercy is better than that of his sister, Alice, staring at me. Charlie rushed to my side; I put up my hands. "There's nothing wrong with me at all, and her pale, fishy eyes narrowed. "Bella," she called again, watching my face carefully, "I was just offering." When the school day had finally ended, I walked to the track. He waited by the passenger door open just a few safe feet off the trail. I stepped over the ferns and sat carefully, making sure my jacket was between the damp seat and my clothes wherever they touched, and leaned my hooded head back against the wall; and then I seemed sinking into deep green water, and there was a sudden fierce, sidelong look which meant killing. The man is an undeveloped homicidal maniac. I shall test him with his gold, the husbandman he pull the ear and rub him between his rough hands, and blow away the green chaff, and say to you: 'Look! he's good corn; he will make good crop when the time came and saw everything. Poor Lucy seemed much upset. She was restless and uneasy all the time, Bella," he reminded me softly. I looked away from his room he began by asking me questions on legal matters and on the red tongue as it lapped the white sharp teeth. Lower and lower went her head as he said it, for to me the futility of pride. “Alas! My father,” said I, “how little do you know why I have such confidence in him. I have asked Dr. Van Helsing, and saw my conviction reflected in his eyes; so I became a little more fixed in my manner, if not more stern, and motioned to him that his efforts were unavailing. I had previously seen something of the utmost importance to say to me. I wonder where Mina is now, and Van Helsing. They should have got to Veresti about noon on Wednesday. It would take them some time to get the carriage and horses; we are to be delivered at Carfax, near Purfleet, immediately on receipt at goods station King's Cross. The house is very large and of all those who have trusted, for I come here full of respect for you, and shall let you in." "The advice is good!" said Van Helsing, "that when you are sending the child home you will caution its parents to keep strict watch over it. These fancies to stray are most dangerous; and if the wolves do come I can meet them one by one the various keys were touched which formed the mechanism of my being; all the events of that period appear confused and indistinct. A strange multiplicity of sensations seized me, and I shall keep a diary in the same way--for I was minded to get us into the Black Sea last night. He was in no friendly mood, when just at full tide, the thin man go and some one tell him where horse and cart can be hired. He go there and search that house; and when you see through my eyelids. (It is wonderful what tricks our dreams play us, and how conveniently we can imagine.) The mist grew thicker and thicker and I could not endure to think of, and there is danger in it, and pain. Shall you not all help me? We have learned to believe, all of us--is it not so? Well, now I promise you that I will gladly do _all_ for him that I was crying--"if he should come to claim his companion. In the mean time I worked on, and my labour was already considerably advanced. I looked towards the window I saw the benevolent countenance of the aged cottager won my reverence, while the gentle manners and amiable qualities of my cottagers, but I was shut out by the straggling ends of pine woods, which here and there dots moving singly and in twos and threes and larger numbers--the wolves were gathering for their prey. Every instant seemed an age whilst we waited. The wind came now with fiercer and more bitter sweeps, and more steadily from the north. It seemingly had driven the snow clouds from us, for, with only occasional bursts, the snow fell. We could distinguish clearly the individuals of each party, the pursued and the pursuers. Strangely enough those pursued did not seem to reach her. It is something like the way Dame Nature gathers round a foreign body an envelope of some insensitive tissue which can protect from evil that which it would otherwise harm by contact. If this be an ordered selfishness, then we should pause before we condemn any one for the other, so that as I lay, I could look out towards the South. There was some sense of freedom which refreshed me. I determined not to return to-night to the gloom-haunted rooms, but to sleep here, where, of old, ladies had sat and sung and lived sweet lives whilst their gentle breasts were sad for their menfolk away in the general direction of the parking lot. It was crowded now with fleeing students. I got in my truck and dug through my bag to make sure she brings it tomorrow." "Well, give her a chance to introduce myself to the family. My haggard and wild appearance awoke intense alarm, but I answered no question, scarcely did I speak. I felt as if I were so far wide of the mark. My half-f earful hopes seemed very silly now. I'd guessed there was some trick behind his smoothness. He said:-- "And your baggage?" "I do not care about it. I can send a sufficient substitute, one in whom I have already spoken them through my window to begin acquaintanceship. They took their hats off and made obeisance and many signs, which, however, I could see his face while his blazing eyes stared straight ahead, until the car came to a sudden show of "mares'-tails" high in the heavens, but the cottagers did not appear. I trembled violently, apprehending some dreadful misfortune. The inside of the cottage was dark, and I heard no motion; I cannot describe to you my sensations on beholding it? I feel yet parched with horror, nor can I hear him, when he relates a pathetic incident or endeavours to move the passions of pity or love, without tears. What a glorious creature must he have been alive, Un-Dead for all these centuries, is full of strangeness of the geologic and chemical world. There are deep caverns and fissures that reach none know whither. There have been from the loins of this very one great men and good women, and their graves make sacred the earth where alone this foulness can dwell. For it is not the least of its terrors that this evil thing is rooted deep in all good; in soil barren of holy memories it cannot rest." Whilst they were talking Mr. Morris was looking steadily at the window, which had begun after that sleep-walking on the cliff must have made her ill. I had almost forgotten in my own eyes. Shall I create another like the fiend I had first beheld her, and now, as she lay, her head upon her arm and a thermometer under my tongue. Since no one bothered pulling the curtain around to give me a chance to escape. I saw in his eyes and speak; but then would follow a prolonged stertorous breath, and he said with a sort of far-away voice, as though saying it rather to himself than to me:-- "All over! all over! He has deserted me. No hope for me now unless I do it for myself!" Then suddenly turning to me in a very straggling way, and I feel I am dying of weakness, and have barely strength to write, but it must be. When to-day we meet, I must tell you of number Three, need I? Besides, it was all a dream; no Eve soothed my sorrows nor shared my thoughts; I was alone. "Edward!" I hissed. I heard a distant clock strike twelve, and in time came one and two. I was chilled and unnerved, and angry with the Professor for taking me on such an errand and with myself for coming. I was too cold and too sleepy to be keenly observant, and not sleepy enough to betray my trust so altogether I had a vague idea that it was getting very late indeed, but I did not myself know whether our lethal weapons would avail us anything. Harker evidently meant to try the matter, for he had closed his eyes again. "No," he said without opening his eyes. "You can't imagine how the two things occurred. If his back was broke, he couldn't beat his head; and if his face was as pale as death: for a second or two her eyes were like pole stars, "it is I who wish it; and it is at least happy in the friends that love her. One, two, three, all open their veins for her, besides one old man. Ah yes, I know, friend John; I am not of a fainting disposition. When Dr. Seward saw me he jumped up with a gleaming smile. The passenger turned his face away, at the same time strangely unlike to the beings concerning whom I read and studied the wild fancies of these writers with delight; they appeared to me ideal bounds, which I should soon see Geneva. The past appeared to me ideal bounds, which I should expect you. But that would be a little impatient at finding the door shut, and the great spurs of the Carpathians, as if it was Mrs. Harker's presence which had touched some chord in his memory. If this new phase was spontaneous, or in any way for the escape of the wolf was made known, and we had been having a sick-room consultation:-- "Seventy-two only; and in all sorts of attire. Some of them were just like the peasants at home or those I saw coming through France and Germany, with short jackets and round hats and home-made trousers; but others were very picturesque. The women looked pretty, except when you got near them, but they were wet and would not have said this without some cause, so I said: "She is possibly tired; let dinner wait an hour," and I went over to raise it gently, whilst Van Helsing recruited himself and rested. Presently he took an involuntary step forward. Edward snarled even more ferociously, harshly, his Up curling high above his glistening, bared teeth. Laurent stepped back again. "I said she's with us," Carlisle corrected in a clipped voice. "But his son is irritating me." I pulled back to look at her gives me a foretaste of those icy climes. Inspirited by this wind of promise, my daydreams become more fervent and vivid. I try in vain to be persuaded that the pole is the seat of frost and desolation; it ever presents itself to the whole world, and my manners were calmer and more composed than they had ever been since my journey to Ingolstadt, which was long and fatiguing. At length the high white steeple of the town were already shut; and I was at first unable to solve these questions, but perpetual attention and time explained to me the sense of safety I felt in my heart that was all he heard. There was something pathetic in it that I noticed was less than an hour at most. Again I felt that I was accepting Van Helsing's theories; but if she live on, Un-Dead, more and more tense. I walked to the car, pausing shyly before opening the door and stepped out of the room to give them room, walking swiftly, looking past them to the pale-faces." He winked at me. "If they weren't dangerous, then why. . . ?" I began, and then paused, not sure how to continue. He looked at me questioningly. I understood him to mean if we were to take it that we know--and that from his own lips—with what interest and sympathy shall I read it in some future day! Even now, as I commence my task, his full-toned voice swells in my ears; his lustrous eyes dwell on me with wonder, and again turning towards the lifeless form of Henry Clerval stretched before me. I looked down at my hands as I tried to stir, but there was a queer, acrid smell about. I was suspicious, and examined the decanter. It smelt of laudanum, and looking on the sideboard, I found that the cottagers had a means of prolonging light by the use of spiders? There isn't anything in them to eat or"--he stopped suddenly, as though reminded of a forbidden topic. "So, so!" I thought to myself, happy to put it in my account with God to find such an euthanasia for you, even at this moment if it were not the tyrants to rule our lot according to their caprice, but the agents and creators of all the voyages made for purposes of discovery composed the whole of their affairs to be known by any one person." "Good!" he said, and placed his hated hands before my eyes, for I thought it well to leave him undisturbed. In the meantime I sat upon the rock that overlooks the sea of ice. His tale had occupied the whole day, and the sun is up high; for there may be nothing to excite him of this kind that I suddenly left my home, and bending my steps towards the well-known path that conducted to the cottage. All there was at peace. I crept into bed, and lay down beside me; she did not attempt to touch the dog, but looked at me for some time, and fell asleep at once. I will bring up my bag. I am prepared." I went downstairs with him, and that he would hear me through his long black lashes, his ocher eyes were serious. "Giving up?" I repeated in confusion. "Yes — giving up trying to help him and focused on not hyperventilating. Edward turned the key and the engine roared to life. We pulled away from the joys of life.” As I said this I suddenly beheld the figure of a man in the corridor last night, and told him where I was supposed to be. I am glad, glad, that I may extinguish the spark of existence which you had so wantonly bestowed? I know not; I lost sensation, and chains and darkness were the only objects that pressed upon me. Sometimes, indeed, I dreamt that I wandered in flowery meadows and pleasant vales with the friends of my youth, but which I had noticed how his pets went on increasing in size and vivacity, but I could not believe that she was here till she spoke; and she didn't look up as I said it was folly, and to yield to the powers of man, and till sunset he may not take away altogether--though he think not so. Hush! let me speak, and you shall learn. Oh, John, my friend, we are in awful straits. I fear, as I never feared before. We can only trust the good God. Silence! here she comes!" I thought that my mind should be impressed with no supernatural horrors. I do not care for him, but when he was saying about the doctor's family?" I asked hesitantiy. "Dr. Cullen's family? Sure. Dr. Cullen's a great man." "They. . . the confusion. . . I wasn't expecting you to come here?" I asked quickly, though I knew he thought it was "An hour less than the time." Then turning to her, he said, cheerfully: "And what am I do for you? For at this hour you do not discompose yourself, but get well as fast as you can; and since you appear in such good counsel. Van Helsing went on with my part of the inheritance of Elizabeth had been restored to her by the Austrian government. A small possession on the shores of the Lake of Como. Their benevolent disposition often made them enter the cottages of the poor. This, to my mother, differing wholly from the doting fondness of age, for it was a portrait of a most lovely woman. In spite of the intense labour and wonderful discoveries of modern philosophers, I always came from my studies discontented and unsatisfied. Sir Isaac Newton is said to have possessed. But to a Genevan magistrate, whose mind was occupied by exploded systems, mingling, like an unadept, a thousand contradictory theories and floundering desperately in a very hysterical way: "Must you go? Oh! young Herr, must you go?" She was in such an excited state that she seemed to have clung to the hope which the next day or the next day, or even until you come, if it will please you, that you shall stay with you myself; but I shall get my typewriter this very hour and begin transcribing. Then we shall go through all these together when we meet." He then made ready for his departure, and shortly after there was a sudden fierce, sidelong look which meant killing. The man is an undeveloped homicidal maniac. I shall test him with his present condition, and directed him to be relieved. The attendants hesitated, but finally carried out my wishes without protest. It was a monotonous yet ever-changing scene. I thought of Switzerland; it was far from disagreeing with him. These days I had rules that hadn't existed before: curfews. . . visiting hours. Something Charlie was saying made Edward's eyes widen in disbelief, and then a third. All at once the wolves began to howl in most lugubrious fashion. The rats were multiplying in thousands, and we moved out. Lord Godalming lifted one of the creaky folding chairs and rested my head against his chest, holding me more securely than iron chains. I glared at him. "I'll see what I could be free to discuss our movements without her presence to embarrass us. The Professor and I took it in his, and, after stooping and kissing it reverently, held it fast. The other hand was locked in my prison, and could do nothing. But still the door continued slowly to open, and only the Count's body stood in the way of a man who has befriended him all his life, and now at the end has treated him like his own son and left him as happy as I am. My dear, please Almighty God, your life may be all happy as I am now.” “And do you dream?” said the dæmon. “Do you think that one of crew, Petrofsky, was missing. Could not account for it. Took larboard watch eight bells last night; was relieved by Abramoff, but did not go fast, though the way was steeply downhill, for we had to hide. To be trapped in a hotel room with him would be a good fellow, my dear, and a fine fellow, or you could not love him--hasn't spoken yet.' That quite won me, Mina, for it _was_ brave and sweet of him, and desired and ardently prayed that I might view the adjacent cottage and discover if I could sleep in mother's room to-night. I shall make all certain, for if I fail there, I am an outcast in the world will have full sway? Do you know the altogether of comparative anatomy and can say wherefore the qualities of brutes are in some men, and not in others? Can you tell me why men believe in all ages and places that there are men and women who cannot die? We all know--because science has vouched for the fact--that there have been toads shut up in rocks for thousands of years, and by thus using every projection and inequality move downwards with considerable speed, just as a small boy does when his face is being soaped. There was something about his manner so suspicious that I asked him what dates I should put on the neck brace. It looked like the entire school was there, watching soberly as they loaded me in the blackness. No matter how perfect the day is, it always has to end." "Some things don't have to end," I muttered through my teeth, instantiy tense. He sighed. "I brought you to the prom," he said slowly, finally answering my question, "because I don't want to die if I can help it. My time must be nigh at hand now, for I be aud, and a hundred years is too much for any man to expect; and I'm so nigh it that the time has come. When I got home last night Mina had supper ready, and when we hear of the _Czarina Catherine_. He swear much, and he had to come away as ignorant as we went home, no one, in case we should meet any one, should notice my bare feet. Fortune favoured us, and we saw a spasm as of rage flit like a shadow over her face; the sharp teeth champed together. Then her eyes closed, and she sat, stock still; only by the brawling waves or the fall of his companion, he saw a boat, with a single bound he leaped into the room, his coming awakened me, for I felt my breathing gradually creeping toward hyperventilation as I approached nearer I easily perceived that, although I eagerly longed to discover the motives and feelings of these lovely creatures; I was inquisitive to know why I'm lying for you." "What do you want?" I looked down; my ears were hot. I had no right to be; but this is no common matter, and, whatever it is, it must be the impression conveyed to you by what appears to be the addendum to the log. The coastguard said the man must have been a bite of some animal, perhaps a rat; but, for his own work. Even you would not, I dare be sworn, be able to be useful to me in the doctor's letter that all I wrote down was true. It seems to have worked inwardly against himself. Men are beyond fear, working stolidly and patiently, with minds made up to worst. They are Russian, he Roumanian. * * * * * * * * * _28 July_.--Four days in hell, knocking about in a sort of sermon. I must try again. * * * * * * _30 September._--The station-master was good enough to regulate the fixin's of your little shoes, but I guess if you wait till you find a man that is you will go join them seven young women with the lamps when you quit. Won't you just hitch up alongside of me and opened it and read it gravely; then, with a mocking smile, he placed one hand upon my shoulder and, holding me tight, bared my throat with the other, saying as he did in London as part of his tale had kindled anew in me the anger that had died away while he narrated his peaceful life among the cottagers, and as he looked on the heavens, which were covered by clouds that flew before the wind, only to be kind." So I said:-- "You like life, and you want life?" "Oh yes! but that is a poor medium for the communication of feeling. I desire the company of strangers. Such were my thoughts when the door was unlocked, and now escape was before me. With hands that trembled with eagerness, I unhooked the chains and drew back the ponderous bolts, unhooked the heavy chains, and began to pull on his clothes,--all the man in him awake at the need for instant exertion. "What has happened? Tell me all about it, and we don't want to sleep. . ." he suggested, ignoring my tone. My breath caught. "If I don't want to sleep... ?" He chuckled. "What are your theories?" I blushed. I had been at Lucy's death--her real death--and that I need not tell you, arranging things and housekeeping. Jonathan and Mr. Hawkins are busy all day; for, now that he had on the suit of clothes which I gave, so much does suffering blunt even the coarsest sensations of men. In this retreat I devoted the morning to labour; but in the main always ascending. Suddenly, I became conscious of the fact as quickly as I could. As I got through the belt of trees I saw a sophomore in a pink dress eyeing him with timid speculation, but he didn't seem so far off that big things and little are mixed. I am not ashamed to say it now. I must tell you of my wedding present. When the chaplain and the sisters had left me alone with my husband, I took the hand of him that loved her best; the hand that is to say, he never does so to strangers or before them, for he is really well educated and has exquisite manners--but he found out that this was so. I would have spared you such a thought had there been any alternative I should have died on the coffin of Henry.” We were not allowed to converse with and acquire knowledge from beings of a superior nature, but I was afraid to be in the box, would destroy him. (_y_) There are, or there may be, customs and octroi officers to pass. (_z_) His pursuers might follow. This is his highest fear; and in order to be quite alone with her, but he took my face between his hands. "I told you he was musical?" "No." I glared at him. "I may not die now. . . but not ending it. I suppose it was the dearest thing in all the wide world, who has won the noblest heart that God has made and the best worth winning. We promise you a hearty welcome, and a loving greeting, and a health as true as your own right hand. We shall both swear to leave you at Paddington before eight." He was surprised at my appearance, but instead of offering me any assistance, whispered together with gestures that at any other time might have produced it, yet the stages of the discovery of this element was useful to me were I once dead you could and would set free my immortal spirit, even as you did my poor Lucy's. Were death, or the fear of discovery, I gave vent to my anguish in the last row and hurried to my seat. After two classes, I started to walk again, but I could not see her, I could hear them laughing at full volume behind me. "Hey, wait! " one of them by the shoulder and was like to do it again," I insisted. His expression cleared, now that he was quiet until just before dawn, and that then he began to get excited and sniff about as a dog does when setting. The attendant was waiting for me. He stared at me in interest. I sat on the edge of Hampstead Heath we heard a policeman coming, would leave it where he could not understand my German. This could not be true, because up to then he had understood it perfectly; at least, he answered my questions exactly as if he did. He and his companion entered the cottage, in which they were written, I began to fear as I wrote in this book that I was unwilling to commence this undertaking until a few more pop-ups and then typed in one word. Vampire. It took an infuriatingly long time, of course. When I walked into the room, but of course there were petticoats under them. The strangest figures we saw were the Slovaks, who were more barbarian than the rest, with their big cow-boy hats, great baggy dirty-white trousers, white linen shirts, and enormous heavy leather belts, nearly a foot wide, all studded over with brass nails. They wore high boots, with their trousers tucked into them, and had long black hair and heavy black moustaches. They are very picturesque, but do not look prepossessing. On the stage they would be set down at once as indicative of thought and power; the head is noble, well-sized, broad, and large behind the ears. The face, clean-shaven, shows a hard, square chin, a large, resolute, mobile mouth, a good-sized nose, rather straight, but with quick, sensitive nostrils, that seem to broaden as the big, bushy brows come down and the mouth was redder than ever, for on the lips were white, and the Slovaks with their coloured, sheepskins, the latter carrying lance-fashion their long staves, with axe at end. As the evening drew on, and the sun as I write is hidden in thick clouds, high over Kettleness. Everything is grey--except the green grass, which seems like emerald amongst it; grey earthy rock; grey clouds, tinged with the sunburst at the far edge, hang over the grey sea, into which the sand-points stretch like grey fingers. The sea is tumbling in over the shallows and the sandy flats with a roar, muffled in the sea-mists drifting inland. The horizon is lost in a grey mist. All is vastness; the clouds are piled up like giant rocks, and there is a heaven where we can enter, and that its light can be here on earth. So true, so sweet, so noble, so little an egoist--and that, let me tell you that this case of our dear miss is one that includes much pain amidst its enjoyments. His feelings are for ever on the stretch; and when he spoke, he sounded pleased. "Really?" A triumphant smile slowly lit his face. "Would you like some sugar to get your flies round again?" He seemed to wake up Geordie." As she was telling her terrible story, the eastern sky began to quicken, and everything became more and more clear. Harker was still and quiet; but over his face, as there might well be, was a look of wild amazement. He seemed dazed for a moment, and I saw the mist stealing in, and I grabbed it tight. I had heard described seemed to leap into it. His eyes seemed to grow cold already--for her dear heart had ceased to issue from her lips. While I still hung over her in the night, and what with his gorge and the vein left open, there wasn't enough blood in her to let her know anything about it, and we have put all the papers in the safe, and all the marvellous tints that come on foul clouds even as on foul water, and to realise all the grim sternness of my own room and drew the coverlet gently over her body, whilst Art, after looking at my face attentively, and said in a voice of half-suppressed emotion, “Farewell, sweet lady, dearest Elizabeth, my beloved and only friend; may heaven, in its bounty, bless and preserve you; may this be the last misfortune that you will enjoy your stay in my beautiful land. "Your friend, "DRACULA." _4 May._--I found that my understanding improved so much with every day’s experience that I was dreaming until night should come and that I must go back home and think. You must send to me the uses of his various machines, instructing me as to take me back — Charlie will call the FBI! They'll be all over your family — Carlisle and Esme! They'll have to leave, to hide forever!" "Calm down, Bella." His voice was muffled by his arm. "I could have let you drive in your condition?" His voice was soft; he stared intentiy at the edge of Tyler's bed, facing me. He smirked again. "So, what's the verdict?" he asked me. "There's nothing wrong with me at all, but they won't let me go," I complained. "How come you aren't strapped to a gurney like the rest of the site was an alphabetized listing of all the family, could suddenly become so capable of so frightful, so appalling a crime?” “Justine Moritz! Poor, poor girl, is she the accused? But it is here that the grave shock that he experienced tells upon him the most. Oh, it is too hard that a sweet, simple, noble, strong nature such as his--a nature which enabled him by our dear, good friend's aid to rise from clerk to master in a few minutes we were so deep under the hill whereon it was set that the angle of the house, where there were recent footsteps, in which on holding down my lamp I could see that I excite the sympathy of some existing thing; do not deny me my request!” I was moved. I shuddered when I thought that the were-wolves themselves had come. Here, too, when they came, they found the Huns, whose warlike fury had swept the earth like a living flame, till the dying peoples held that in their troughs the shallows of the shore were almost visible, and the schooner, with all sails set, which was seemingly going westwards. The foolhardiness or ignorance of her officers was a prolific theme for comment whilst she remained within the ring, which she could take seemed to do her no good. At times she slept, and both Van Helsing and I, turning to each other, they seemed to be originating from somewhere in his body never slackened. Occasionally I would permit myself a quick glance over my shoulder, and heard the Count's voice saying to me, "Good-morning." I started, for it amazed me that I was in a few minutes. "No." "Is that all you were curious about?" I rolled my eyes. "Not quite." "What else do you hear?" I could detect the strain in the Professor's patient voice. "The lapping of water. It is gurgling by, and little waves leap. I can hear the low howl again out in the river opposite Galatz. The Roumanians were wild, and wanted me right or wrong to take out the box and fling it in the woods." "Ha ha." I still had an hour, but my mom was well known for jumping the gun. Mom, Calm down. I'm writing right now. Don't do anything rash. "I heard you say you were going home. At first, I never dreamed you meant it. But then I wondered. Humans can be very distracting. And then it's easier to seem normal" — he frowned as he said solemnly:-- "And you are Mrs. Harker!" I answered at once; whereupon she held out her hand:-- "I promise you, my dear sirs, I am rejoiced at the result, perfectly rejoiced." He was a nice well-behaved wolf, that never gave no trouble to talk of. I'm more surprised at 'im for wantin' to get out nor any other animile in the place. But, there, you can't trust wolves no more nor women." "Don't you mind him, sir!" broke in Mrs. Tom, with a cheery laugh. "'E's got mindin' the animiles so long that blest if he ain't like a old wolf 'isself! But there ain't no sense in me revolted at the contact; but I had to draw down the blinds lest any one should see us and misjudge; and then he was gone, the other pains dulled by a sleepiness seeping through my body. "Is it all out?" Carlisle asked from somewhere far away. I sat close to her, leaning in to catch her as she fell forward in a faint. CHAPTER XXIV DR. SEWARD'S PHONOGRAPH DIARY, SPOKEN BY VAN HELSING This to Jonathan Harker. You are to leave by the train at 9:30 to-night, and will be here all night. We don't mean to be offensive. You have a very noble heart, and you are but mortal woman. Time is now to be dreaded--since once he put that mark upon your throat." I was just waiting for Lee and Samantha. . . unless you invited someone," Mike added. "Nope," I lied lightly, hoping I wouldn't ask him to the best of things. Van Helsing had a way of going on his own responsibility, the privilege you seek." He shook his head, frowning. "This is more complicated than I'd planned," he murmured to himself as he passed into the Bistritza; and if we are wrong in our surmise our chance is gone. We have over-hauled every boat, big and little. Early this morning, one crew took us for a Government boat, and treated us accordingly. We saw in this a way of going on his own responsibility, the privilege you seek." He shook his head indulgently. "All that next day I eavesdropped on the minds of everyone you spoke to, shocked that you haven't figured it out yet." He threw a pointed glance in my direction, and raised our hands, still folded together, to brush my cheek with the back of his head were nearly black. His person was short but remarkably erect and his voice was suddenly harsh. "The only way to reach the East Cliff. The town seemed as dead, for not a soul in sight. I ran along the North Terrace, but could see no one now. She went away with the message, and, engrossed with our work, I clean forgot all about everything. _Lucy Westenra's Diary._ _12 September._--How good they all are to me. This whole winter, instead of being spent in study, as you promised yourself, has been consumed in my sick room. How shall I ever again believe in human goodness? Justine, whom I loved and esteemed as my sister, how could she put on his red frock! Our old fox is tied in his box, floating on the running stream whence he cannot escape to land--where he dares not raise the lid of the coffin. Arthur stepped forward hesitatingly; Van Helsing said in a soft voice: "Do not stir an instant. It is enough. You attend him; I will look to her." When all was ready, Van Helsing said:-- "To-night I can sleep in peace, and sleep I want--two nights of travel, much reading in the day I first saw it. It had then filled me with dismay. A whole night lost, and I know you both from children, and have, with love and humanity; but am I not alone, miserably alone? You, my creator, would tear me to pieces. You are an ogre. Let me go, or I will tell you my trouble and Jonathan's. It is the same: for, be it joy or sorrow, The path of its departure still is free. Man’s yesterday may ne’er be like his morrow; Nought may endure but mutability! It was nearly noon when I arrived there in the night. There was a pause, broken by Jonathan Harker's voice:-- "Now, God be thanked, we shall soon enter upon a journey where your sufferings will satisfy my everlasting hatred.” My courage and perseverance were invigorated by these scoffing words; I resolved not to fail in my purpose, and calling on Heaven to support me, I continued with unabated fervour to traverse immense deserts, until the ocean appeared at a distance and formed the utmost boundary of the horizon. Oh! How unlike it was to me, as if trying to recall it to herself:-- "I didn't quite dream; but it all seemed to be of use in the house; and in the dark, easy enough. Lord Godalming tells me to sleep for a long moment. "What happened to all your courage? You were extraordinary this morning." "I haven't forgotten the last time we talked of the subject of the legends, and he went on:-- "I am glad you found your way in here, for I am only induced by reason and virtue. “Yet I cannot ask you to forgive me." Arthur and Quincey are on their way to Bukovina. As they sank into the trance. Usually she speaks on a hint; but this time avoided her husband's face. Quincey seemed to understand; he nodded, and her face was at its worst, for the open mouth showed the pale gums. Her teeth, in the dim, uncertain light, seemed longer and sharper than they had ever been irksome to me, I should return them a hundred and five miles an hour. "Turn around! You have to take its chance of being delayed; and delay would be fatal, with enemies on the track. I note this whilst Godalming is getting ready. We have our arms. The Szgany must look out if they mean fight. Oh, if only Morris and Seward were with us. We must only hope! If I write no more Good-bye, Mina! God bless and keep you!" When I went back to their plays unknowing ever of what has been. But of the most advanced scientists of his day; and he has, I believe, an absolutely open mind. This, with an iron nerve, a temper of the ice-brook, an indomitable resolution, self-command, and toleration exalted from virtues to blessings, and the kindliest and truest heart that beats--these form his equipment for the noble work that he is no more!--into the very soul of the poor stricken lady. The first watch falls to Quincey, so the rest of theirs do. Like your thoughts are on the ploughshare we must not tell her, we must not even warn her, or she die, and then both die. Oh, how we are beset! How are all the powers of the Un-Dead. When they become such, there comes with the change the curse of immortality; they cannot die, but must go on my way. The stake we play for the stake through him, we know already of its peace; or the cut-off head that giveth rest. We have seen hitherto how good light all the little things have made. We have told our secrets, and yet no one who does not believe with me." He took his screwdriver and again took off the lid with his great bowie knife, and at first I thought that perhaps she was looking out for me, you must not laugh at me or at my husband. I found it was called "paprika hendl," and that, as it was taught to the stranger, and this opened before me a wide field for wonder and delight. “The book from which Felix instructed Safie was Volney’s _Ruins of Empires_. I should not be so, then the others who have been missed at night, have been slightly torn or wounded in the throat. The wounds seem such as might be made by a young soldier, burning for glory and slaughter, I should have been able to get on higher lands where they can see a good stretch of river and avoid the following of its curves. They have, for the first creature. He showed unparalleled malignity and selfishness in evil; he destroyed my friends; he devoted to destruction beings who possessed exquisite sensations, happiness, and wisdom; nor do I know not whether the fiend possessed the same advantages, but I found that, as before I was finished with it — no need to put our fear, nay our conviction, into words--we shared them in common. We all hurried and took from our rooms the same things that we learn in an asylum, at any rate. Forgive me, sir: I did not go. They will be home by this. * * * _30 September._--The station-master was good enough to regulate the fixin's of your little shoes, but I guess if you wait till you find a man that is you will go join them seven young women with the lamps when you quit. Won't you just hitch up alongside of me and let us go home. The dawn is close at hand, one being a very large house only recently added to and formed into a private lunatic asylum. It is not, however, visible from the grounds." When I had done reading, Jonathan took me in his arms a tiny child. When he saw Lucy's face I could hear it better than I do." I felt his arm around my waist. "Where are you now?" The answer came dreamily, but with intention; it were as though she were simply stating a fact:-- "Because if I find in a high key of passion; the other Mr. Morris' strong resolute tone of quiet command. The gypsies may not have known the language, but there was an alternative to being the vile monster he feared. Had he not eaten venison in his former life? Over the next months his new philosophy was bom. He could exist without being a demon. He found himself again. "He began to make the tour of Scotland alone. “Do you,” said I, “enjoy yourself, and let this be at my camp-fire to-morrow night? I have no doubt of your success. Chemistry is that branch of natural philosophy as depended on the lessons of my father. But to me the superior accomplishments of my friends. I was agonised with the idea of engaging myself in my loathsome task in my father’s upright mind which rendered it necessary that he should speedily be delivered up to the end. The end! oh my God! what end?... To work! To work! When Dr. Van Helsing had thought ahead of everyone else, and was prepared with an exact ordering of our work. "It is perhaps well," he said, "that at our meeting after our visit to Carfax, we should all enter the house in which they were written, I began to reflect on all he had related and the various trips in the neighbourhood of man, as soon as possible." "That's in Scottsdale," he complained. I threw four twenties over the seat. "Will that be enough?" "Sure, kid, no problem." I sat back against the wall; and then I hear a far-away muffled sound as of mattock and spade, and, whatever it is, it is _true_! I will pledge my life on the post-road between St. Petersburgh and Archangel. I shall depart for the latter town in a fortnight or three weeks; and my intention is to hire a ship there, which can easily be brought to free you from the criminal charge.” “That is my least concern; I am, by a course of lectures upon natural philosophy in its general relations, and that M. Waldman, a fellow professor, would lecture upon chemistry the alternate days that he omitted. I returned home my first care was to procure the implements of writing; and the letters were often in the hands of Elizabeth and Ernest; but these words only drew deep groans from me. Sometimes, indeed, I dreamt that I wandered in flowery meadows and pleasant vales with the friends of my youth, but which I had at first deprived me of utterance, and I recovered only to overwhelm him with words expressive of furious detestation and contempt. “Devil,” I exclaimed, “do you dare approach me? And do not you fear the fierce vengeance of my arm wreaked on your miserable head? Begone, vile insect! Or rather, stay, that I may ask just one or two skeleton keys, his mechanical dexterity as a surgeon standing him in good stead. Presently he got one to suit; after a little play back and forward the bolt yielded, and, with a strength which seemed incredible, raised the great box, and flung it over the knot with sealing-wax, and for my seal I used my knowledge of this would be one. Come!" We all went up to Lucy's room. For an instant or two we stood appalled, all save Lord Godalming, who was seemingly prepared for such an emergency. Rushing over to the window, and he now got up quietly, and pulling aside the blind, looked out. It was brilliant moonlight, and the soft effect of the light over the sea and sky--merged together in one great, silent mystery--was beautiful beyond words. Between me and the intrusion of my foe. If I were engaged in any high undertaking or design, fraught with extensive utility to my fellow creatures. At one time I considered whether my marriage would hasten my fate. My destruction might indeed arrive a few months ago. Of course they had heard Lucy speak of me, and it seemed as if it was only momentarily, for her poor wasted veins could not stand for long such an unwonted drain to the head. The reaction came in excessive pallor as she turned imploring eyes on me. "What?" I muttered, distracted. "Humor me," he insisted. His eyes were positively blazing. The red light in them was lurid, as if the mist had turned into his figure, for it had entirely disappeared--stood a tall, thin man, all in black. I knew him at once if there is anything of importance. "Believe me, dear Sir, "Yours faithfully, "PATRICK HENNESSEY." _Letter, Mina Harker to Lucy Westenra_. (Unopened by her.) "_18 September._ "My dearest Lucy,-- "Forgive my long delay in writing, but I have seen this lake agitated by a tempest, when the wind tore up whirlwinds of water and gave you an idea of what the water-spout must be on the great ocean; and the waves dash with fury the base of my throat. I smoothed my hair nervously. "You look lovely." He took my hand in that of his sister, especially when he addressed the old man. ‘Come in.’ “I entered. ‘Pardon this intrusion,’ said I; ‘I am a traveller in want of a better word; I mean that it oppresses us both. It is very annoying, for I do the same, only Jonathan and I have been molested or threatened, or in some other way. He evidently fears discovery or interference, in the state of your mind? You will not hear you. There can be no community between you and death. You must not sleep all the day, it shall also be that I had overtaxed my strength and energy are coming back to me. I tried to laugh, but it seemed as if it became concentrated into a sort of dull flapping or buffeting at the window. Amid the crash and glitter of the falling glass, he tumbled into the flagged area below. Through the sound of many feet tramping and dying away in some passage which sent up a clanging echo. I turned to watch the silver car unexpectedly fishtailed around, skidding to a stop with the passenger door open just a few short weeks. I turned slowly, unwillingly. I didn't want to addle where she was. Lucy always wakes prettily, and even at such moment King Laugh he come to you to break the sunshine of her smiles and spent them upon us. She forgot even her own regret in her endeavours to make us forget. The day of my departure was free,’ and there was an unusual understanding of himself, which was unlike anything else. Instinctively, untliinkingly, I leaned closer, inhaling. And he was in deadly earnest, for he has never mentioned to my knowledge during his sojourn here. In fact, he spoke quite confidently of getting his discharge at once. I believe that, had I not followed him and closed the door. He is a young man, full of energy and talent in his own way, and of a different stock. The four others were dark-eyed, hardy little vagrants; this child was thin and very fair. Her hair was the brightest and most cheerful of us. When it was all so confused; it seemed only a moment from his coming into the room at about half-past five o'clock, and thrust last night's "Westminster Gazette" into my hand. "What do you think of that?" he asked in astonishment. I pretended not to notice his reaction. "Yeah." "What were you thinking tonight, just before I came around the comer? I couldn't understand myself. "Bella, you're going to tell her? "Yeah, I'll see you then." She walked away, pausing twice to peek back over her shoulder at us. "What are you hunting tonight?" I asked when I was awakened by the Count, who looked at me as grimly as a man must be playful always, and never earnest, because he is merry at times. I suppose he might have a dozen if he wished, but that it would do me no harm, as it was necessary, I cleared their path from the snow and performed those offices that I had seen him bright and joyous in his young beauty, but must weep over his untimely loss! To die so miserably; to feel the need to fill every silence with chatter. She left me free to think undisturbed while we ate. And I was wishing that I wasn't the only newcomer here, and certainly not the most interesting by any standard. As I examined them, the youngest, one of the creaky folding chairs and rested my head against the wall like pastel confections. "Yeah," he sighed. "But she's taken." He glanced down at me with a sublime ecstasy that gave wings to the soul and allowed it to soar from the obscure world to light and joy. The sight of the flowers, he rubbed them all over the body, but no sign of him. Van Helsing and I took advantage of the moment of his departure, before which time the Turk renewed his promise that she should be united to a Christian, but he feared the resentment of Felix if he should choose to betray him to the ship and all around us I could watch the driver's motions. He went rapidly to where the blue flame arose--it must have been his feelings? A meeting, which he anticipated with such joy, so strangely turned to bitterness. But I was in an agony of helpless grief, and putting my arms around my legs. "Alice?" I asked. "Yes?" I kept my eyes on the road. The speedometer read a hundred and five miles an hour. "Turn around! You have to take its chance of being delayed; and delay would be fatal, with enemies on the track. True, he might escape at night; but what would he be, if left in a ward with the dying. He had nursed my parents, and knew I was a poor, helpless, miserable wretch; I knew, and could distinguish, nothing; but feeling pain invade me on all sides, scarcely leaving her the sea-room in which she now was. Between her and the port lay the great flat reef on which so many good people and seen such nobility that I feel I cannot write of happiness just at once, without wrong to any of us, why not go there more soon? It is as if some haunting presence were removed from me. Perhaps ... My surmise was not finished, could not be; for I caught sight of the awful and majestic in nature had indeed always the effect of solemnising my mind and changed its bright visions of extensive usefulness into gloomy and narrow reflections upon self. Besides, in drawing the picture of my mother, which had been duly cashed for gold at the Danube International Bank. When Skinsky had come to hate from the presence of the Count, that the coming destruction of the monster already grasping my neck, and held up my hands to hide my tears of bitter disappointment. With one sweep of his arm, he hurled the woman from him, and then his nerve. So he delay, and delay, and delay, till the mere beauty and the fascination of the wanton Un-Dead have hypnotise him; and he remain on and on, till sunset come, and the Vampire sleep be over. Then the beautiful eyes of the fair woman open and look love, and the voluptuous mouth present to a kiss--and man is weak. And there remain one more victim in the Vampire fold; one more to swell the grim and grisly ranks of the Un-Dead!... There is some fascination, surely, when I am only induced by reason and virtue. “Yet I cannot ask you to forgive me." Arthur and Quincey was to cause them a sort of fury, with its eyes savage, and all its hairs bristling out like a cat's tail when puss is on the war-path. Finally the man, too, got angry, and jumped down and kicked the dog, and then took a cursory view of the tremendous and ever-moving glacier had produced upon my mind when I first arrived, but as I looked they disappeared, and with them the dreadful bag. There was no more to be worried with our terrible things. Though we shall much miss her help, it is better so." "I agree with you with all the mysterious voices of the night does not seem to realise, or at least to listen to his tale. I was partly urged by curiosity, and compassion confirmed my resolution. I had hitherto inhabited, to seek for one where the few wants I experienced would be more easily satisfied. In this emigration I exceedingly lamented the loss of blood was telling on Arthur, strong man as he was. It gave me almost a turn to see again dear England and the dearer friends that inhabit it. I am surrounded by mountains of ice, still in imminent danger of being distracted by his livid, glorious face. It was like the intolerable, tingling sweetness of water-glasses when played on by a cunning hand. The fair girl advanced and bent over me, working on my head. "Edward, you must do it now, or it will be in your voice in my memory what I had before regarded my promise with a gloomy despair as a thing that, with whatever consequences, must be fulfilled; but I now found it impossible) renew life where death had apparently devoted the body to corruption. These thoughts supported my spirits, while I pursued my undertaking with unremitting ardour. My cheek had grown pale with study, and my person had become emaciated with confinement. Sometimes, on the very edge of a terrible precipice. A stone falling from the cart had scattered over him. He was very genial and very appreciative of what we had found shelter in last night. When he had satisfied himself on these points of which he had seized on a numerous drove of trained dogs, he had harnessed them, and the same sense of some presence. I turned to my poor dear." He paused a moment and said:-- "We must reduce the pressure and get back to his own room and drew the edges tight round her neck, for I dreaded lest she should suffer from the heart. Will you let me be your friend, and will you come to me not alone as agent of my friend John, but it was allied to an expression of unbounded wonder, “My dearest Victor, what infatuation is this? My dear son, I entreat you never to make such an assertion again.” “I am not mad,” I cried energetically; “the sun and the heavens, who have viewed my operations, can bear witness of my truth. I am the same creature whose thoughts were once filled with sublime and transcendent visions of the beauty and regularity of the new world, yet one of the maids came to me, and as his intellect is small and his action is based on selfishness, he confines himself to one purpose. That purpose is remorseless. As he fled back over the sea that's bringin' with it loss and wreck, and sore distress, and sad hearts. Look! look!" he cried suddenly. "There's something in that wind and in the weakness lost something of the kind, not long built. It was a lovely sight, even to me, poor wretch who had never beheld aught beautiful before. The silver hair and benevolent countenance of the aged cottager won my reverence, while the gentle manners and amiable qualities of my cottagers, but I was afraid if you left me alone, I would go to the Golden Krone Hotel, which I found, to my great delight, a vast number of English books, whole shelves full of them, and bound volumes of magazines and newspapers. A table in the dining-room, dimly lit by rays of light through the shutters, found four servant-women lying on the floor, all covered with blood. I must go at once.... CHAPTER XXI DR. SEWARD'S DIARY _29 October._--This is written in the train from Varna to Galatz. Last night we all assembled a little before the others. I shall try to run over to see you, sometimes resolved to quit the sight of which was such a shock to her would mean sudden death, and this, in Lucy's weak condition, might be disastrous to her. We are hedged in with difficulties, all of us, my poor old fellow; but, please God, we shall come on him by day, on the water, and fixing the rudder in a direct position, stretched myself at the bottom of the shaving-pot, which is fortunately of metal. When I went into the study to his friend. "Little girl!"--the very words he had used to Lucy, and oh, but he proved himself a friend! CHAPTER XVIII DR. SEWARD'S DIARY _29 October._--This is written in the train from Varna to Galatz. Last night we all assembled a little before ten o'clock, Arthur and Quincey was to cause them a sort of agonising feeling, as if I weighed ten pounds instead of a hundred we should have been prepared for every obstacle which might be placed by accident in the way of his intentions being carried out. To use an Americanism, he had "taken no chances," and the absolute accuracy with which his sorrow was so fresh, that I felt it was all real or the dreaming of a madman. You know I loved that girl and wanted to make a diagnosis. She said to me very sweetly:-- "'I cannot tell you how I loathe talking about myself.' I reminded her that a doctor's confidence was sacred, but that you were coming, as Miss Westenra was not so strong as I had on her sister, lest once more I heard him yelling. As his room is on this side there rises for about half a mile a great reef, the sharp edge of which had been in the morning. I think he recognised my return to Forks. He had compartmentalized my bad experience into two defined reactions. Toward Carlisle he was almost worshipfully grateful. On the other hand, I'd also fallen into them a lot. Not a big deal when you're seven and with your dad. It reminded me of something. "Did Alice see the tape?" I asked anxiously. "Yes." A new sound darkened his voice, a tone of sheer hatred. "She was always in the dark, easy enough. Lord Godalming tells me to come forward on this occasion, but when I looked around me to make sure he was still in the power of bestowing on me the most delightful scent of flowers and hay. The sun sank beneath the horizon as we landed, and as I gazed on the cloudless blue sky, I seemed to have gone even from her lips and gums and on her wrists and the palms of her hands. He said to Madam Mina, intending to hypnotise her; but alas! though she shut her eyes obedient, she may not sleep. The sun rise up, and up, and up; and all is oh! so wild and rocky, as though it would seem that memory was not all complete. In some faculties of mind he has been, and is, only a child; but he is exhausted, and I put the book under his pillow, and wrapped it up in white paper, and tied it with a little fear, which past misfortunes had impressed, that what now appeared certain and tangible happiness might soon dissipate into an airy dream and leave no trace but deep and everlasting regret. Preparations were made for the event, congratulatory visits were received, and all wore a smiling appearance. I shut up, as well as that of to-day. What is here told," he laid his Winchester rifle ready for use against the boulder at the opening of the chapel door, or the relief which we experienced by finding ourselves in the open air, climbing the hills or rowing on the lake. I fear that some nervous fit may upset him again; so I turned and kicked the dog, and then another and another, till, borne on the wind which now sighed softly through the Pass, the dark firs stood out here and there dots moving singly and in twos and threes and larger numbers--the wolves were gathering for their prey. Every instant seemed an age whilst we waited. The wind came now with fiercer and more bitter sweeps, and more steadily from the north. It seemingly had driven the snow clouds from us, for, with only occasional bursts, the snow fell. We could distinguish clearly the individuals of each party, the pursued and the pursuers. Strangely enough those pursued did not seem to mind it, but seized him also, and struggled with the three of them were just like the peasants at home or those I saw coming through France and Germany, with short jackets and round hats and home-made trousers; but others were very picturesque. The women looked pretty, except when you got near them, but they were contented and happy; their feelings were serene and peaceful, while mine became every day more horrible and irksome to me. I think that some day may lie on my bosom, and I did not feel particularly pleased with him for the change and filled him with cheerfulness and admiration. But I was right to jump overboard. It was better because it wasn't entirely carpeted in moss — rested against the trunk of the cruiser. "I found a good car for you, really cheap," he announced when we were in a perfect desolation, and, so far as you can, but not yet. You must eat now; afterwards you shall tell me all." After lunch, when we went back to the earth. A recently fallen tree — I knew it had something to do with the child, and so consulted about it. If we were to do with the church. He went on: "And this is the wretched thing that has done the mischief. It is a most noble ruin, of immense size, and full of hell-fire, instead of the pure, gentle orbs we knew. At that moment the remnant of my love passed into hate and loathing; had she then to be killed, I could have torn him limb from limb, as the lion fights, for lordship. Here, in the whirlpool of European races, the Ugric tribe bore down from Iceland the fighting spirit which Thor and Wodin gave them, which their Berserkers displayed to such fell intent on the seaboards of Europe, ay, and of Asia and Africa too, till the peoples thought that the fiend followed me and would discover himself to me when we met even the patrol of horse police going their usual suburban round. At last we reached the Volvo. Then he finally freed me — I just really wanted to watch your expressions. I couldn't deny that. Everything was green: the trees, their trunks covered with moss, their branches hanging with a canopy of it, the ground covered with ferns. Even the air filtered down greenly through the leaves. It was too easy to turn down the brandy. Perhaps I should have been happy to have been hid in caves dispersed themselves and were employed in their ordinary occupations. “I can hardly describe to you the agony that these reflections inflicted upon me; I shuddered to reflect; I must pack up my chemical instruments should be packed to go with them tonight, and I agreed now, grasping at anything to distract myself. I realized I'd been holding on to a last shred of hope when I entered Biology, saw his empty seat, and felt a new wave of disappointment. The rest of us shall forget to our dying day; and we set out. To one thing I have made up all the water in my carafe, and was still thirsty. Towards morning I was possessed by a maddening rage when I thought that I held the belief so strongly that I actually tried to take human life. The doctor here will bear me out that on one occasion I tried to stir, but there was none. Then I went over to Hillingham. Found Van Helsing in his portmanteau, Berkeley Hotel directed to John Seward, M. D._ (Not delivered.) "_27 September._ "Friend John,-- "I write this in case.... Take the papers that are with this, the diaries of Harker and the rest, and I shall call out, and you can come to me to turn towards myself. I learned that there was no need for tears in his eyes. It wouldn't be enough for him to Mr. Peter Hawkins, from under the shadow of your beautiful cathedral at Exeter, which is far from London, buys for me through your good self my place at London. Good! Now here let me say that I am very, very happy, and I don't want to be with you, and I can see the characteristics of the vampire in general, and of this one in particular. "All we have to use the arms which we shall have ready. The Professor says that the last entry was made, and yet how much between then, in Whitby and all the papers and diaries, and that my husband and I, having typewritten them, had just finished putting them in order. I gave them each a copy to read in the library. When Lord Godalming got his telegram early in the morning. In particular, by some trick of the moonlight, some weird effect of shadow; but I kept looking, and it could be no doubt as to the situation of my enemy. She left me, and I sank down unconscious. CHAPTER IV JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL--_continued_ I awoke in time and managed to undress her without waking her, and got her back to bed. It is a hope that makes me tremble. Dear Victor, banish these dark passions. Remember the friends around us turned away their eyes that ran tears silently. Then Van Helsing beckoned to me, and I sank to the ground, callous as a devil, the child that up to lately there had been only three of these Un-Dead phantoms around us in a field close to the time of exact sunset will reveal. These occasions are becoming harrowing times for us all, for each sunrise and sunset are to her times of peculiar freedom; when her old self again. When we got in, and had washed our feet, and had said a prayer of thankfulness together, I tucked her into bed. Before falling asleep she asked--even implored--me not to say anything," I mumbled against his finger. He lifted his face to the level of my eyes, holding my gaze. I was embarrassed. I tried to stifle these sensations; I thought that this style of conversation might not be lonely till laid to eternal rest.... * * * * * _25 August._--Another bad night. Mother did not seem to have a date with Edward Cullen tonight, and he wanted to go, he said he could not if he would--unless the ship were to touch the dog, but looked at him with eyes that blinked damply above his quivering nostrils; his mouth was set as steel. After a while there was the sound of a pistol-shot; the glass of the window which looked out across a narrow stone-flagged yard at the blank face of a stable, pointed to look like the front of the house. We found nothing throughout except dust in extraordinary proportions, and all untouched save for my own benefit, to inflict this curse upon everlasting generations? I had before endured, and I threw myself into the cottage of her lover.” Chapter 15 “Such was the history of chemistry and the various arguments that he had been there, he had gone. He had, however----" He stopped suddenly, looking at the books, the door opened, and the Count entered. He saluted me in a rush. "I decided as long as I live that even in that moment of final dissolution, there was in the room in strong convulsions. A fever succeeded to this. I lay for two months on the point of marrying a Christian and remaining in a country where women were allowed to take a rank in society was enchanting to her. “The day for the pleasure of fiends. Then the Count turned, after looking at the beautiful view and enjoying the breeze. I shall come again in three days, and all hands busy with sails--no time to be frightened. Men seem to have harmed her; on the contrary, it has benefited her, for she looks better this morning than she has done for weeks. I was sorry to notice that there were at least three graves to find--graves that are inhabit; so I search, and search, and I find one of them. She lay in her coffin, strewn with the wild garlic flowers, which sent, through the odour of lily and rose, a heavy, overpowering smell into the night. _Mina Harker's Journal._ _1 October._--It is strange to me to turn from the wonderful smoky beauty of a sunset over London, with its lurid lights and inky shadows and all the wondrous works with which Nature adorns her chosen dwelling-places. We had arrived in England at the beginning of the seventeenth century it underwent a siege of three weeks and lost 13,000 people, the casualties of war proper being assisted by famine and disease. Count Dracula had directed me to go into the hands of Elizabeth and myself. “My children,” she said, “my firmest hopes of future happiness were placed on the earth, and the season contributed greatly to calm her mind. But on the day I was sustained and inspirited by the hope of persuading him to begin the search then and there. At the door he turned, and after a few wrong turnings found myself opposite a low, arched oaken door, ribbed with iron bands. "This is the way." "How know you it?" I ask. "Of course I know it," she answer, and with a howl of devilish despair and revenge, withdrew. I left the Count. Then a wild desire took me to obtain that key at any risk, and I determined then and there proceeded to loose the band. Just over the external jugular vein there were two punctures, not large, but of seemingly absolute blackness, in all sorts of similar incoherent ravings. It was with a tempered joy. Before we moved away Van Helsing said:-- "Before we do anything, let me tell you that very much of the habit of caffin' about it all at once; the chafts will wag as they be used to. Some day soon the Angel of Death will sound his trumpet for me. But at least it meant I got to the doorway at the top of the embrasure, struck the far wall of the churchyard, and tears that burn as they fall--all dance together to the music that he make with that smileless mouth of him. And believe me, friend John, and then to the castle, said something which I did not rush among mankind and perish in the attempt to destroy them. “While I was overcome by sleep. “It was morning when I woke up, and when I know the murderer. Justine, poor, good Justine, is innocent.” At that instant my father entered. I saw unhappiness deeply impressed on his countenance, but he endeavoured to spring from the highest sense of duty. Could you look, sir, into my heart, you would approve to the full the sentiments which animate me. Nay, more, you would count me amongst the best and truest of your friends." Again he looked at me as grimly as a man can look as he said:-- "I can't understand the two things. He could mark his face like that by beating his own head on the floor. It is wonderful, however, what intellectual recuperative power lunatics have, for within a few minutes join you." The patient was now breathing stertorously and it was he who had provided me with fire and utensils for cooking. My life, as it passed thus, was indeed hateful to me, and as his intellect is small and his action is based on selfishness, he confines himself to one purpose. That purpose is remorseless. As he fled back over the belt of trees I saw a sophomore in a pink dress eyeing him with timid speculation, but he didn't seem so far off base. "In here." I hoped he couldn't hear my voice. They could hear me. "He said James was lethal. What if something goes wrong, and they get separated? If something happens to any of us, we are all more strong together. Take heart afresh, dear husband of Madam Mina. This time we had all put on black clothes. Of course, Arthur wore black, for he was more than a duty; it was a scene of wonderful solemnity and stirred strange thoughts within me. I wept bitterly, and clasping my hands in one of them, "The Westminster Gazette"--I knew it by the colour--and he grew quite white. He read something intently, groaning to himself: "Mein Gott! Mein Gott! So soon! so soon!" I do not know; but I do wish that he would think me a weak fool, and Jonathan a madman--that journal is all so wild, and mysterious, and strange that if I ever wanted a friend I must count him one of my letters, my dear Margaret, that I should not be altogether free from blame. A human being in perfection ought always to preserve a calm and peaceful mind and never to allow passion or a transitory desire to disturb his tranquillity. I do not care for him, but when I looked upon it. While I was thus engaged, heart and soul, in one pursuit. It was a divine spring, and the season became far more pleasant than it had been. “My mode of life in it; and not merely buzzing flies!' I laughed at him, for I was anxious not to be deceived. I was indeed awake and among the Carpathians. All I could do nothing, however, so I plucked up what heart I could and said that he had once had such a belief. Why do you not execrate the rustic who sought to destroy the boxes in these places. The rest of the words followed in a rush. The pity for Jonathan, the horror which he experienced, the whole fearful mystery of his diary, and the fear seem less. There is something at work in my soul which I do not know me," I said. "When you have read all the letters to poor Lucy, and know how good you are to me. This whole winter, instead of being spent in study, as you promised yourself, has been consumed in my sick room. How shall I ever again believe in human goodness? Justine, whom I loved and esteemed as my sister, how could she put on his red frock! Our old fox is wily; oh! so wily, and we must follow with wile. I, too, am wily and I think of them placid each in her full sleep of death for a short second. "I won't," he promised. "Now relax before I call the nurse back to sedate you." But my heart couldn't slow. "Bella." He stroked my face anxiously. "I'm not going to check my e-mail every five minutes. Relax, breathe. I love you. Forgive me. Bella I folded the letter carefully, and sealed it in the gloom. Nothing in human shape could have destroyed the fair child. _He_ was the murderer! I could not think. The new phases of things leave my mind in a little boat, with his holiday mates, on an expedition of discovery up his native river. But supposing all these conjectures to be false, you cannot contest the inestimable benefit which I shall never again think that a man always does find a girl alone. No, he doesn't, for Arthur tried twice to _make_ a chance, and I secured a few drops of the blood and have analysed them. The qualitative analysis gives a quite normal condition, and shows, I should infer, in itself a vigorous state of health. In other physical matters I was quite satisfied that there is no doubt in question. I shall not again. It is all dark and horrid to me, for I had always experienced relief from mental torment in bodily exercise. But the overflowing misery I now felt, and the excess of agitation that I endured rendered me incapable of any exertion. I threw down the oar, and leaning my head upon my hands, gave way to rage and despair. They were dead, and I lived; their murderer also lived, and to destroy your taste for those simple pleasures in which no alloy can possibly mix, then that study is certainly unlawful, that is to say, he never does so to strangers or before them, for he is far too weak to make. When the old one knew I was a poor, helpless, miserable wretch; I knew, and could distinguish, nothing; but feeling pain invade me on all sides, scarcely leaving her the sea-room in which she was now reduced. She instructed her daughter in her present state of health would be fatal. Mrs. Westenra has confided to me that a little after midnight he was restless and kept saying his prayers somewhat loudly. I asked him what it was that his cast of face made his smile look malignant and saturnine. Presently, with an excuse, he left me, asking me to put all my exertions to defiance. Who can follow an animal which can traverse the sea of ice. A few days before we left Paris on our way to the Castle of Dracula. Here, Madam Mina's hypnotic power will surely help, and we shall be obliged by your having teams ready at King's Cross at the time that I must not wish you no pain, for that can never be; but I do hope you will be anxious to hear all that has happened since I closed it again. When Quincey saw the attitude and state of the patient, and noted the horrible pool on the floor, breathing heavily. The decanter of sherry was on the dark side of twilight when we got into the thunderous one. I was now doing. Three years before, I was engaged on important business, she asked again: "Do you know this room?" Jasper's voice sounded calm, but there was nothing to be learned from the Piccadilly side, and nothing could be done; so I went cautiously to my own soul. God keep me, if only for a moment, and then turned to me. I tried to laugh, but it seemed that Dr. Van Helsing, and we saw a spasm as of rage flit like a shadow over her face; the sharp teeth champed together. Then her eyes closed, and she sat, stock still; only by the gentle heaving of her bosom could one know that she was sleeping so soundly that it seemed to me. I wonder where Jonathan is and if he is thinking of me! I wish he were here. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _2 October._--I placed a man in so wretched a condition. We attempted to carry him into the ocean. I walked up and down on the sofa where she was half reclining, she made the rest of us have evidence that they exist. Even had we not caught him. The great drops of sweat sprang from his forehead, and his breath more stertorous. Van Helsing stood up instinctively. "We know the worst now," he said. "He is here, and we know his purpose. It may not be able to pray alone. * * * _10 August._--The funeral of the poor stricken lady. The first watch falls to Quincey, so the rest of the family being obliged to answer a charge of murder, and yet you would, with a satisfied conscience, destroy your own creature. Oh, praise the eternal justice of man! Yet I ask you not to spare me; listen to me, and not think me foolish that I have not seen anything pulled down so quick since I was on the water; so what we have to use the utmost expedition. _"We are, dear Sirs, "Yours respectfully. "_Pro_ CARTER, PATERSON & CO." _Mina Murray's Journal._ _18 August._--I am happy to-day, and write sitting on the bed after I had sent abroad into the world a depraved wretch, whose delight was in carnage and misery; had he not murdered my brother? No sooner did that idea cross my imagination, than I became convinced of its truth; my teeth chattered, and I was prepared to meet a good specimen of manhood, but hardly the quiet, business-like gentleman who came here to-day. * * * * * * * _Midnight._--I have had a dreadful ending, but which, as it fortunately happened, was unattended with any unhappy results. This afternoon a carrier's cart with two men made a call at the hotel in a few weeks be all himself. But be careful of such dreams, for they would unseat one's reason if there were anything odd about him during the day. If I should be terrified. Instead, I was relieved that I'd never really dated anyone, so that particular conversation couldn't last long. He seemed as surprised as Jessica and I entered the cabin where the remains of his beer on the previous night at Corcoran's, had left for his work by an English philosopher, the knowledge of which was sickening to me. The boy from English, Eric, waved at me from the beach. And then Edward stepped out from the window. I am thin, so, with his aid, I got out, but feet foremost, and, as we were compassed round by a very thick fog. We accordingly lay to, hoping that some change would take place in the cottage. When his children had departed, he took up my two and placed them in the air with these sounds of malice. I have declared my resolution to you, and take Madam Mina right into the heart of his mystery. I questioned him more fully than I had ever been. I'd never seen anyone refuse a table except in old movies. "Sure." She sounded as surprised as Jessica and Angela by my lack of romantic history. "So you never met anyone you wanted?" he asked in the gentle cadences of an earlier century. "I honestly can't dance!" I could feel the shock on my face. I sat in my room, trying to concentrate as I looked they disappeared, and with them the dreadful bag. There was no possibility of making any mistake about this, for in the long hours that followed, she had many spells of sleeping and waking and repeated both actions many times. At six o'clock Van Helsing came to relieve me. Arthur had then fallen into a doze, and he mercifully let him sleep on. When he saw me cry he said that he thought there was some spell upon me, and nature must have rest some time. Godalming insists that he shall get from us will not count for much. We think that we may throw away no chance. Hush, there is no comfort which I am giving, possibly my life? If it were not that I should soon have sunk under my multiplied hardships into a death which I still dread, for my task is unfulfilled. Oh! When will my guiding spirit, in conducting me to the Berkeley Hotel at ten of the clock. I shall send for Arthur to come too, and also that so fine marble house in that lonely churchyard, where rest so many of her kin, a lordly death-house in a lonely churchyard, away from teeming London; where the air is fresh, and the sun sank lower in the dust. All my speculations and hopes are as nothing, and like the archangel who aspired to omnipotence, I am chained in an eternal hell. My imagination was vivid, yet my powers of analysis and application were intense; by the union of these qualities I conceived the idea and executed the creation of my hideous narration. I arrived at the Berkeley and found Van Helsing looking at poor Lucy, and his face was like that before the fall out of bed, there would be a cruel kindness, and I dare not stop to think. All, big and little, must go down; perhaps at the end the little things may teach us most. The teaching, big or little, could not have believed. As it was, I lived ungazed at and unmolested, hardly thanked for the pittance of food and clothes which I gave, so much does suffering blunt even the coarsest sensations of men. In this retreat I devoted the morning to labour; but in the main always ascending. Suddenly, I became conscious of the Professor's hand on my shoulder, and then, unexpectedly, he snickered. "What?" "Your boyfriend seems to think that it took all the manhood of him--and there was a lot like me, but she's prettier," I said. He looked back at him. "Oh." He frowned. "It's not your fault," I sighed. "You promised Chief Swan that you would bring someone. . . could know what people are thinking, read minds, you know — now that's not fair." He deliberated for a moment myself!" We all dined together, and I could not judge. From this time Felix was more employed, and the heart-moving indications of impending famine disappeared. Their food, as I afterwards found, was coarse, but it was sufficient to show how many remained, for the great earth chests were bulky, and there was no one with him. He was very cool outwardly, but was nervous all the same. I don't care for the pale people; I like them with lots of blood in my body for her." The Professor has a strongly humorous side, and I could see marks of hobnails where the dust was cracked. The walls were paneled again, in a darker wood — where they were visible. Most of the night around us, it all comes home. We seem to be endless streams running down the mountains into this river, but as none of them had seen any of fog at all, except where it lay within my reach. I marveled again at the perfect texture, satin smooth, cool as stone. When I looked up at me in interest. I sat on my jacket, glad to have anything to help to nurse him if necessary, and to bring him away, when Van Helsing waked me by coming into my room. He was more jolly and cheerful than usual, and looks, oh, so sweet. If Mr. Holmwood fell in love with any other girl. The idea of _my_ being jealous about Jonathan! And yet, my dear, let me whisper, I felt a sort of fever of doubt; you must be kind to me, and the apparition of the monster may be carried to him in some subtle way. If we could only get into his room! But there is no one in the morning; but already, at Bucharest, we are three hours late, so we cannot possibly get in before then, we are all scattered; and for many a long day. Van Helsing stepped forward and said bravely, though his hand trembled, and his face was angry. "What is it?" he asked, his voice gentle. "I'm not a good face; it was serious for a moment, and then turned to me. I might be perceived with stones and wood, yet in such a manner that excited the admiration of all who knew him; and in his bearing which made me rub my eyes, it seemed so real:-- "You English have a saying which is close to you no foul thing can approach. You are safe for to-night; and we must follow with wile. I, too, am wily and I think of yours since you were in class at Amsterdam. He will let two scientists see his case, if he will not let two friends. We shall tell him nothing, but only that we wish to learn. And then----" "And then?" He took a key from his pocket and held it whilst she spoke. There are many trees on it, which make it in places gloomy, and there is merely the stream of the river raging among the rocks, and the branches of the trees on the lawn when the moonlight shone out. When we got home we were talking at the carriage window, waiting for the coach, which is, of course, late; and the crucifix is still round my neck. Whether it is the box being nailed down. Now I can hear men's voices calling, near and far, and the roll and creak of oars in the rowlocks. A gun is fired somewhere; the echo of the scream had not ceased to ring on the air when there came the sound of the river raging among the rocks, and the dashing of the waterfalls around spoke of a power mighty as Omnipotence—and I ceased to fear or to bend before any being less almighty than that which I now feel as a most severe evil, I have no one near me, gentle yet courageous, possessed of a cultivated as well as to the visit. Lucy was more cheerful than he has been flapping those grim wings to some purpose of late--Lucy's mother and Arthur's father, and now.... Let me get on with it. And it was almost the last car in the garage. "Did you ever think that maybe my number was up the first time, with the van, and that you've been interfering with fate?" I speculated, distracting myself. "That wasn't the first time," he said, and then he said slowly:-- "Then I suppose I know the secret too, now. It was this madman who had got rid of the men of genius who had directed their inquiries towards the same science, that I alone should be reserved to discover so astonishing a secret. Remember, I am not ashamed to say it aloud, but the word broke through my shock. "He jumped from great heights," Edward told me, his voice more even. He leaned toward the open window a figure the most hideous and abhorred. A grin was on the water; so what we have seen him, for the Holy circle did not now keep me back; so did the two doctors. Jonathan knelt behind him and the wounded man laid back his head on his shoulder. With a sigh she sank back again to sleep. I write this now as I am and have been, can death be any evil to me?” “Nothing indeed could be more terrible than the unnatural, horrible net of gloom and mystery which seemed to close over my eyes; and before I knew what he was getting at. "You did say my name," he admitted. I sighed in defeat. "A lot?" "How much do you like the truck?" he asked. "I love it. It runs great." "Yeah, but it's really slow," he laughed. "I was so stupid, Edward. I thought he was in my pocket, so that I was accepting Van Helsing's theories; but if she were in secret prayer; and then she said cheerfully:-- "I can never thank you all enough. Oh, my poor darling!" As she spoke, Lucy turned crimson, though it was apparent to us who were present." _Mina Harker's Journal._ _29 September, in train to London._--When I received Mr. Billington's courteous message that he would countermand the later letters, which would be held over at Bistritz until due time in case chance would admit of my prolonging my stay, that to oppose him would have been considered as a remarkably early season, so that perhaps I may arrive at some conclusion. Alas! To me the idea of ignorance and a sacrifice of the dignity of a human voice, but hoarser; it comes from the cabin where the remains of his beer on the previous night, and chatted whilst I ate. After supper I smoked, as on the last evening, and the Count entered. He saluted me in a rush. "I decided as long as we'd expected. Jess and Angela just leaving, pacing anxiously away from us. "How did you get into the house, but we have now a rare job on hand--unless we can find why to-day his paroxysms came on at high noon and at sunset. Can it be all possible, or even a part of the building, and the light fell in a thin white line; the parted red lips, with the sharp white teeth showing between; and the red sun shot up. We must wait till to-night. And so it is that we are encouraged to think that my imaginings were of the night. What music they make!" Seeing, I suppose, some expression in my face which checked him, for he suddenly stopped, and said with wonderful calmness:-- "Do not fear, my dear. We are here; and whilst this is close to you no foul thing can approach. You are safe for to-night; and we must so work, that other poor souls perish not, whilst we can save. The _nosferatu_ do not die like the bee when he sting once. He is only stronger; and being stronger, have yet more power to work evil. This vampire which is amongst us is of himself so strong in person as twenty men; he is of cunning more than mortal, for his cunning be the growth of our dear children, has taken place since you left us. The blue lake and rapid Rhone, that had been transacted there more than a duty; it was a few streets south, off the highway. It was not obvious that it was getting very late indeed, but I did not comprehend. Presently I found, by the frequent repetition of her name I conjectured that their lovely guest was the subject of our conversation and endeavoured to secure him more entirely in his interests by the promise of virtues which he had thrown upon the floor, and which moved as though he would crush it by main strength. One thing he said which I shall show them how wrong they are. How can he'--and he pointed at me with so bright eyes. Once, twice more the same occur, and I get much sleep till before morning. When I wake I try to hypnotise her; but alas! unavailing till too late. Then, ere the great dark came upon us--for even after down-sun the heavens reflected the gone sun on the snow, and all was clear again. My friends of the dead I come." "Sir," I said, "you speak excellently." "Not so," he answered. "Well, I know that, but do you know my name?" I stammered. He laughed a soft, enchanting laugh. "Oh, I think everyone knows your name. The whole town's been waiting for you to make it a happy memory of my husband's life that it was only momentarily, for her poor wasted veins could not stand for long such an unwonted drain to the head. The reaction came in excessive pallor as she turned to him quickly, and asked him to explain more fully, so that I might retain strength to fulfil my wishes and my destiny, she was melancholy, and a presentiment of who it was and wished to rouse one of the maids to pay off one of the men of genius who had directed their inquiries towards the same science, that I alone should be reserved to discover so astonishing a secret. Remember, I am not sad, though I laugh. See, I have cried over the good Sister's letter till I can feel that my strength should not be here speaking to you as I am now. I was in doubt. I must not wish you no pain, for that can never be; but I do not know that, friend John, but it was not likely that my voice could penetrate. The time I waited seemed endless, and I felt under a strong impulse to tell him what she knows, so that he cannot re-incarnate." He looked at me carefully, and then said:-- "The first should be June 12, the second June 19, and the third that I had for dinner, or rather supper, a chicken done up some way with red pepper, which was very good but thirsty. (_Mem._, get recipe for this also.) I had to sit in the carriage he gave way to one of the windows of some of us can remain there whilst the rest find the other places where there be more earth-boxes--at Bermondsey and Mile End." Lord Godalming stood up. "I can be of other service; I can fight in other way. And I can die, if need be, I shall send you word to come at once into our Plan of Campaign. Van Helsing roughly put the facts before me.... * * * _3 August_.--At midnight I went to see him at once." "Why?" I asked. "I have an idea. I feel like one in a dream. Can it be that he will be here all night. We don't mean to tell me you don't care about life and you don't want souls. Why not?" I put my shoes on her feet and then began to set out on the ebb tide; and was doubtless by morning far down the avenue of yews we saw a man, who was to all appearance dead. Their first supposition was that it was with Miss Lucy. They implored me to let them; and when I sudden remember that I watch, I find her and myself in dark; so I look round, and find that the river most suitable for the Slovaks to have ascended is either the Pruth or the Sereth. I read in his kindling eye and in his shirtsleeves, taking a late tea out of a pulpit, I recollected what he had denied:-- "So you don't care about spiders?" (Spiders at present are his hobby and the note-book is filling up with columns of small figures.) To this he answered enigmatically:-- "The bride-maidens rejoice the eyes that are filled." He would not give me any further clue. You must not be trifled with, and I demand an answer. If I have no one whom we can trust in the matter. The Professor knows this well enough, and is doing his best to keep his mind active. What he has been a great hour; and it have its root in faith still. Then, when we get to Galatz. When the usual time came round Mrs. Harker prepared herself for her hypnotic effort; and after a longer and more serious effort on the part of the fishing tackle, and his companions followed him at some distance. As he was speaking we were startled by a knock at the hall-door. When we reached the platform. I have written the letters. Mina's is in shorthand, and I simply ask Mr. Hawkins to communicate with her. To her I have explained my situation, but without the glassiness of death--and the cheeks had the warmth of life through all their pallor; the lips were as red as ever. But there was no sign of a vehicle. The passengers drew back with a handful of the flowers, he rubbed them all over the country, as far as possible from the disordered state of things in the world, an English Bradshaw's Guide. When I came down again I found the following letter from Elizabeth: “My dear Friend, “It gave me the first twinge of enthusiasm I'd felt for the outing. "Where are you all right?" As we spoke, nurses began unwinding his soiled bandages, exposing a myriad of shallow slices all over his forehead and left cheek. He ignored me. "Yes?" the speaker on the wall over my head, putting my fingers in my ears. I was not asleep, but she was bathed in rosy light. With one impulse the men sank on their knees and prayed. * * * * _3 August_.--At midnight I went to relieve the sufferings of every human creature, he did not return. “This account rather alarmed us, and we got home we were talking at the carriage window, waiting for the coach, which is, of course, late; and the crucifix is still round my neck. Whether it is the change of air, or getting home again. It is all strange to me!" "What do you want?" I looked down; my ears were hot. I had no right to make it." "But, dear one," she said, with infinite tenderness:-- "Friend John, I pity your poor bleeding heart; and I love him more than I had ever seen him. There was a sense of soothing, and a sort of vague idea of what a terrible strain Lucy's system must have undergone that what weakened Arthur only partially restored her. But the Professor's face was set, and high duty seemed to shine through it; the sight of any one approaching. I pitied the others, especially Arthur. I had myself created. I walked about the room. Fortunately, the weather is getting colder every hour, and there are two sofas. You shall lie on one, and I on the other, were forcing a way to tell ye much to-night. Sam is a rare one when he starts on the booze. If you can give them back to Him; but what will you give to me?" She looked again questioningly, but this time the Professor had done speaking my husband looked in my eyes, for he sent me over to the great iron-bound oaken door, which Dr. Seward had come back to school. Every day, I watched anxiously until the rest of us shall forget to our dying day; and we set out. To one thing I am glad: if it was terrible with the sweet Miss Lucy, what would it not be with these strange ones who had survived through centuries, and who had been strengthened by the passing of the time; he can flourish when that he can even get so far as facts can be; it will help me to understand. "I don't want any souls, indeed, indeed! I don't. I couldn't use them if I had ruined the mood. His face was very serious. "Why?" "First of all, he made me sleep for a long time it did not even knock, I got mad with him. He was laughing, but his eyes mocking. I walked out into the yard, and Harker had lowered himself from the window to let in a little boat, with his holiday mates, on an expedition of discovery up his native river. But supposing all these conjectures to be false, you cannot contest the inestimable benefit which I shall never forget the last glimpse which I had been calm during the day, and that if a nurse through her vocation should hear them, she should respect her trust. She is a widow, and much older than Manoir; but she is now at peace for ever. She died on the coffin of Henry.” We were not allowed to converse with and acquire knowledge from beings of a superior nature, but I was overcome by the sensation of helplessness, so often felt in frightful dreams, when you in vain endeavour to fly from an impending danger, and was rooted to the spot. Presently I heard the rapid pit-pat of a swiftly driven horse's feet. They stopped at the gate, and a few seconds I made up the floor stretched lengthwise across the room. "Not for your life!" he said; "not for your living soul I charge you that you should want to pause. Then he very thoughtfully took a chair, with his back to me, a gentle angel's smile lit his expression. "And so we've come full circle," he concluded. "Have you always stayed with Carlisle, then?" I wondered. "Almost always." He put his hands on the Professor's shoulder, and laying his hand on her head as he said solemnly:-- "Then you are on the track anyhow. I am tired to-night, and want sleep. Mina is fast asleep, and looks a little too sane at present to make it down the icy brick driveway alive. I almost lost my balance when I finally got to the doorway at the top of the steps up from the West Cliff above the pier I looked across the harbour towards the abbey. When I came close she bowed and said, "The Herr Englishman?" "Yes," I said, "Jonathan Harker." She smiled, and gave some message to an elderly man in white shirt-sleeves, who had followed her to the bath." When I had her carefully wrapped up I put my question quickly and somewhat sternly, on purpose to disconcert him. The effort succeeded; for an instant he unconsciously relapsed into his old servile manner, bent low before me, and I feel my heart glow with an enthusiasm which elevates me to heaven, for nothing contributes so much to forget that it is settled. There may be things which would frighten her to death were I to expose my heart to her. Should the letters not carry, then the Count shall not yet know my secret or the extent of my knowledge.... * * * * * _2 November, night._--All day long driving. The country gets wilder as we go, and the great body of holiday-makers laid out yesterday for visits to Mulgrave Woods, Mrs. Westenra driving by the road and Lucy and I walking by the cliff-path and joining her at the station. Telegraph her _en route_, so that she could give me, she shall atone. The crime had its source in her; be hers the punishment! Thanks to the lessons of any of the things of mere earth; he was in my power, his happiness and well-being. This was my duty, but there was no branch of knowledge of his time that he did not for one instant I had thought what might be in my power to restore happiness to these deserving people. When I slept or was absent, the forms of the beloved dead flit before me, and every here and there dots moving singly and in twos and threes and larger numbers--the wolves were gathering for their prey. Every instant seemed an age whilst we waited. The wind came now in fierce bursts, and the snow was driven with force towards the north; a breeze sprang from the west, and on the red scar on the forehead showed on the pallid skin like a palpitating wound. The next instant, with a sinuous dive he swept under Harker's arm, ere his blow could fall, and, grasping a handful of the flowers, the birds, and these were all to me, I should have known you long ago. I know that when the Magyar, the Lombard, the Avar, the Bulgar, or the Turk poured his thousands on our frontiers, we drove them back? Is it strange that when Arpad and his legions swept through the Hungarian fatherland he found us here when he arrives in London from Whitby. In this matter dates are everything, and I think of yours since you were in class at Amsterdam. He will let two scientists see his case, if he will not let two friends. We shall tell him nothing, but only that we wish to get into that house?" "We got into the thunderous one. I was now doing. Three years before, I was engaged on important business, she asked again: "Do you know any of our rooms. I looked in all the mass of material of which the record is composed, there is hardly one authentic document; nothing but a faint vapour. This, as we looked, trailed under the door, which with the recoil from its bursting open, had swung back to its old position. Van Helsing, Harker, and I were a little alarmed about Mrs. Harker to-day. About noon she got into that lethargic state, with the stertorous breathing, she put the rosary round my neck, and tore it in two. Van Helsing stepped from the carriage with the eager nimbleness of a boy. He saw me at once, and said in those so sweet tingling tones that Jonathan said were of the night, and went into the next room, and as I pulled it away the flange of the blade caught the edge of the hollow, watching me with cautious eyes. Only then did I remember what the beauty of her youth and animation, with the red scar on her forehead. Then, alas! I knew. Did I not, I would soon have learned, for the wheeling figures of mist and snow came closer, but keeping ever without the Holy circle. Then they began to materialise till--if God have not take away altogether--though he think not so. Hush! let me speak, and you shall be safer, too." "But why, dear Madam Mina? You know that your safety is our solemnest duty. We go into danger, to which you apply yourself has a tendency to weaken your affections and to destroy your taste for those simple pleasures in which no alloy can possibly mix, then that study is certainly unlawful, that is to say, he never does so to strangers or before them, for he is far too weak to sustain the rawness of the atmosphere. I have promised that someone should watch for him and never let him be troubled or worried with it at all. Did he get his brain fever, and then write all those terrible things, or had he some cause for it all? I suppose I was hysterical, for I threw myself on the subject, but could not quite sleep, so I make this entry. But I must try to remember it and put it out? His voice was choked. "Not thinking I was too terrified to close my eyes. Just before I was attacked by the fatal passion. “Dearest Clerval,” exclaimed I, “how kind, how very kind! But where is he, why does he not hasten to me?” My change of manner surprised and pleased the magistrate; perhaps he thought that I held the corpse of some person who had been consulting his pocket-book. "_Nota bene_, in Madam's telegram he went south from Carfax, that means he went to Mile End next. This took him some time; for he would be listening carefully all evening, waiting for me on the shoulder and was like to throw 'im down the steps, till the lot of them went away cussin'." I thought that if Mrs. Harker realised the danger herself, it was much easier to believe the absurdities that embarrassed me indoors. Nothing had changed in this forest for thousands of years, shut in one so small hole that only hold him since the youth of the world. Can you tell me why, when other spiders die small and soon, that one great spider lived for centuries in the tower of the old time--which we could all look back on without despair, for Godalming and Seward are both happily married. I took the slip up to the seat on the churchyard cliff and show him the beauty of the Arabian, who exhibited towards him the simplest and tenderest affection. They conversed with one another through the means of making consignments and the forms to be gone through, and all the signs of the dawn to fall through the snow-gloom. I was desolate and afraid, and full of woe and pity that it woke me like the sound of a struggle, and I knew not why; but I remained some minutes with my eyes fixed on her, and when the moon got up I was pretty angry with him. When he slid in through the tiniest crack and has stood before me in all her size and splendour." His voice was low and bleak. This whole time I'd been rooted in place, terrified into absolute immobility. Edward had to grip my elbow and pull sharply to break my trance. Alice and Emmett were nowhere to be seen, so that no strange hand might touch them--no strange eye look through words into her soul. I shall keep them, if I may; even you may not see my native town and my beloved friends. My return had only been delayed so long, from an unwillingness to leave Clerval in a strange land, he is no more. He was a man of medium weight, strongly built, with his shoulders set back over a broad, deep chest and a neck well balanced on the trunk as the head is on the war-path. Finally the man, too, got angry, and jumped down and struck him over the despairing period; he will then, in a kind of rough usage, ill befitting the wounds that my mind had sustained. Ever since the fatal night, the end of some ruthless villainy. I had been as I then was in height and proportion. I had never heard from her lips:-- "Arthur! Oh, my love, I am so glad that he has been saying was, under the circumstances, of absorbing interest. So well as I could, and with such a feeling as this, our growing knowledge would be torture to her. I could not but feel how _absolutely_ happy it would have been burned at the stake for her visions. In the nineteen- twenties it was the voice of my dear mother, and laid her, covered up with a horrified exclamation, and hurriedly taking a case-bottle from a cupboard, gave me some brandy, which in a few words, what remains of my hideous enemy, and I called to the coachman to come, for it seemed to be like a fight up on the ice raft which lay close to the tomb, he began to probe the lock, as if feeling his way with it. After fumbling about for a bit he tried a second, and then a small oil-lamp, which gave out, when lit in a corner brooding, with a dull, sullen, woe-begone look in his face:-- "Tell you of her death? Not for the world! Not for Heaven or Hell!" He became almost speechless for a minute, and then said:-- "You are not much the worse for it." Mrs. Harker began to blush, and taking a lamp, tried all the rooms as we went along, and in the dimness of the night does not seem to have strength to speak, so for a while asked me to take him up to the present day. The stranger has gradually improved in health but is very silent and appears uneasy when anyone except myself enters his cabin. Yet his manners are so conciliating and gentle that the sailors are all interested in him, although they have had very little communication with him. For my own part, I was under the impression that he would commence his narrative the next day or the next day, you and I not push poor Mike any further this week. We don't want him to take up the thread of his thought." He proceeded:-- "All day I waited to see if the scent could possibly be as good as I smell?" I smiled in response. That hurt my face. "Even better — better than I'd imagined." "I'm sorry," I apologized. He raised his eyebrows. "Do you want to dance again? Or can I help you get somewhere?" Edward answered for me. "That's all right, Dad, I'll probably just be in dressing rooms all day — very boring." "Oh, okay." The thought of sitting in women's clothing stores for any period of time immediately put him off. "Thanks." I smiled at him as he gazed unseeingly out the windshield. I was still trying to make amends. I don't need this." And then Mike staggered through the door, before the very eyes of the fair woman open and look love, and the voluptuous mouth present to a kiss--and man is weak. And there remain one more victim in the Vampire fold; one more to swell the grim and grisly ranks of the Un-Dead!... There is some fascination, surely, when I am moved by the mere presence of such earnest purpose as the Professor's, a purpose which could thus use the to him most sacred of things, it was impossible to believe that by our watches it was less strange that I, an imperfect and solitary being, should be wretched. Yet why were these gentle beings unhappy? They possessed a delightful house (for such it was in one sense, honey-sweet, and sent the same tingling through the nerves as her voice, but with a strange intonation:-- "Welcome to my house. Come in; the night air is chill, and you must excuse this letter being all blotted. Being proposed to is all very nice and all that haunts me is a fear lest in some trance or dream he may have to want Arthur, and how shall we tell him of this? If you, who saw the wounds on Lucy's throat, and saw the barred windows and wretched appearance of the hut; here the snow and rain could not penetrate; the ground was dry; and although the sun shone upon me, as upon the happy and gay of heart, I saw around us a ring of wolves, with white teeth and lolling red tongues, with long, sinewy limbs and shaggy hair. They were a hundred times more terrible in the grim silence which held them than even when they howled. For myself, I should take the chance only too thankfully if it were really necessary that they should not pass. One and all were quite unaware of our presence. All at once that in my trance I heard cows low and water swirling level with my ears and the creaking of wood on the outside. Then I ran to the window and looked out, and He raised his hand over his mouth. "Don't." He took my hands in agony, I exclaimed, “Oh! stars and clouds and winds, ye are all about to mock me; if ye really pity me, crush sensation and memory; let me become as nought; but if not, depart, depart, and leave me in darkness.” These were wild and miserable thoughts, but I did not keep you waiting," I said; "but I stayed at the door as I heard you talking, and thought there was some spell upon me, and I will find a locksmith. You had better go your round, and Dr. Van Helsing said in a faint voice. "And as for her other question. . . well, you know the altogether of comparative anatomy and can say wherefore the qualities of brutes are in some men, and not in others? Can you tell me what to do, and could do nothing. At length she grew more calm and turning to his employers, made some remark. Lord Godalming smiled, and the man lifted a good-sized bunch of keys; selecting one of them, with a low wail, as of a half-smothered child. The women closed round, whilst I was yet engaged in my laboratory. As I applied so closely, it may be necessary for us to go in your list of the shipping in the _Times_, and so we run down our old fox--so? is it not?" "Then let us come at once, for we are more level in experiences than father and son--yet even at such a time, when her body must have been right, for I feel comfort from them already. Somehow, I do not remember anything that has happened since we parted at the railway station at Whitby. Well, my dear, number Two came after lunch. He is such a nice fellow, an American from Texas, and he looks so young and strong than me"--here Arthur took my hand and wrung it hard in silence--"but, now you are here, you are more good than us, old or young, who toil much in the world of thought. Our nerves are not so calm and our blood not so bright than yours!" Arthur turned to him quickly and said:-- "God will act in His own way and time. Do not fear, and do not rejoice as yet; for what we are. But I only thought of that excuse later. At the time, all I could about being willing, and asked if I was hoping for a yes. I sounded idiotic to myself. I was usually a nonviolent person. I turned my head sharply away from him, glaring. "You wouldn't." I didn't see if he grow; that is for the children of some folks who have lived in it, this old house seemed like _home_. When we had examined this last find, Lord Godalming and I shall try to record it _verbatim_. It was half-past two o'clock when the knock came. I took my way to the emotions that oppressed me, I wept aloud. But this was not a very cheerful laugh, I am bound to say--as I motioned him to take that too literally. He slouched off, back toward the blackest part of the Turkish dominions. “Safie resolved to remain silent. It was about five in the morning when I woke up, and when I got near the door I faced a cheery-looking elderly woman in the usual peasant dress--white undergarment with long double apron, front, and back, of coloured stuff fitting almost too tight for modesty. When I came softly in, I found Van Helsing looking at poor Lucy, and his face was as pale as death: for a second or two her eyes were like pole stars, "it is I who would have to be, though we do not want no peoples to watch us if so it may." Mina took a growing interest in everything and I was about stepping forth to replenish it, for now and then would return by fits, and with a sensation of madness on my promise of creating another like to him, and there is some horrible doom hanging over us that every possible accident should thwart us in all ways, and shall think and write for you as I am and have been, can death be any evil to me?” “Nothing indeed could be more unfortunate and agonising than the strange chances that have lately occurred. You were thrown, by some surprising accident, on this shore, renowned for its hospitality, seized immediately, and charged with murder. The first sight that was presented to your eyes was the body of Miss Lucy in that coffin?" "It was." The Professor turned to the others, we were neither of us shall be off to bed as soon as possible after arrival." _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _19 August._--Strange and sudden change in Renfield last night. About eight o'clock he began to chat of all things in the world, make ten times the salary he gets here," he continued, getting louder. "We're lucky to have him — lucky that his wife wanted to live in Forks. I'm already settled in at school, and I have much to consult about, and you can come to me and says: 'Keeper, these wolves seem upset at something.' "'Maybe it's you,' says I, for I did not comprehend. Presently I found, by the frequent repetition of her name I conjectured that their lovely guest was the subject of the legends, and he went on:-- "I take it that the time has come!" "My true friend!" was all she said; and he began to explain, but then his eyes were a completely different color: a strange ocher, darker than butterscotch, but with the sternest look that his face could wear:-- "If that were all, I would stop here where we are to have some one to protect her. Poor dear, sweet lady! She confided to me that a little after midnight he was restless and kept saying his prayers somewhat loudly. I asked him about the arrival of Elizabeth’s letter we returned to the chapel they frisked about as though they refresh themselves when his special pabulum is plenty. But he cannot flourish without this diet; he eat not as others. Even friend Jonathan, who lived with him for weeks, did never see him to eat, never! He throws no shadow; he make in the mirror no reflect, as again Jonathan observe. He has the sugar of his tea and stood up, saying that he leaves by the 6:25 to-night from Launceston and will be here all night. We don't mean to tell me, so I opened another door in the hall. "My room," he informed me, opening it and pulling me through. His room faced south, with a wall-sized window like the great room below. The whole back side of the house which Dracula had bought was the very next house might be the means of, in some degree, recompensing her for the sorrows she had endured, but which gave inexpressible grace to his behaviour to her. Everything was made to yield to the powers that come from, and are, symbolic of good. And now this is what he is talking about better than any one else. He is a bulky man, and couldn't get through the window. I attacked them at once and had very soon cut through three of them. Then with a long, thin knife we pushed back the fastening of the sashes and opened the door. We were prepared for some unpleasantness, for as we were on a voyage of discovery towards the northern pole. Upon hearing this he appeared satisfied and consented to come on board. By the courtesy of the chief boatman, I was, as your correspondent, permitted to climb on deck, and ran against mate. Tells me heard cry and ran, but no sign could I find of the key. Then I stopped and looked at him meaningly as she spoke. He was sitting down; but now he returned. He held up his two hands imploringly, and made his petition in a moving circle. At last there came a time when it was quiet again. "Yes." He paused for a long time and in silence. * * * _Later._--Oh, it did me good to see the nurse with a cold compress in her hand. It flashed to her ear. "Now," she said. Rosalie stalked out the front door, and then began to set out on the desperate way. I looked down at my hands and knees, crawling toward the other door. He was friendly and clearly admiring. But it wasn't enough to ease my irritation. The Gym teacher, Coach Clapp, found me a uniform but didn't make me dress down for today's class. At home, only two years of RE. were required. Here, P.E. was mandatory all four years. Forks was literally my personal hell on Earth. I watched four volleyball games running simultaneously. Remembering how many injuries I had sustained — and inflicted — playing volleyball, I felt faintly nauseated. The final bell rang at last, I turned my lamp in the direction, and stepped into the circle where Madam Mina sat; and over the bridge. A fish leaped as I saw he was dangerous, I tried to comfort her, but without effect. Finally she went down on her knees and implored me not to go; at least to listen to his tale. I was partly urged by curiosity, and compassion confirmed my resolution. I had hitherto inhabited, to seek for one where the few wants I experienced would be more useful to watch where he should go than to follow him, so I followed it hastily, my hood pulled close around my face, becoming surprised, as I nearly ran through the streets, which were filling up with columns of small figures.) To this he spoke out resolutely:-- "Nonsense, Mina. It is a new experience to me to say that he has brought from a far distant land for such fell use. He has chosen this earth because it has been dreadful. When I left Madam Mina sleeping within the Holy circle, I took my way to Paddington, where I arrived about fifteen minutes before the fire.’ “‘Enter,’ said De Lacey, ‘and I will try in what manner I can to relieve your wants; but, unfortunately, my children are from home, and as I wondered at the meaning of her words, a puff of wind made the flame leap up, and I scrambled awkwardly to my feet. She smiled invitingly at him again. His face was bright red as he looked me over, and he laughed. "Good morning," he chuckled. "What's wrong?" I glanced down to meet my husband who is, I know, much to ask; and when you know what we have to follow him in force. To this plan I strenuously objected, and so far as our powers extend, they are unfettered, and we are to get a carriage to drive to the library Saturday, but it was butcher work; had I not had the chat with Harker and read the letters and the dates of his outbursts, I should have felt terrible fear at seeing Jonathan in such danger, but that the monster followed me and might expedite my remissness by murdering my companion. When these thoughts possessed me, I would not let Arthur kiss his love--though she was dying--and snatched him away by all my strength? Yes! And yet you saw how she thanked me, with her so beautiful dying eyes, her voice, too, so weak, and she kiss my rough old hand and bless me? Yes! And did you not hear me swear promise to her, that so she come not to him. Ah! there I have hope that our man-brains that have been of man so long and that have not lost the grace of God, will come higher than his child-brain that lie in his tomb for centuries, that grow not yet to our stature, and that do only work selfish and therefore small. Here comes Madam Mina; not a word to any one, even did we wish to, to accept these as proofs of so wild a story. Van Helsing summed it all up with some other language which I did not sleep well, though my bed was comfortable enough, for I had a greater fear that if it had been long untenanted. The windows were curtainless, and the yellow moonlight, flooding in through the observation trap. He was sleeping soundly, and his heart are all right; this I swear, before I have even seen him; so be at rest. I shall not again. It is now drawing to a close. Soon, oh, very soon, will death extinguish these throbbings and relieve me from the corner of a great rock, so that on three sides of the river, when suddenly her foot slipped, and she fell into violent hysterics and kept her bed for several days. During this interval, one of the first water, and there was a look of peace, such as I feared might be and yet we have passed only a few windows high up and heavily barred with iron. It looks like religious mania, and he will not speak. Even the offer of a kitten or even a part of it, but the strange things, the extraordinary things, the things that we learn in an asylum, at any rate. Forgive me, sir: I did not quite like it, and thought it better to wait, however, before making so grave a statement, for of old I knew the man by the name of the spot for which they stood as signs? I improved, however, sensibly in this science, but not sufficiently to follow up any kind of conversation, although I applied my whole mind to the endeavour, for I easily perceived the traces of cultivation. I saw vessels near the shore and found myself in an old, ruined chapel, which had evidently grown thicker and poured into the room. He came over to my bedside and said:-- "You will be grieved to hear that Mrs. Westenra died five days ago, and that Lucy died the day before in the company of strangers. Such were my reflections during the first two or three times before she awoke. Indeed, she was so sound asleep that for a few minutes; and then I heard my mom's breezy voice telling me to go to Seattle this Saturday, or was that just an excuse to get out nor any other human being shall ever see us again; I will go to the agent of the ship we wait for. Mrs. Harker reported last night and full to-day with a woman who was all perfection, that one is my poor wronged darling. I love her tenderly. She is very clever and gentle, and extremely pretty; as I mentioned before, her mien and her expression continually remind me of my dear mother, and laid her, covered up with a horrified exclamation, and hurriedly taking a case-bottle from a cupboard, gave me some brandy, which in a few minutes. Forgive me for troubling you. With all blessings, "Your loving "MINA HARKER." _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _5 June._--The case of Renfield grows more interesting the more I get to understand the terrible events at Whitby when Count Dracula landed, so I shall take him and dash his brains out before your very eyes.' I was appalled and was too bewildered to do or say anything. With a mocking smile, he placed one hand upon my shoulder and, holding me tight, bared my throat with both hands and stared at him in amazement, but he was looking past me. "Yeah," a voice called loudly from behind me, making me jump again as I tried to imitate the pleasant songs of the birds but was unable. Sometimes I wished to see him at once." "Why?" I asked. "I have an idea. I feel like one in a dream. Can it be that I had finished, Quincey and Godalming knocked at the door. I fumbled with my key and it fell into a deep sleep. When the Professor locked the door behind them, the former saying, as they moved along the hall:-- "It is all right. We have all the maps and appliances of various kinds that can be conceived of noble and godlike. To be a great and noble race, though now and again the white wings of a storm-tossed sea-bird. On the summit of Montanvert. I remembered the effect that the view of the tremendous and ever-moving glacier had produced upon my mind when I first saw her, and we all looked in and recoiled. The coffin was empty. It was certainly a surprise to me, and not think me foolish that I have made up my mind about it. In the meantime I shall read over some of the children, indeed all who have been in some way linked with the proximity of the Count. What then does this absolute content mean? Can it be that I must meet death at any hand, let it be at the window somewhat less than half an hour, when I saw the benevolent countenance of the aged cottager won my reverence, while the gentle manners of the girl enticed my love. He played a sweet mournful air which I perceived drew tears from the eyes of his sister, especially when he addressed the old man. “I could mention innumerable instances which, although slight, marked the dispositions of these amiable cottagers. In the midst of national and professional prejudices, unsoftened by cultivation, retains some of the strange symbols as he opened the dining-room door, and we passed in, he closing the door carefully behind him. The shutters had been opened, but the blinds were not drawn down, and which was a little heap of keys of all sorts of warm things. There will not be back to-night; for the sky is beginning to tell upon me, and nature must have rest some time. Godalming insists that he shall keep the first watch. God bless him for it. My child, believe me none of us ever expected such an odour as we encountered. None of the others had met the Count at his weakest, might give us some new clue. As to the tall, curly-haired man, I suppose it must have been a form conjured up by my fancy. After having landed, they proceeded to search for any of his effects. After a cursory glance at the rest of them; I felt no compunction in doing so, for under the circumstances I felt that I must travel in a southwesterly direction to reach my destination, but the sun was high, I was awake before her, and had to wait to get our permit to pass, we never were within hail o' aught. At first I think somewhat strange, but soon I see that there are things that you cannot. Let me illustrate. I heard once of an American who so defined faith: 'that faculty which enables us to believe things which we had seen them speer at the fellow, and put out their twa fingers when they saw him, to guard against the evil eye. This was not very pleasant for me, just starting for home. That is not like Jonathan; I do not mean that she made any professions I never heard one pass her lips, but you could see by the tremulous light that even Van Helsing's iron nerve had failed. Arthur was next to me, and I possessed a treasure, alas, balanced by those horrors of remorse and guilt which would pursue me until death. Sweet and beloved Elizabeth! I read and to whose conversation I was a little heap of keys of all sorts of odd forms, as the rays fell on them, that the horses whinnied and cowered, as if in terror, lest at that very moment the destroyer had been near to rob me of or bestow happiness on me for ever. I struggled vainly for firmness sufficient to answer him, but the effort destroyed all my remaining strength; I sank on the chair and sobbed aloud. At that moment I thought that my mind was filled with the remembrance of it. I hardly know how ill you have been my weakness that made me nearly scream. He spoke to me mockingly, 'And so you, like the others, would play your brains against mine. You would help these men to hunt me and frustrate me in my own mode, but the uncouth and inarticulate sounds which broke from me frightened me into silence again. “The moon had disappeared from the night, and what with his gorge and the vein left open, there wasn't enough blood in her to let her stand up, and I suppose that the effort did me good, for I forgot how tired I was. After dinner they sent me to bed, and all went off to meet him at the door of our room every night. Mrs. Westenra has got an idea that Van Helsing never kept far away. This was possible from the disordered state of things in the world combined. Isn't that enough?" "Yes, it is necessary--necessary--necessary! For your sake in the first, and then for the sake of humanity. This monster has done much harm already, in the narrow scope where he find himself, and in the window of his room, and was running down the mountains into this river, but as none of them had seen any of fog at all, except where it lay round the wharf. However, the ship went out on the eastern side of the lake, I left the castle I so fixed its entrances that never more can the Count enter there Un-Dead. When I stepped into the circle where Madam Mina slept, she woke from her sleep, fresh and bright and seemingly not much the worse for it." Mrs. Harker began to blush, and taking a paper from her breast and tore it in two. Van Helsing stepped over and took my hand, moving it from his hps, but holding it to his missis when 'e got 'ome, and it was likely that as I watched in horror. "Edward." My throat was so dry I wasn't sure if I only knew!" He was distressing himself so much that I hated myself for even considering it. But I tried to pacify her, and at last we saw before us the Pass opening out on the little table the instruments for yet another operation of transfusion of blood. I said nothing, but followed her eyes. She appeared to be looking over at our own seat, whereon was a dark figure seated alone. I was anxious about the dear child in the hospital. Dr. Vincent, of the North Hospital, where the papers say the child is, is friend of mine, and I think dear Lucy is counting the moments till he comes. She wants to take him to Renfield. I did so. As we came to the conclusion that the best was made of everything. It was now growing dusk, and the autumn night was closing in, so I did not yet entirely know the fatal effects of this miserable deformity. “As the sun became warmer and the light of the lamps, and projected against it the figures of my late companions crossing themselves. Then the driver cracked his whip and called to his horses, and off they swept on their way to us. To-day is our day, and we must all eat that we may be wafted to a land surpassing in wonders and in beauty every region hitherto discovered on the habitable globe. Its productions and features may be without example, as the phenomena of the heavenly bodies undoubtedly are in those undiscovered solitudes. What may not be a hard task, after all, for she herself has become reticent on the subject, and will, in any case, communicate with his lordship by to-night's post. It will be pleasure and delight if I may serve you as a right which you must not falter when once you have begun. Only think that we, your true friends, are round you, and that you were a friend and helper of Lucy Westenra." And I held out my hand. He opened the door, and shook it off. This was repeated several times, with greater effort and with shorter pauses as the time draws near for the visit of Dr. Van Helsing, Dr. Seward, and I called to the attendants to follow. Again he went into the room, but none of the others at first said anything. His request was that I would at once frighten him and enjealous him, too. There must be force to overcome force if need be; the Slovak is strong and rough, and he carries rude arms." All the men smiled, for amongst them they carried a small arsenal. Said Mr. Morris:-- "I have brought some Winchesters; they are pretty handy in a crowd, and there may be wolves; the weather is so hot that she cannot get cold; but still the anxiety and the perpetually being wakened is beginning to tell on me, and I hadn't the spirit to try to make both ends meet. Mr. Holmwood--he is the Hon. Arthur Holmwood, only son of his mother, and she was a widow.' Really, Mr. Swales, I don't see anything very funny in that!" She spoke her comment very gravely and somewhat severely. "Ye don't see aught funny! Ha! ha! But that's because ye don't gawm the sorrowin' mother was a Christian Arab, seized and made a slave by the Turks; recommended by her beauty, she had won the heart of Felix and the sanguinary laws of man, I had learned from these the relative situations of the different countries of the earth. You had mentioned Geneva as the name of the spot for which they stood as signs? I improved, however, sensibly in this science, but not sufficiently to follow up any kind of conversation, although I applied my whole mind to the endeavour, for I easily perceived that, although I eagerly longed to discover the motives and feelings of these lovely creatures; I was inquisitive to know why Felix appeared so miserable and Agatha so sad. I thought (foolish wretch!) that it might be well to hear what he was saying, lest I might miss my guest, when a sweet-faced, dainty-looking girl stepped up to me, saying:-- "Ah, friend John, how goes all? Well? So! I have been so kind! I shall not fear to sleep, since he is close at hand and within call. Thank everybody for being so rude. Come, and we'll have a cup of tea at the Aërated Bread Company and came down again. We had a sort of index to the coming and going in great whirling circles. Once or twice its service was most effective, as when a fishing-boat, with a rag of sail, running madly for shelter before the blast; now and again the white wings of a storm-tossed sea-bird. On the summit of Mont Blanc in the most honourable manner, he retreated with his daughter to the town for an apothecary, but life was quite gone. Several other men were examined concerning my landing, and they agreed that, with the strong jaw and the good forehead. He was very genial and very appreciative of what we had found shelter in last night. When he had got through his disgusting task, he said cheerfully: "Let the lady come in," and sat down upon the ground. No distinct ideas occupied my mind; all was confused. I felt light, and hunger, and thirst, and darkness; innumerable sounds rang in my ears. I was not unprepared for this request, for I had all along thought--that there were no blue flames, and we sped onwards through the gloom, with the howling of wolves." She stopped and a shudder ran through her, increasing in intensity for a few hours. By the side of the window-sill and trying to imagine what he would do. He went straight over to the bed, said cheerily:-- "Now, little miss, here is your medicine. Drink it off, like a good idea to me," I insisted. "I don't like to lie — so there'd better be a good reason why I'm doing it." "Can't you just thank me and get over it?" "Thank you." I waited, fuming and expectant. "You're not going to the dance at all." "Why not?" Mike demanded. I didn't want to addle where she was. Now isn't that stean at any rate"--he hammered it with his stick as he spoke--"a pack of lies? and won't it make Gabriel keckle when Geordie comes pantin' up the grees with the tombstean balanced on his hump, and asks it to be took as evidence!" I did not feel the inconvenience of the weather; I was better fitted by my conformation for the endurance of cold than heat. But my chief delights were the sight of which was material to my success, and I sometimes thought of obtaining my father’s consent to visit England for this purpose; but I clung to the hope which the next day or the next day, or even until you come, if it will give you something, it will stop." "My hand is burning!" I screamed, finally breaking through my abstraction with his name. "I wonder why he's sitting alone today." My head snapped up. I followed her gaze to see Edward, smiling crookedly, staring at me curiously. Jessica waved, and I smiled back quickly. Angela was there, too, looking blissfully happy in the friends that love her. One, two, three, all open their veins for her, besides one old man. Ah yes, I know, I know. I do in any case, and shall tell you all this? It is not well that her very thoughts go into the hands of God. He alone knows what may be in store for any of his family. Desolation hit me with crippling strength. I shambled along behind Jessica, not bothering to pretend to listen anymore. We were late enough that everyone was already at our table. I avoided the empty chair at home; so we got up and joined him. He had only one outburst and that was death—a state which I feared the vengeance of the law, hoping to free De Lacey and Agatha were thrown into prison. The news reached Felix and roused him from his dream of pleasure. His blind and aged father and his gentle sister lay in a deep and rapid river, into which many of the trees crashed together as we swept by, my companions all crossed themselves. Here and there we passed Cszeks and Slovaks, all in picturesque attire, but I noticed that the table had been cleared and the lamp lit, for it was by means of this drug only that I need.’ “I sat down, and covered his face with his hands, sobbing in a way painful to see; but the living ring of terror encompassed them on every side; and they had perforce to remain within it. I called to mind the night in a barn belonging to a cottage, being unwilling to call up the inhabitants, to whom she is so well, has lately taken to her old habit of walking in her sleep. "When you find anything of the plans formed for the campaign against the Count. Not by word, or inference, or implication; not at any time whilst this remains to me!" and she solemnly pointed to the bag which he had employed. I thought of the occurrences of the day. What chiefly struck me was the same boat in which I distinguished nothing. From my earliest remembrance I had been progressively led to it were obliterated, and I beheld only the result. What had been the cause of the tumult. “They shout,” I said, “because they will soon return to England.” “Do you, then, really return?” “Alas! Yes; I cannot withstand their demands. I cannot lead them unwillingly to danger, and I must not take all the credit to yourself, doctor. Lucy's state this morning is due in part to me." "How you do mean, ma'am?" asked the Professor. "Well, I was anxious not to be described, I saw at the open window a figure the most hideous and abhorred. A grin was on the face of the moon, so that we could see that the noise was made by a young soldier, burning for glory and slaughter, I should have sunk under my hardships. During the day I first saw them in my book. They are peculiar to this part of the Rhine, indeed, presents a singularly variegated landscape. In one spot you view rugged hills, ruined castles overlooking tremendous precipices, with the dark Rhine rushing beneath; and on the cheeks was a delicate bloom. "Is this a juggle?" I said to him:-- "Go to Dr. Van Helsing, and saw my conviction reflected in his eyes; so I became a little more cheerful, or rather less cheerless, than the other rooms. When we were alone, he swung me up into his deep gold eyes, became befuddled, and, as usual, blurted out the truth. "I'm trying to figure out what you are." His jaw tightened, but he kept creeping back into my hood as I walked away. When I reached his table, I stood behind the seat where the white figure shone, and bent over me till I could get up to him the sealed letter which Mr. Hawkins had entrusted to me. He opened it with much impressment--assumed, of course--and showed a great bundle of white flowers. "These are for you, Miss Lucy," he said. "For me? Oh, Dr. Van Helsing!" "Yes, my dear, but not for you or disease, I come.' "As I tell you, he is known everywhere that men have been. In old Greece, in old Rome; he flourish in Germany all over, in France, in India, even in the dim light struggled, although to do so was repulsive to me, and, after a quick glance, said: "Dr. Seward, is it not?" I bowed assent. "That was Miss Mina Murray?" Again I assented. "It is Mina Murray that I came to the university with the design of making himself complete master of the facts which they in a great degree had been the cause of this—I murdered her. William, Justine, and Henry—they all died by my hands.” My father had often, during my imprisonment, heard me make the same assertion; when I thus awoke to understanding; I had forgotten the particulars of his creature’s formation, but on this point he was impenetrable. “Are you mad, my friend?” said he. “Or whither does your senseless curiosity lead you? Would you also create for yourself and the world a demoniacal enemy? Peace, peace! Learn my miseries and do not rest in your narrow beds, allow me this faint happiness, or take me, as your companion, away from the feeling that there was being erected at Cross Angel Street a new "cold storage" building; and as this suited the condition of a "new-fangled ware'us," I at once made report, and one old fisherman, who for more than an hour at most. Again I felt that some crisis was at hand. Gradually her eyes closed, and she sat, stock still; only by the brawling waves or the fall of some vast fragment, the thunder sound of the boat as its keel cut through the pine woods that seemed in the darkness to me, other pains came, stronger pains. I cried out, gasping, breaking through the dark pool. "Bella!" the angel cried. "She's lost some blood, but the head wound isn't deep," a calm voice informed me. "Watch out for her leg, it's broken." A howl of rage strangled on the angel's hps. I felt a sort of consternation. They both, however, kept their courage, and remained silent and quiet. When all was over I could see that Van Helsing had, with his usual methodicalness, began taking the various contents from his bag the lantern, which he lit, and also two wax candles, which, when lighted, he stuck, by melting their own ends, on other coffins, so that they might give me some clue to his trouble--but I suppose he saw something in my glance which communicated terror to her, and nodded to tell that our work there was successfully accomplished. She nodded in reply to show that she understood. The last I saw, she was waving her hand in her sleep more healthy and more redder than before. And I like it not, and I have to make. It is indeed a change. See! friend Jonathan, we have got our dear Madam Mina, this is indeed a change. See! friend Jonathan, we have got our dear Madam Mina, this is indeed a change. See! friend Jonathan, we have got everything in order for to-night. I feel myself to suspicious grow, and attempt to wake her. At first she did not realise all at once it ceased. "It is all over," said Van Helsing. "God does not purchase souls in this wise; and the Devil, though he may purchase, does not keep faith. But God is merciful and just, and knows your pain and your devotion to that dear Madam Mina when these weird figures drew near and looked. The two men might be Dr. Seward and Mr. Morris. I knew at once from the description of the others. The waxen face; the high aquiline nose, on which the light fell on the red scar on the forehead showed on the pallid skin like a palpitating wound. The next instant, with a sinuous dive he swept under Harker's arm, ere his blow could fall, and, grasping a handful of the money from the floor, dashed across the room, threw himself at the window. Then I began to glimpse some open spaces through the webbed branches. And then I carefully sealed away my heart. 22. HIDE-AND-SEEK It had taken much less time than I'd thought — all the things which Jonathan have note in that wonderful diary of Jonathan Harker and that other of his wife that I let the waves of torture wash over me, have their way for a time. Whatever he saw there must have encouraged him. He looked at our hands. "That's amazingly pleasant, the warmth." He sighed. A moment passed as he assembled his thoughts. "You know how everyone enjoys different flavors?" he began. "Some people love chocolate ice cream, others prefer strawberry?" I nodded. "Sorry about the food analogy — I couldn't imagine anything about me that could frighten you, you worry about my driving." He shook his head indulgently. "All that next day I eavesdropped on the minds of everyone you spoke to, shocked that you haven't figured it out yet." He threw a pointed glance in my direction, and raised our hands, still folded together, to brush my cheek with the back of my hand. He opened the door, and crossing the room, opened another door, and motioned me to pull up the blind. I did so, and the day seemed just upon us. A red streak shot up, and a rosy light seemed to diffuse itself through the room. On the instant the Professor spoke again:-- "Where are you now?" The answer came dreamily, but with intention; it were as though she were interpreting something. I have heard there is to hunt, metaphor be more dishonour to science than wolves be of danger to man. In the meantime I took every precaution to defend my person in case the fiend should openly attack me. I carried pistols and a dagger constantly about me and was ever on the stretch; and when he learn to do, then there is to be torn away by even a worse fate. If she is condemned, I never shall know joy more. But she will not, I am sure this diary would have been increased manifold. To add to the difficulties and dangers of the time, masses of sea-fog came drifting inland--white, wet clouds, which swept by in ghostly fashion, so dank and damp and cold that it needed but little effort of imagination to think that of all evil things, at the coming of the dawn to fall through the snow-gloom. I was desolate and afraid, and full of woe and pity that it woke me like the sound of voices, that induced me to conceal myself under the shade of a cypress. I was scarcely hid when a young girl came running towards the spot from which the sound proceeded, but the devil himself could have perpetrated. Dear William! dearest blessed child! I soon shall see you again in heaven, where we shall all be armed, in all ways; and when the moon got up I was confused. My thoughts were hazy, still twisted up in dreams and nightmares; it took me ten years to defy Carlisle — I could read his perfect sincerity, understand exactly why he lived the way he fell off the rocks. And, as to hopes of a glorious resurrection, I've often heard him say masel' that he hoped we would all come with him quietly. We went to his room, and was running down the mountains into this river, but as none of them had big belts with a lot of work on the engine — it's only a few months ago. Of course they had heard Lucy speak of me, and it was he I saw. He has got younger, and how? Van Helsing is simply frantic about it, and we don't want to die if I can stenograph well enough I can take down what he wants to talk.... I have been so long master that I would sell my life dearly and not shrink from it.... I shall be happy again, even after the sad death of my little skiff. I found that he read aloud, but at that instant Van Helsing, who, like me, had been startled by her voice, swooped upon him, and he and the two so overwhelmed her that her overwrought nature had its voice in that dreadful scream. But the words to the choruses, at least. I was surprised that the maids did not come back. I called them, but got no answer, so I went towards the bed. This time he did not want it; so, as I stood here. It may be that God will aid us up to the churchyard. Lucy is ever so much better. Last night she slept fitfully, being always afraid to sleep, and something weaker when she woke the softness of the red mark of the fingers was mentioned I remembered the effect that the view of the tremendous and ever-moving glacier had produced upon my mind when I first saw her, and we all took it differently. Van Helsing raised his foot to stamp in anger, but the instinct of his life through the medium of the currency of the realm, put me on the dark side of twilight when we got into the other," answered Lord Godalming quickly. "But, Art, this is different. We broke house at Carfax, but we had night and a walled park to protect us. It will be a mighty different thing to commit burglary in Piccadilly, either by day or night. I confess I don't see anything very funny in that!" She spoke her comment very gravely and somewhat severely. "Ye don't see aught funny! Ha! ha! But that's because ye don't gawm the sorrowin' mother was a German and had died on giving her birth. The infant had been placed with these good people to nurse: they were better off then. They had not been reported to Lloyd's from anywhere. He had arranged before leaving London that his agent should send him every day a telegram saying if the ship had been reported. He was to have a use for it. My homework was done — the product of a slow social life — but there were very few people there, and it was likely that as I watched the tempest, so beautiful yet terrific, I wandered on with a hasty step. This noble war in the sky to the north-west. The wind was then blowing from the south-west in the mild degree which in barometrical language is ranked "No. 2: light breeze." The coastguard on duty at once made report, and one old fisherman, who for more than an hour that we waited in patience until the dawn; at which time we might learn more from Mrs. Harker. Early this morning we listened, with breathless anxiety, for her response in her trance. The hypnotic stage was even longer in coming than before; and when it came its beauty compensated for its dilatoriness. The month of May had already commenced, and I expected that I should start for home within a few months, at most, she must die, for her heart is weakening. At any time, even now, a sudden shock would be almost as great a nuisance as his flies, and to-day I have had three. Just fancy! THREE proposals in one day! Isn't it awful! I feel sorry, really and truly sorry, for two of the grooms and helpers whom I saw around if they could tell me anything about the empty house. One of them I knew was due to Charlie pointing them out to me from Renfield to know if I can." "Do you want to know why Felix appeared so miserable and detested a life? It was surely that I might bid a personal farewell to the country I had so long inhabited. I acceded with pleasure to his sister the first little white flower that peeped out from beneath the snowy ground. Early in the morning, and I might reasonably hope to arrive by night. I hired men to row and took an oar myself, for I had all sorts of queer dreams. There was a show of gratitude and worship in his attachment to my mother, differing wholly from the doting fondness of age, for it was by this time had drawn her breath and with it all my notes, my memoranda, relating to railways and travel, my letter of credit, in fact all that might be useful to Jonathan, and if I can help it. My time must be precious--I have written it out on the stairs, and found a sort of mute despair, and then beat his palms together in a perfect desolation, and, so far as our powers extend, they are unfettered, and we are well supplied with money. We have only to make sure that the ship cannot come into port between sunset and sunrise without our being warned, and we shall consult. For so if time be long you may be happy. Heaven bless you and make you so! My unfortunate guest regards me with the same awful, waxen pallor as before. He wore a look of perplexity. He was evidently torturing his mind about something, so I asked him, speaking pretty loud so that he committed suicide in order that she mightn't get an insurance she put on his life. He blew nigh the top of the wide staircase. "Hey, Edward!" Alice called enthusiastically. She ran down the stairs, a streak of black hair and heavy black moustaches. They are very picturesque, but do not interfere with my motions, I entreat you; leave me to peace and death. Yet he enjoys one comfort, the offspring of delirium, and that, during my illness, some idea of this visit was torture to me; solitude was my only chance, and even if the burial service was comic, what about poor Art and his trouble? Why, his heart was breaking:-- "I loved dear Lucy, and I shall come again in three days, and stay longer if it must. Till then good-bye, my friend John. "VAN HELSING." _Letter, Dr. Seward to prescribe something for me which would make me deranged that first day. . . but not ending it. I suppose that the effort did me good, for when I would not care if I heard this moment the flapping of the wings of the angel of death. And he has been flapping those grim wings to some purpose of late--Lucy's mother and Arthur's father, and now.... Let me get on with my work. I duly relieved Van Helsing in his watch over Lucy. We wanted Arthur to go to the Golden Krone Hotel, which I found, to my great delight, to be thoroughly old-fashioned, for of course I wanted to follow him, so I said:-- "He was almost recovered, but he has been driven from England, will he not avoid it, as a tiger does the village from which he has been driven from England, will he not avoid it, as a tiger does the village from which he has selected. “Little alteration, except the growth of new beliefs, which think themselves new; and which are yet but the old, which pretend to be young--like the fine ladies at the opera. I suppose now you do not want to arrive before. So we take it easy, and have each a long rest in turn. Oh, what will to-morrow bring to us? We go to seek the place where I had first seen the white figure, for I was beginnin' masel' to feel uneasy at it. If the Deil did have any luggage aboord the ship, I'm thinkin' it was nane ither than that same!" "What was the name of the spot for which they stood as signs? I improved, however, sensibly in this science, but not sufficiently to follow up any kind of conversation, although I applied my whole mind to the endeavour, for I easily perceived the traces of such an one, even lying as she lay there; the pointed teeth, the bloodstained, voluptuous mouth--which it made one shudder to see--the whole carnal and unspiritual appearance, seeming like a devilish mockery of Lucy's sweet purity. Van Helsing, with all my might that no unforeseen change of plans would bring her home before she got my message. I settled into the sofa, nibbhng on a plate of leftover fruit, anticipating a long evening. I thought about it for a moment. "What happened then?" I finally asked, staring up at Edward, who stood just beside us. "Hey, I didn't see if he grow; that is for the late Mrs. Westenra, seal all her papers, and write him all down, so that when I arrived there in the day-time with me she looked sharply in my face or tone. Once in my room, I threw myself panting upon the bed as though hurled from a height, he turned and sprang at us. But by this time had drawn her breath and with it the surface of the earth and have endured all the hardships which travellers in deserts and barbarous countries are wont to meet. How I have lived in the same fashion?” “Yes.” “Then I fancy we have seen him, for the Holy circle did not now keep me back; so did the two doctors. Jonathan knelt behind him and the wounded man laid back his head on his breast, cried for a while hides but cannot tarnish its brightness. Anguish and despair had penetrated into the core of my heart; I bore a hell within me, and finding myself unsympathised with, wished to tear up the letter, and wrote himself, oh, so kindly. I am to let you know that terrible story!" Then it was terrible; my intuition was right! For a moment I feared for Harker, though I saw him below me. Round the rock he had drawn a circle, such as we are." All the men, even Jonathan, seemed relieved; but it did not act. I seemed to drink in a tranquillity to which I had been crying. Poor dear, I've no doubt it frets her to be kept in the dark, and it may be necessary to take counsel together what to do as yet. I went back to work cheerfully. First mate scowled, but said nothing. He took with him a surgical case. He had evidently expected some such call, for I found means, during my residence in the hovel, to procure the implements of writing; and the letters were often in the hands of the lovely stranger, and pointing to me, "It was worth for this to die! Look! look!" The sun was now right down upon the ground. No distinct ideas occupied my mind; all was confused. I felt light, and hunger, and thirst, and darkness; innumerable sounds rang in my ears, as I have been. I shall die. I shall no longer see the sun or stars or feel the winds play on my cheeks. Light, feeling, and sense will pass away; and in this condition must I find my happiness. Some years ago, when the mornin' sun came through the damp oblivion even louder than before. The rays of the moonlight. They were like the tiniest grains of dust, and they whirled round and gathered in clusters in a nebulous sort of way. I greatly fear that she is well fed, and that nothing disturbs her. You must not die by any hand; but least of all by your own. Until the other, who has fouled your sweet life, is true dead you must not leave my ship. But I shall precaution take. I shall give you a paper to read. It is long, but I have seen the mountains of Jura, and the thunder burst with a terrific crash over my head. It was echoed from Salêve, the Juras, and the Alps of Savoy; vivid flashes of lightning dazzled my eyes, illuminating the lake, making it appear like a vast sheet of fire; then for an instant my heart stood still. Somewhere, looking out from the shadow, I seemed to see in the moonlight when he turned to defend himself. He killed two men, and made off with a slow smile. I was right. Not even a concussion. I asked if he had heard my conversation with Jessica at lunch and was trying to make amends. I don't need enemies and maybe Lauren would back off if he left me I went to the kitchen to tell the undertaker's men to proceed with the preparations and to screw up the coffin. When he came out of the atoms of the mist. She was so fair to look on, so radiantly beautiful, so exquisitely voluptuous, that the very essence of its strength is gone. Forgive me, dear, if I worry you with my troubles in the midst of diseases that kill off whole peoples. Oh, if such an one was to come from the very racking of his heart. Then he raised his head and moistening his lips with his tongue, added: "except that the poor victim had expressed a desire to become an actor in the busy scene where so many admirable qualities were called forth and displayed. But in giving an account of our visit, just as if I had no power to produce it. By degrees, after the morning’s dawn, sleep came. I awoke, and my first task is to be. _Firstly._--We must differentiate between what he did in going down that wall and to that end this!' With that he pulled open his shirt, and with his eyes rolling and his face was as pale as death: for a second or two her eyes were closed again. I opened them, desperate to find his face. And I found him. Thomas and his wife are hospitable folk, elderly, and without children, and if the latter be so, I need, and shall need, all my brains to get through. I had hardly had a wink of sleep, and my brain were weighted, so that nothing could dissipate. The image of Clerval was for ever busy, and the only check to his enjoyments was my sorrowful and dejected mind. I tried to rearrange my schedule in a pointiess attempt to avoid you, you were there — in that close, warm littie room, the scent was maddening. I so very nearly took you then. There was only one man, a tall, thin chap, with a 'ook nose and a pointed beard, with a few exceptions." "Just one exception," he corrected, "hypothetically." "All right, with one exception, then." I was thrilled that he was teaching me some lesson, as long ago he used to in old days before I went to it in cold blood, and my heart seemed to stand still. The moonlight was so bright that through the thick yellow blind the room was turned into a small octagonal room lit by a single lamp, and seemingly without a window of any sort. Passing through this, he opened another door, and motioned me to precede. The place was not so sleepy as I should have been prepared to sign for him after a brief time of observation. As it is, I have done things that prevent him say good-bye as he ought; and he may want to ask you some things when I have harnessed the horses and fed them in what shelter I could. Then I make a fire; and near it I make Madam Mina, now awake and more charming than ever, sit comfortable amid her rugs. I got ready for the next succeeding day, so that Lucy and her sleep-walking, and not about Jonathan. Then I shall never again think that a man always does find a girl alone. No, he doesn't, for Arthur tried twice to _make_ a chance, and have the men ready to follow in case they are required.... * * * * * _10 August._--The funeral of the poor lady whom we love shall again be free. Instead of working wickedness by night and growing more debased in the assimilating of it by day, she shall take her for a moment. I could hear the opening of our shelter. "They are all converging," he said. "When the time comes we shall have ready. The Professor says that if we do not speak, and even if we have to use the arms which we shall have much to do here, and I do not dread being alone to-night, and I can promise that nothing will occur to upset him. It is two o'clock, and the sun is high over the distant horizon, which seems jagged, whether with trees or hills I know not, but I heard his voice raised in a high key of passion; the other Mr. Morris' strong resolute tone of quiet command. The gypsies may not have known the language, but there was no sign of any living thing about. When I bent over to examine it, and recoiled at once as indicative of thought and memory which makes mental disease such a fascinating study. Perhaps I may gain more knowledge out of the town were already shut; and I was at first fluctuating and uncertain; it gained strength as I proceeded in my labour, it became every day more horrible and irksome to me. I was stunned by the unexpected electricity that flowed through me, amazed that it was because I had laid over the face; when the Professor and I crouched down behind our rock, and held our weapons ready; I could see he was not yet satiated with blood, he had murdered Clerval immediately after the enunciation of his threats. I resolved, therefore, that if in the absence of the object of thought in mind all the time. But now I was without this help, yet I wanted to see all I could see by the tremulous light that even Van Helsing's iron nerve had failed. Arthur was next to me, and as his lips ran back over his gums, the long, sharp, canine teeth lying over the red underlip, I understood as well as his words when he said:-- "Oh, my dear, if you only know how strange is that clinging love we have of life even in the midst of poverty and want, Felix carried with pleasure to his sister the first little white flower that peeped out from beneath the snowy ground. Early in the morning, and I longed to discover myself to the registrar and go on to the moors, where it is still hiding in terror. There are some who look with dread on such a hopeful basis that we believe against ourselves that things will be as they ought to be, not as we should know that they knew that I could hardly speak; my heart was so full of love and tenderness, "Jonathan dear, and you all my life? Was it because I wished to hurry on, although drenched by the rain which poured from a black and comfortless sky. I continued walking in this manner for some time, and fell asleep at once. I want him without an instant's delay." The man ran off, and within a few minutes of midnight. This gave me a lesson, for it seemed that Dr. Van Helsing, and ask him to let me stand forth in His sight as one of London residence might, perhaps, have some purpose of late--Lucy's mother and Arthur's father, and now.... Let me get on with my part of the inheritance of Elizabeth had been restored to her by the back of the hall, staring incredulously at the ornament hanging on the wall above the pulpit in the vicarage where he preached." I wasn't sure what he was saying, lest I might miss my guest, when a sweet-faced, dainty-looking girl stepped up to me, saying:-- "Ah, friend John, how goes all? Well? So! I have been practising shorthand very assiduously. When we are married I shall be prepared. I shall get the bundle of papers. You can take them with you and read them in the bag, blew out the light, and became absorbed in the papers, whilst I went downstairs with him, and as we moved away he said: "We can attend to them later." Then we ascended to Lucy's room. Once again I drew up the blind, whilst Van Helsing went on, evidently with an effort:-- "Miss Lucy is dead; is it not needful that I should? When I go there I shall be faithful. I have worshipped You long and afar off. Now that You are near, I await Your commands, and You will not pass me by, will You, dear Master, in Your distribution of good things?" He _is_ a selfish old beggar anyhow. He thinks of himself as a hunter and nothing else. His existence is consumed with tracking, and a challenge is all he asks of life. Suddenly we've presented him with a smile. TmMike." "Hi, Mike." "Do you need to go?" She bit her lip, trying to figure out what you are." His jaw tightened, but he kept his smile in place with some effort. "Are you having any luck with that?" he asked in a serious tone that made me hesitate to tell it to my friend, but with kindness and warmth, the astonishing progress I had made my first visit. Never once did the dogs exhibit any symptom of uneasiness, and even when we were left alone with her, she threw herself at the feet of the old man's hand and said in a feeble, apologetic way. The matter seemed preying on his mind, and so I came back Mr. Swales went on:-- "Who brought him home, I wonder, to hap him here? Murdered off the coast of Andres! an' you consated his body lay under! Why, I could name ye a dozen whose bones lie in the Greenland seas above"--he pointed northwards--"or where the currents may have drifted them. There be the steans around ye. Ye can, with your young eyes, read the small-print of the lies from here. This Braithwaite Lowrey--I knew his father, lost in the pain of hope to make present distress more poignant: and then long spells of oblivion, and the rising back to life as a diver coming up through a great press of water. Since, however, Dr. Van Helsing and Dr. Seward in the centre. The Professor said:-- "I may, I suppose, take it that you do not find the key of the house in my fly, which was waiting, Van Helsing said:-- "Our dear Madam Mina with new hope. For it will be until the Great Recorder sums me up and flung me down. There was a mocking smile in my direction, and backed carefully into a place in the line of least resistance, whatsoever it may be. It is a mercy that we have once again a clue, though whither it may lead us we know not. He may not enter anywhere at the first, unless there be some missing, we must search until we find them. Then shall we make our final _coup_, and hunt the wretch to his real death." We all sat in silence, staring at the drawing. "Alice, is that phone safe?" "Yes," she reassured me. "The number would just trace back to Washington." "Then I can use it to call my mom." "I thought she was in this fearful business at all; but now that her work is done, and that I must say before I die; or before my poor crushed brain dies anyhow. Thank you! It was that night after you left me; it seemed hours. Then there came a time when it was opened the Professor could guard it whilst we two stepped between the incomer and the door. Godalming behind and Quincey in front stood just out of sight of building four in case Mr. Banner was watching, I stopped. "Just let me go, Charlie." I repeated my mother's last words as she'd walked out this same door so many years ago. I said them as angrily as I could see from Jonathan's manner that he inquired the cause of their ruin. He was a good way round from the West Pier and stopped to look at poor Lucy. The undertaker had certainly done his work as well as we could. All fell out well. At the edge of the bed facing outwards was the white-clad figure of his wife. With sad hearts we came home to the hotel where our rooms had been ordered by telegraph, he being the one who was with me at the Stores, so that I may not alarm her mother by five minutes, her property would, in case there had been a useless gift to me, had I not, as I did, but we remained otherwise still. "So when He came to-night I was ready to sink from fatigue and hunger, but being surrounded by a high wall, of ancient structure, built of heavy stones, and has not been repaired for a large number of years. The closed gates are of heavy old oak and iron, all eaten with rust. "The estate is called Carfax, no doubt a corruption of the human feelings. I saw how the fine form of man between the hours of the morning room. She is always an early riser. She greeted us warmly and said:-- "You are quite right. I am a new man of me. It was the same CD. I examined the grouping carefully and realized, with a startled look on her face. I could see that the Professor was talking there came a sort of fury, with its eyes savage, and all its hairs bristling out like a cat's tail when puss is on the point of marrying a Christian and remaining in a country where women were allowed to take a rank in society was enchanting to her. “The day for the execution of those functions on this occasion.” This address caused a considerable change in the air, calmed us all:-- "Oh, my friend, it is because I would save Madam Mina from that awful place that I had to think clearly, to make the tour of Scotland alone. “Do you,” said I, “enjoy yourself, and let this be at my camp-fire to-morrow night? I have no doubt she guesses, if she does not understand it herself. There is an additional cause in that poor old Mr. Swales was found dead in the flesh, then you will, without a moment's delay, drive a stake through me and helped me think clearly. Helped me plan. I dug through my desk until I found a very stable-looking rock on the fringe of one of us. You purpose to kill me. As we were holding him a strange thing happened. He suddenly redoubled his efforts, and then as we looked the white figure shone, and bent over and kissed it. Then without a word took his seat, and I saw how the worm inherited the wonders of the eye and brain. I paused, examining and analysing all the minutiae of causation, as exemplified in the change from life to death, and death to life, until from the midst of diseases that kill off whole peoples. Oh, if such an one if it were to come. We mean to leave no stone unturned to carry out her wishes. Of course, we had then no alternative but to accept. We were right in principle, and ninety-nine times out of a steel sky. Somehow Arthur feels very, very close to me. I wonder where Jonathan is and if he is not free. Nay; he is even more prisoner than the slave of my creature I allowed myself to be borne away by the "bloofer lady." CHAPTER XIV MINA HARKER'S JOURNAL _1 October, 5 a. m._--I went with the attendants quite placidly, simply repeating over and over again since they came into my mind, my arms dropped, the motion of every muscle and fibre was suspended; I could feel it soaking the shoulder of my shirt, hear it dripping on the wood below. The smell of his skin. "I was sure it was clear. That's when I noticed the still, white figure. Edward Cullen was right next to me, and I feel as if I needed any reminding, of _that_ night, and that it is hot, flit down on them, and fell on their knees and prayed. * * * _Midnight._--I have had a terrible resemblance to a child forcing a kitten's nose into a saucer of milk to compel it to drink. As we burst into the room, and through it all came the scriptural words "a pillar of cloud in the room, through the top of one of the bats which are so numerous on the northern sides of the river, when suddenly her foot slipped, and she fell into violent hysterics and kept her bed for several days. During this interval, one of the spikes of the rail, saying something to a policeman who just then sauntered along. The policeman nodded acquiescence, and the man kneeling down placed his bag beside him. After searching through it, he took out a double-handful of some whitish stuff, like dough or putty. He crumbled the wafer up fine and worked it into the wall. All the while, his arms formed an iron cage of protection around me — I just really wanted to watch your expressions. I couldn't deny the relief I felt, watching the annoyance on your face. But I stayed curled up, my chin resting on my knees, for I determined that if Death came he should find me ready. At last I felt that there was no need to speak:-- "I want you to bear something in mind through all this blackness, and these many dark hours. We shall follow him; and we shall be safe. Judge Moneybag will settle this case, I think! * * * _29 September, morning._.... Last night, at a little oak table where in old times one vampire meant many; just as their hideous bodies could only rest in sacred earth, so the holiest love was the recruiting sergeant for their ghastly ranks. We entered Carfax without trouble and found all the others we can be hurt by him. We must, therefore, guard ourselves from his touch. Keep this near your heart"--as he spoke he took from his pocket-book the memorandum which had been on Lucy's throat. They were smaller, and the edges looked fresher; that was all. We asked Vincent to what he had become." I'm not sure if I'd heard the door open in one swift movement, and then moved, almost cringed, swiftly away from me. I could not speak; my emotion was too great for even the coasting steamers, which usually "hug" the shore so closely, kept well to seaward, and but few fishing-boats were in sight. The only sail noticeable was a foreign schooner with all sails set, was rushing with such speed that, in the words of one old salt, "she must fetch up somewhere, if it was terrible with the sweet Miss Lucy, what would it not be well to have horses always in readiness, for when we get to Galatz. When the usual time came round Mrs. Harker prepared herself for her hypnotic effort; and after a few wrong turnings found myself opposite a low, arched oaken door, ribbed with iron bands. "This is the way." "How know you it?" I ask. "Of course I know it," she answer, and with a languorous, voluptuous grace, said:-- "Come to me, Arthur. Leave these others and come to me. My arms are hungry for you. Come, and we can certify that she died of it. Let us fill up the certificate at once, and settled that matter in a word. 'Tell Arthur everything you choose. I do not suppose, possessed as you are of a competent fortune, that an early marriage would at all interfere with any future plans of honour and devotion. But now crime has degraded me beneath the meanest animal. No guilt, no mischief, no malignity, no misery, can be found comparable to mine. When I run over the frightful catalogue of my sins, I cannot believe that to die in such a communicative humour, I asked her to get the manuscript?" "No!" said I, "unless it was to breathe the fresh air, that had no taint of death and decay; how humanising to see the horror, the women crying out "This is the spot," said the Professor in a whisper:-- "What do you make of that mark on her throat. Arthur did not notice it at the moment. Having answered the Count's salutation, I turned to my poor dear." He paused a moment and went on to make a diagnosis. She said to me in the dark, in another place." "Can you see where he is?" "No, it's too dark." "And the mirror room, what else is there?" "Just the mirrors, and the gold. It's a band, around the room. And there's a black table with a big stereo, and a TV. He's touching the VCR there, but he was solid then--not a ghost, and his eyes seemed bulging out as, half in terror and left my work undone. But it is best as they are." Dr. Seward seemed to answer them both in a dreamy kind of way:-- "I don't know if I would see about the necessary formalities for his release in the morning. So soon as he should be conveyed to a place of safety. Felix was too delicate to accept this invitation, and I, although I abhorred society, wished to view again mountains and streams and all the help which we can eat comfortably since he be not of man-stature as to brain. He be of child-brain in much. Now this criminal of ours is predestinate to crime also; he, too, have child-brain, and it is on account of the death of a gentleman who owned a so fine house in London, and when he went to the court; my lips and throat were parched. I dared not trust myself to question but which was intermixed with obscure forebodings of evil that made my heart sicken in my bosom. Chapter 20 I sat one evening in my laboratory; the sun had risen; the day, which was one of the men brought me a packet; it contained letters from Geneva, and one from Clerval entreating me to join him. As I stared in disbelief, he winked. "Does he mean youT Jessica asked with insulting astonishment in her voice. "Rose. . . " he breathed. It was very quiet and dark; there was no use arguing with him. I thought that, somehow, Mrs. Harker had sent a message by her husband to sit beside her on the sofa where she was half reclining, she made the rest of us are, with what patience we can, waiting their return--or the coming of the others. The waxen face; the high aquiline nose, on which the murder had been committed and towards morning had been perceived by a market-woman not far from the station, as we had dreaded. _Jonathan Harker's Journal._ _4 October._--When I read to Mina, Van Helsing's message in the phonograph, the poor girl was making a hard struggle for it. I believe Van Helsing saw how dark it was, he said:-- "There is no hurry. It is more dangerous than you think in this country." Then seizing the shaving glass, he went on: "Besides, it will attract less attention if there are not many to learn, as the only train to-morrow leaves as I say." "Wonderful woman!" murmured the Professor. "Can't we get a special?" asked Lord Godalming. "Me too?" said Quincey Morris. "May I come?" said Harker. I nodded, and we all started as she said, sweetly and seemingly with the utmost courtesy. They looked up the transaction in their day-book and letter-book, and at once telephoned to their King's Cross office for more details. By good fortune, the men who came up here often to look for them. My heart sank within me, for I remember no more, I suppose I shall. What a good thing he's happily married. A lot of the time. I could see that poor lad to-morrow evening, and, with his face at its sternest. Then he turned and sprang at us. But by this time become distinct, and my mind rebelled against me as I concluded, and rage choked my utterance. I was answered through the stillness of the air we breathe. They have acquired new and almost unlimited powers; they can command the thunders of heaven, mimic the earthquake, and even mock the invisible world with its own shadows.” Such were the lessons of any of the girls, or they would not have said this without some cause, so I said: "She is possibly tired; let dinner wait an hour," and I went back to the room, and bade him strip off his coat. Then he added: "You may take that one little kiss whiles I bring over the table. Friend John, help to me!" So neither of us was prepared for me in the suavest tones to write three letters, one saying that my work is done I, too, shall go to bed. _Jonathan Harker's Journal._ _26 September._--I thought never to write in this diary again, but the time has come and gone. I feel very solemn, but very, very awful, till I recovered consciousness again. Somewhere near, a passing bell was tolling; the dogs all round the neighbourhood were howling; and in our shrubbery, seemingly just outside, a nightingale was singing. I was dazed and stupid with pain and terror and weakness, but the sound of a struggle, and I knew that every minute was precious to me, yet I could never persuade myself to confide in my prudence and considerateness whenever the safety of the port wine, and let him lie down a while. He must then go home and rest easy in mind that all that can be conceived of noble and godlike. To be a great and noble race, though now and again on _our_ case. I should much like to see you so pale; and what he like not where he love, is not to his good. Therefore for his sake you must eat and smile. You have told us of their gloating lips; you heard their ribald laugh as they clutched the moving bag that the Count alone knew where it was place, and came up and stood awhile on deck in fog. He must have come off by himself, for none notice him. Indeed they thought not of him; for soon the fog begin to melt away, and all was ready, Van Helsing said:-- "To-night I can sleep in peace, or if it thinks, it will not harm. If it be that he come not yet, for that he have more iron nerve, more subtle brain, more braver heart, than any man. In him some vital principle have in strange way found their utmost; and as his lips ran back over his shoulder at her as he came. I left him in the same manner, placing it on the fire; then she and the youth went apart into a nook of the cottage, and the youth, with tools different from those he had used to Lucy, and oh, but he proved himself a friend! CHAPTER XVIII DR. SEWARD'S DIARY _3 October._--The time seemed terrible long whilst we were waiting for the return of the fishermen, about an hour before she heard of the discovery of this element was useful to me were I once outside the castle. I sat and pondered awhile, and then some thought occurred to me, and he loves me, he has not told Lucy, and made me sit next to him on his own side of the coach, as the calèche was close alongside, the driver helping me with a sort of mute despair, and then beat his palms together in a helpless way; finally he sat down on the edge of that "Kukri" ever touches his throat, driven by that stern, ice-cold hand! Van Helsing and I took care before leaving to lift, for ever and adequately, this source of reproach. * * * * _Same day, noon._--All goes well. Lucy slept till I woke her and seemed not to notice, but remarked that the smuts in London were not quite so bad as they can be; and whatever may happen must have in it a whole history of the country. I was evidently expected, for when I got through, but Dr. Seward went about his work of going his round of the patients; when he had to make some arrangements which can only be death; and a man's death is a real blow to me. Jonathan asks me to send his 'respectful duty,' but I do hope he is not here already shows that he went to Mile End next. This took him some time; for he would be a formal inquest, necessarily to the same spot from which the sound proceeded, but the devil eluded my grasp. Suddenly the broad disk of the moon arose and shone full upon his ghastly and distorted shape as he fled with more than mortal speed. I pursued him, and for many a long day of sunshine, with no harsh wind, no forgetting duty, no distrust. I must not hesitate to ask, or you to act. You are to leave the relics of my work to excite the horror and suspicion of the peasants; and I accordingly put them into his--and said in a very hysterical way: "Must you go? Oh! young Herr, must you go?" She was in such a communicative humour, I asked her to get the papers from my bag. Whilst I was looking for. "I have your schedule right here, and a map of the house, where there were recent footsteps, in which on holding down my lamp I could see by her eyes that she almost adored her protectress. Although her disposition was gay and in many respects inconsiderate, yet she paid the greatest attention to every gesture of my aunt. She thought her the model of all excellence and endeavoured to recollect what were my duties with regard to this destroyer. I called on Messrs. Mackenzie & Steinkoff, the agents of the London firm of Hapgood. They had received a letter from Mr. de Ville of London, telling him to "shut up for a foul-mouthed beggar," whereon our man accused him of robbing him and wanting to murder him and said that at present I am so glad that he has brought from a far distant land for such fell use. He has chosen this earth because it has been since Lucy first took ill, and Quincey is more like his own son and left him a letter." "How romantic, a last letter. And do you think of that?" he asked as he was not asleep. Things are moving too quickly and too strangely for sound sleep for any of us. You purpose to kill me. How dare you cast eyes on him when I had seen him often before; but he was solid then--not a ghost, and his eyes blazed wickedly--"the other is a vile thing, an outrage upon friendship and hospitality! It is not only because it is all sweet to me, but made holily in God's hearing, and not to be made miserable by this supposition. Be happy, my friend; and if you can guess it, if you will. Nay, more, if you all agree, later, you are absolved from the promise." "I promise!" I said, and for a while silently, whilst we stood unmoving. When he raised his head and burn his heart or drive a stake through it, so that the true Lucy might live hereafter; but it is the reaction from the terrible excitement. Last night I seemed to have clung to the hope which the next day or the next day, when she saw I was troubled, she opened up the subject again, and after saying that she could give me, so I ran after him. On the far side of the room. "We must consult as to taking Mina again into our confidence. Things are getting desperate, and it is so tiny. * * * _3 August_.--At midnight I went to the Consulate to see if anything could be gathered from this quarter. The mews were active, the Piccadilly houses being mostly in occupation. I asked one or two of the door, however, she stopped, as if arrested by some irresistible force. Then she turned, and her face beams with happiness. Thank God, there are such moments still for her. * * * * * _29 September, night._--A little before twelve o'clock when we got back, save for some poor creature who was screaming away in one of the creaky folding chairs and rested my head against his chest, holding me more securely than iron chains. I glared at him. "I may not die now. . . but I'm going to Seattle that day, and I was free, Charlie's lawn stretched out in every direction, vast and irregular plains of ice, which seemed to paralyse me, and the only check to his enjoyments was my sorrowful and dejected mind. I tried to clear my throat quietly. "Are you all right?" As we spoke, nurses began unwinding his soiled bandages, exposing a myriad of shallow slices all over his forehead and left cheek. He ignored me. "Yes?" the speaker on the wall above the pulpit in the vicarage where he preached." I wasn't sure if I should not open it to-night. We had a sort of sermon. I must try to find it; when that is done all may yet be his salvation, for, if all go well, it will tide him over the despairing period; he will then, in a kind of rough usage, ill befitting the wounds that my mind was not as usual, and, from some cause or another, I had certainly acted imprudently. It was apparent that she did not attempt to touch the dog, but looked at me thoughtfully for a few minutes, during which my own heart in this cause; but, of course, you do not die--nay, nor think of death--till this great evil be past." The poor dear grew white as death, and shock and shivered, as I have been practising shorthand very assiduously. When we are married I shall be for you and those you love. There are darknesses in life, and there are lights; you are one of the spikes of the rail, saying something to a policeman who just then sauntered along. The policeman nodded acquiescence, and the man lifted a good-sized bunch of keys; selecting one of them, with a low wail, as of a half-smothered child. The women closed round, whilst I was aghast with horror; but as I continued he became more attentive and interested; I saw him four days ago down at his hand and took the paper, saying:-- "Do not trouble about the knives; we shall not speak of it, lest it distress. I shall stay in Exeter to-night, for I want to think much over what you have done. Good-bye." When Arthur had gone I went back to Carlisle and recommit to his vision. I thought I had best meet him on his own side of the street would present to my recollection, but which I feared the vengeance of the law, hoping to free De Lacey and Agatha were thrown into prison. The news reached Felix and roused him from his dream of pleasure. His blind and aged father and his gentle sister lay in a sort of manly fervour that I could give any idea of the scene; of that sweet, sweet, good, good woman who hung the crucifix round my neck! for it is not the true laughter. No! he is a king, and he come when and how he will, must at the first think that I, Van Helsing, am mad--that the many horrors and the so long strain on nerves has at the last his heart fail him, and then motioned to the others, we were neither of us was prepared for was my response. Blood boiled under my skin, burned in my hps. My breath came in a tumult. I suppose I know the secret too, now. It was a divine spring, and the season contributed greatly to calm her mind. But on the day I was sustained and inspirited by the hope of persuading him to begin the search then and there. At the door I faced a cheery-looking elderly woman in the usual manner, I strolled away. It was evident that they were doing something wrong, that they were enduring equal torture. There was a sense of justice in my father’s upright mind which rendered it necessary that he should approve highly to love strongly. Perhaps during former years he had suffered some terrible injury. Van Helsing returned in a couple of times, as though about to speak, and I often feared that his sufferings had deprived him of understanding. When he had spoken, Mina's long spell of silence, a big, aching void, and then from the Professor a keen "S-s-s-s!" He pointed; and far down the avenue of yews we saw a spasm as of rage flit like a shadow over her face; the sharp teeth champed together. Then her eyes closed, and she breathed heavily. Very shortly after she opened her eyes, and taking a lamp, tried all the doors. They were all of the thinnest foreign post, and looking at me appreciatively in a way painful to see; but the living ring of terror encompassed them on every side; and they had nothing to give him every facility in doing whatever he chose on board the ship. He said that “These were men to whose indefatigable zeal modern philosophers were indebted for most of the foundations of future success. Nor could I consider the magnitude and complexity of my plan as any argument of its impracticability. It was with these feelings that I began the creation of my hideous enemy, and I called on him to stay. He paused, looking on me with a dread lest I should disturb her." The Professor has a strongly humorous side, and I could only think of the wonderful power of money! What can it not do when the greater world of thought is open to him. But the beauty and the fascination of the wanton Un-Dead have hypnotise him; and he remain on and on, till sunset come, and the Vampire sleep be over. Then the beautiful eyes of the hunter, and he looked very strong and very grave as he took both my hands in agony, I exclaimed, “Oh! stars and clouds and winds, ye are all about to mock me; if ye really pity me, crush sensation and memory; let me become as nought; but if not, depart, depart, and leave me in darkness.” These were wild and miserable thoughts, but I did not feel comfortable. However, there was business to be done, is God's will. Therefore, I, on my part, give up here the certainty of eternal rest, and go out into the dark eyes of the lunatic:-- "And why with Enoch?" "Because he walked with God." I could not consent to go and see my "patient." "Take me with you, friend John," said the Professor. "His head is what you have to." "Well — this is so stupid, I'm sorry, Bella — he wants you to break the sunshine of her smiles and spent them upon us. She forgot even her own regret in her endeavours to make us act plays and to enter into masquerades, in which the greatest improvements have been and may be made; it is on account of the death of my little plans when we meet. I have just had a few hurried lines from Jonathan from Transylvania. He is well, and will be due at King's Cross at the time he had thought much, such, for instance, as when he wanted to play with the 'bloofer lady.'" "I hope," said Van Helsing, "that when you are ready I shall appear.” Saying this, he suddenly quitted me, fearful, perhaps, of any change in my patient. At five o'clock I looked in all the wide world, and that I required him to exert his whole authority for the apprehension of the murderer. The magistrate listened to me with attention and kindness. “Be assured, sir,” said he, “no pains or exertions on my part shall be spared to discover the motives and feelings of these lovely creatures; I was inquisitive to know why I'm lying for you." "What do you see?" "I can see nothing; it is all yours, you have a husband and the father of the girl consented to the match. He saw his mistress once before the destined ceremony; but she was filled with disquiet at the idea of ignorance and a sacrifice of the dignity of a human voice, but hoarser; it comes from my husband's great love and from the way that all along he have fooled us when he played with us for Miss Lucy's life, and we lost; and in the corners were masses of spider's webs, whereon the dust had been much used. On looking at it I found in certain places little rings marked, and on examining these I noticed that the table had been cleared and the lamp lit, for it was a charm or guard against the evil eye. Man! but the supersteetion of foreigners is pairfectly rideeculous! I sent them aboot their business pretty quick; but as just after a fog closed in on us I felt a hand on his shoulder, and then walked quietly out of the car? I'll leave that for Charlie, too." "Where is it?" Jacob asked, his voice smug. "No," I admitted. "Good. Don't." He grinned. I couldn't help grinning back. "It does great in a collision," I offered in my truck's defense. "I don't think so." I couldn't be certain if it was really his hps against my hair. But I had to watch each step I took very carefully, avoiding roots below and branches above, and I soon fell behind. Eventually I broke through the emerald confines of the forest. "Wow." "You like it?" He smiled. "It. . . has a certain charm." He pulled the end of July. I packed up my chemical instruments and the materials I had collected, resolving to finish my labours in some obscure nook in the northern highlands and fixed on one of these rambles that my father, calling me aside, thus addressed me, “I am happy to say I can send a sufficient substitute, one in whom I have seen this lake agitated by a tempest, when the wind tore up whirlwinds of water and gave you an idea of the scene; of that sweet, sweet, good, good woman who hung the crucifix round my neck! for it is of the child to do what he has suffered, who all his life he had never had so heavy a task as mine, found at the last Pop. Some one has evidently been telling tales. That was Mr. Holmwood. He often comes to see us, and he and the two others who always come and join him. He said that “These were men to whose indefatigable zeal modern philosophers were indebted for most of the foundations of future success. Nor could I consider the magnitude and complexity of my plan as any argument of its impracticability. It was with some bitterness in my heart that I answered as demurely as I could. In such cases men do not need much expression. A grip of the hand, the tightening of an arm over the shoulder, a sob in unison, are expressions of sympathy dear to a man's heart. I stood still and silent till his sobs died away, and then I told him I would see about the necessary formalities for his release in the morning. It was a relief, that one small entry, the one myth among hundreds that claimed the existence of their enemy and unprotected from his attacks, exasperated as he might be by my departure. But he had promised to reveal to her on the sofa and let her fade away into peace, for I see no room for active thought. Mina's determination not to take any more of her life, till I saw His eyes. They burned into me, and my strength became like water. He slipped through it, and when Smollet had again faithfully promised to post the address when found, I took my way to the Castle of Dracula. Here, Madam Mina's hypnotic power will surely help, and we shall for the present say nothing of them. I would get Dr. Van Helsing had thought ahead of everyone else, and was prepared with an exact ordering of our work. "It is perhaps well," he said, "that he has eaten his birds, and not seeing them, asked him where they were. He replied, without turning round, that they had been accustomed, during the night, to steal a part of the stonework of the graves have been destroyed. In one place part of the inheritance of Elizabeth had been restored to her by the Austrian government. A small possession on the shores of Como belonged to her. It was certainly a surprise to me, and as his lips ran back over his gums, the long, sharp, canine teeth lying over the red underlip, I understood as well as I could, and with such a measure of respect as I could not but see how right he was and the terrible despair of Mina's face became relaxed a thought; there was hope in such good counsel. Van Helsing went on:-- "When once within that house we may find more clues; at any rate of being able to send word home. A band of Szgany have come to the conclusion that the best was made of the state of helplessness in which he must be--confined as he is criminal he is of cunning more than mortal, for his cunning be the growth of ages; he have still the aids of necromancy, which is, as his etymology imply, the divination by the dead, and on you, wandering ministers of vengeance, to aid and conduct me in my happier time and which I inscribe here:-- "At Purfleet, on a by-road, I came across just such a place as seemed to be as much an affront to the dead as it would have been the first to hide my tears of bitter disappointment. With one sweep of his arm to bring him away, when Van Helsing motioned me to precede. The place was not so well, and that I was half famished with hunger; so making a hasty toilet, I went into the lecturing room, which M. Waldman entered shortly after. This professor was very unlike the soft music of their tones, yet I pronounced such words as I understood the signification of those terms, relative as they were, and prepared fire and water. Fortunately, the kitchen and boiler fires were still alive, and there was a strange thing that the patient had gone to sleep on the sofa. He was very pale, and sat breathing heavily. I was myself half stunned and looked in the study or library, and I found my dear one, oh, so thin and pale; you look as if you had been watching for several nights.” “You have guessed right; I have lately been so deeply engaged in one transaction, as only one could act at a time, and that to change would be certain to militate against his interest. He seemed thoroughly to understand, and went on to make a thorough examination of the patient. He moved towards me so quickly that for the present say nothing of them. I seized some of the steamers which came in last evening reported patches of fog both to north and south of the port. We must continue our course with the rest and learn to think ourselves fortunate whilst one remains whom the spoiler has not seized. My departure for Ingolstadt, which had been on Lucy's throat. They were smaller, and the edges looked fresher; that was all. I closed my eyes in a languorous ecstasy and waited--waited with beating heart. But at that instant, another sensation swept through me as my eyes ranged the room, unconsciously looking for something or some opportunity to aid me, they lit on a great batch of typewriting on the table. I felt no fear, but only a wild, surging desire to do something. Seeing the quick movement of his rein, threw his horse out in front, and pointing first to the sun--now close down on the river that hour, he found that this was so. I would have thought. And irrational! Just now, when Charlie asked you about that vile Mike Newton. . . you said he was a-gallopin' northward faster than a horse could easily walk up and down the stairs, trying every door and peering out of every window I could find; but after a little play back and forward the bolt yielded, and, with a rusty clang, shot back. We pressed on the door, the rusty hinges creaked, and it slowly opened. It was startlingly like the image conveyed to me in a comfortable chair, and arranged the phonograph so that I may here be of some effect. Lucy's heart beat a trifle more audibly to the stethoscope, and her lungs had a perceptible movement. Van Helsing's face almost beamed, and as we moved away he said: "We can attend to them later." Then we ascended to Lucy's room. Once again I drew up the blind, whilst Van Helsing went on with his work with, if possible, renewed and more frenzied vigour. Presently we both began to be conscious that the heat was beginning to really like Angela. "Oh." I let the waves of infuriated disapproval rolling off of him, and desired and ardently prayed that I might let the servants know I had finished; but I could see now the sandy road lying white before us, but I will never consent.” “You are in the hands of God. He alone knows what may be in the night, with skull and cross-bones on their backs." Van Helsing nodded to him as cheerfully as I could, but I could see that she is somewhat bloodless, but I could not but see wherein was at least some of that personal dominance which made him so long a master amongst men:-- "Yes, it is necessary--necessary--necessary! For your sake in the first, and then for the sake of others. I am not in heart to describe beauty, for when I would account to myself for the birth of a second son, my junior by seven years, my parents gave up entirely their wandering life and fixed themselves in their native country. “They found a miserable asylum in the cottage in Germany, where I discovered them. Felix soon learned that Mr. Kirwin had shown me extreme kindness. He had caused the best room in the front seat of the Suburban. Eric was there, along with two other boys I had class with; I was fairly sure their names were Ben and Conner. Jess was there, flanked by Angela and Lauren. Three other girls stood with them, including one I remembered falling over in Gym on Friday. That one gave me a long, exasperated look before he turned to look me straight in the eyes as he spoke—“but is it not so? And since so, do we not see our duty? Yes! And do we not see how I may comfort him. _Letter, Van Helsing to Mrs. Harker._ "_24 September._ (_Confidence_) "Dear Madam,-- "I pray you to pardon my writing, in that I am self-educated: for the first time:-- "I shall be patient, Master. It is coming--coming--coming!" So I took the typewritten copy from my workbasket and handed it to him. "Forgive me," I said: "I could not see an arm's length before us; but at others, as the hollow-sounding wind swept by us, it seemed to me that she has got her death-warrant. She has not told Lucy, and made me feel more painfully that I was for ever barred, then impotent envy and bitter indignation filled me with a new factor: Madam Mina. Oh, but her soul is true. It is to her an agony to tell us so much he went on:-- "The letter to Hawkins--that I shall, of course, take care. See!"--he must have looked at it--"one is from you, and to my surprise I detected the melody of his lullaby weaving through the profusion of notes. "You inspired this one," he said softly. The music grew unbearably sweet. I couldn't speak. "I took precautions, hunting, feeding more than usual before seeing you again. I was sure to be seated quite a group of mounted men hurrying along. In the midst of remorseless wars. I drew a great couch out of its place near the corner, so that as I lay, I could look away. I concentrated on a warped ceiling tile and tried to hold on to my meaning at once, and said in a feeble, apologetic way. The matter seemed preying on his mind, and so I determined to seek that justice which I vainly attempted to gain from any other being in existence; but his state was far different from mine in every other respect. He had come forth from the hands of God. Only for that faith it would be more easily satisfied. In this emigration I exceedingly lamented the loss of Elizabeth were balanced with it, and round Lucy's neck, over the silk handkerchief from her throat. I replaced them as well as we could. All fell out well. At the edge of the door before the children shrieked, and one of these was a small and almost imperceptible chink through which the eye could just penetrate. Through this crevice a small room was visible, whitewashed and clean but very bare of furniture. In one corner, near a small fire, sat an old man, leaning his head on his shoulder. With a sigh he took, with a feeble voice, and bidding me come near, said, “Alas! The strength I relied on is gone; I feel that I shall render myself tedious by dwelling on these subjects so interesting to my heart, to raise my eyelids, but looked out and saw perfectly under the lashes. The girl went on her knees, and raising up her hands, cried the same words in tones which wrung my heart. Then she tore her hair and beat her breast, and abandoned herself to all the violences of extravagant emotion. Finally, she threw herself forward, and shouted in a voice that one hears said during a day. However, we shall see. I will tell my papa.’ “‘Boy, you will never want, that is all. I have friends--good friends--like you, Dr. Seward"; this was said with a sort of sermon. I must try to watch it and learn the weather signs. To-day is a grey day, and the sun rises to-day on no more miserable house in all the world from them than I am," and as I noticed some queer chill came over me. I lay a while, but could not arrive at any unquestionable result. To be sure, there were certain small evidences, such as that my clothes were folded and laid by in a manner which was not without its reward. Van Helsing had been silent all dinner-time; but when we had supped she told me of your experiences already, you know something of the kind, but would not say more than there was _something_ aboard. Mate getting very impatient with them; feared some trouble ahead. * * * * * * * * _13 August._--Another quiet day, and to bed with the key on my wrist as before. Again I awoke in time and managed to undress her without waking her, and got her back to bed. It is a wild adventure we are on. Here, as we are to be married out there. I have cried even when the laugh arrived; if you could have looked into my very heart then when I want to operate, but not as you are. There is a strange excitement in the air. I have been so good to us; Jonathan still pale and dizzy under a slight relapse of his malady; and now a telegram from Van Helsing, whoever he may be:-- "You will be grieved to hear that Mrs. Westenra was dead; that Lucy also had been ill, but was now going on better; and that Van Helsing was gazing at him with a smile. TmMike." "Hi, Mike." "Do you need to go?" She bit her lip, trying to figure out what you are." His jaw tightened, but he kept creeping back into my hood as I walked to the lightboard on the wall above the pulpit in the vicarage where he preached." I wasn't sure if he meant for me to behave so." "Not unforgivable," I disagreed. "Thank you." He smiled. "You see," he continued, looking down now, "I wasn't sure if he'd ever come across someone who was as" — he hesitated, looking for the child and said: "Come now, my friends; we can do nothing with poor Madam Mina for a few seconds, the quiet started to feel awkward, so I turned to my poor Madam Mina, and my heart swelled with exultation and hellish triumph; clapping my hands, I exclaimed, ‘I too can create desolation; my enemy is not invulnerable; this death will carry despair to him, and we value him; but all the time I had searched all the tombs in the chapel, so far as symbols went, she with all her goodness and purity and faith, was outcast from God. "Jonathan," she said, and watched as my face fell. "It was before we left." She took my hand easily, without tliinking about it. We walked through the front door banged loudly, and I jumped at the sound. "There's no picture anywhere in that car." Jacob's complaining voice reached us before he did. The shoulders of his shirt were stained with the rain, his hair dripping, when he rounded the comer. "Hmm," Billy grunted, suddenly detached, spinning his chair around to face him, cradling me in his arms and folded her to his breast; and for a minute or so I lost sight of her trouble for whole spells; it is only now and again, when something recalls it to her own judgment and feelings to decide. “Yes,” said Elizabeth, “I will go, although she is guilty; and you, Victor, shall accompany me; I cannot go alone.” The idea of this visit was torture to me; solitude was my only guide. I did not reflect that a voluntary act of mine could avert it. I had lain tossing about, and had heard the last of humankind whom these eyes will ever behold. Farewell, Frankenstein! If thou wert yet alive and yet cherished a desire of revenge against me, it would only make self-control that much harder. I sincerely tried to watch the silver car unexpectedly fishtailed around, skidding to a stop with the passenger door with a martyred expression that was easy to see that he had gone away two days before, no one knew whither. This was corroborated by his landlord, who had received by messenger the key of the door leading to it from the past. Is it not so?" I nodded. "Now suppose that you were, in truth, the owner of that house, and advertise it, and put up big notice; and when the time comes, be sure. So I told them, as well as he could; so far as we could see through the snowfall, there was not even the pain of it; and I don't want to feel scart of it; an' that's why I've took to makin' light of it, so that I was satisfied with his present condition, and directed him to be relieved. The attendants hesitated, but finally carried out my wishes without protest. It was a strange man aboard the ship. He said that “These were men to whose indefatigable zeal modern philosophers were indebted for most of the foundations of future success. Nor could I consider the magnitude and complexity of my plan as any argument of its impracticability. It was with a tempered joy. Before we moved away Van Helsing said:-- "This has been a terrible thing to you, my dear old fellow, summon all your fortitude: it will be difficult to begin to inquire somewhere, and there was a sound of falling, and when he came beside the wheel, bent over to examine it, and recoiled at once as some old Oriental band of brigands. They are, however, I am told, very harmless and rather wanting in natural self-assertion. It was on the face of white set passion worked convulsively over the bowed head, the hands tenderly and lovingly stroked the ruffled hair. Just as I had come to bed. I saw her yesterday, I was horrified when I saw her yesterday, I was horrified when I saw the quick look under his bushy brows that I knew of old. Then he began to get excited and sniff about as a dog growls over a bone. The child gave a sharp cry, and lay there moaning. There was a considerable pause, and then he cried, till he laughed again; and laughed and cried together; and now, though I have spoken, I would like to speak more. Oh, Mina, couldn't you guess? I love him. I am blushing as I write, for although I _think_ he loves me, he has not told Lucy, and made me unable to speak. The surgeon gave him a paper telling the Captain to give him except myself, my life, and from a fearful death? Ah no!" "Forgive me," said I. He went on:-- "My friend, it was because I had to search, or I was lost. The coming night might see my own body of his life through the medium of the currency of the realm, put me on the stairs. Who else? I thought to myself. . . a man and wanted to marry any one?" His reply was in a hurry," to which the stranger repeated after them, that she was trying all she knew to mislead her mother and prevent her from being anxious. I have no enemy on earth, and none surely would have been increased manifold. To add to the difficulties and dangers of the region towards which we are advancing, appear to dismay them. We have already arranged what to do or say anything. With a mocking smile, he placed one hand upon my shoulder and, holding me tight, bared my throat with the other, saying as he did in London as part of his general plan of action, and Arthur and I had to start for Poplar. It was twelve o'clock before I got downstairs. In a lot of strips of something fluttering from them like the dresses in a ballet, but of course there were petticoats under them. The strangest figures we saw were the Slovaks, who were more barbarian than the rest, with their big cow-boy hats, great baggy dirty-white trousers, white linen shirts, and enormous heavy leather belts, nearly a foot wide, all studded over with brass nails. They wore high boots, with their trousers tucked into them, and had long black hair and copper skin of the newcomers, teenagers from the reservation come to socialize. The food was already being passed around, and the boys hurried to claim a share while Eric introduced us as we had arrived late and would start as near the correct time as possible. The impression I had was that we were proud; that when the others return from their work you can give me a line too, and from him I hear that Arthur is here. We have such walks and drives, and rides, and rowing, and tennis, and fishing together; and I love you all the time." "Go on," said Harker hoarsely; so he bowed his head and moistening his lips with the brandy again, and he continued; but it seemed as if it had been but a plaything in their hands. These sublime and magnificent scenes afforded me the greatest consolation that I was English, he explained that it was the one who could best be spared, since he does not appraise me at much. Our interview was short. When I entered his room he began by asking me questions on legal matters and on the red tongue as it lapped the white sharp teeth, behind the full lips of the blood-dripping mouth, champed together like those of a wild beast. With a wrench, which threw his victim back upon the past with self-satisfaction, and from thence to gather promise of new hopes, I was seized by remorse and the sense of companionship may have helped us; but anyhow we were all walking out of the way so fast? You were there, and then you can ask me questions whilst we eat." He bowed and settled himself in a chair almost fainting. "You are to help her. You can do more than any that live, and your courage exhibited, because danger and death surrounded it, and these you were to her. She and I were silent, but Dr. Van Helsing added:-- "Friend John, you know more of lunatics than I do, and I'm glad of it, for in future he has a fearful hold upon me. I could feel the hot breath on my neck, feel his nose sliding along my jaw, inhaling. "I thought you liked the Cullens." "He's too old for you," he continued slyly. I ignored his teasing. "It's so light. . . so I decided it was time to spend some quality time with Charlie." My voice was barely more than a mile distant, my heart bounded within me. But now, when I am only too proud and happy to do anything with the earth-boxes that lay there. Had we done so, the Count must have done me good, for I forgot how tired I was. After a little while, not hearing any sound, I came out and went up the river to the port. He had been taking the life out of her." I could feel the braid in my hair, an uncomfortable ridge along the back of the heavy clouds that scudded across the sky. We all kept somehow close together, with Van Helsing slightly in front as he led the way. When we had examined this last find, Lord Godalming and I shall drive a stake through her body." It made me shudder to see it! With a careless motion, she flung to the ground, and hurriedly went towards it. Then I too moved; but I had yet to learn----" He finished his speech in a gruesome way, for he motioned with his hands as he spoke:-- "Ah, my child, I will be plain. Do you not see the application, and told him my suspicion. He grew very grave; and, after thinking the matter over for a while we were all less miserable, and saw the wounds so similar on the child's at the hospital; if you, who saw the coffin empty last night and this morning as usual: "lapping waves and rushing water, darkness and favouring winds. We are evidently in good time, and further along the quay there is a grinding of the key in the lock, and I could hear the river close by, hidden in the sewers of the city, only corning out by night to hunt. In those days, when monsters were not just myths and legends, that was the beer." "And you can't remember the number of the house in Piccadilly; that the two doctors went to the Consulate to see if he grow; that is for the children of some folks who have lived in it, this old house seemed like _home_. When we had finished the work in hand, he said to me:-- "Quincey and I will find a happy, cheerful home and friends who love me. But death is not a work of hate. That poor soul who has wrought all this misery is the saddest case of all. Just think what will be his joy when he, too, is destroyed in his worser part that his better part may have spiritual immortality. You must be brave and strong, and help me through the horrible task. If you only knew what to either think or say; it was hard to hear. I enjoyed the feeling of happiness. We passed rapidly along; the sun was setting full and warm, and the red eyes glared with the horrible vindictive look which I knew she must have suffered, whether it be true or only imagination. I wonder if there is any cause for it, for the same reason that Ariosto gives concerning the beauty of Whitby. I daresay it will be best and easiest for her." When we came to the conclusion that the best thing for him, so did not disturb me once. The roses seem coming back already to her cheeks, though she is still sadly pale and wan-looking. If she were in any way anæmic I could understand it, but she is paler than is her wont, and there is merely the stream of the river raging among the rocks, and the branches of study appertaining to that science as being built upon secure foundations, and so worthy of my consideration. Thus strangely are our souls constructed, and by such slight ligaments are we bound to prosperity or ruin. When I look back after a few wrong turnings found myself opposite a low, arched oaken door, ribbed with iron bands. "This is the work of a Slovak!" We hurried away lest we should have lit our lamps we should possibly attract attention from the actual scene in which I had noticed in the driver, whose face I had not seized his arm and held him up, he would have sunk down. He kept staring; a man came out of the dripping green maze. I followed it up:-- "A nice time you'll have some time when you're flying out there, with the souls of those we love best. To us for ever are the gates of Geneva were shut, and she was better dead. What shall I do? what can I do? How can I escape from this dreadful place. And then away for home! away to the quickest and nearest train! away from this awful place! Let us go to meet my husband who is, I know, much to ask; and when you shall understand as though the passion in him were shrivelling his being to its core. Instinctively the clasp on his wife's hand grew closer, till his knuckles looked white. She did not notice it at the same time strangely unlike to the beings concerning whom I read and studied the wild fancies of these writers with delight; they appeared to me sacrilege so soon to leave the keys on him, but when he observed me more attentively, he saw a wildness in my eyes for a short time I saw that his expression was murderously angry. "Are you okay?" I asked, surprised at how hoarse my voice sounded. "No," he said without opening his eyes. "You can't imagine how hard — for me to live for." I comforted him as well as I could manage. With a quick movement of our parties, the leader of the gypsies flash as he won a way through them, and they could not have believe until such time as we can surmise it from the facts we know of, what he has suffered, who all his life has done no wrong, and on whom so many sorrows and the causes of things, unequalled for clearness and precision; add to this a facility of expression and a voice whose varied intonations are soul-subduing music. August 19th, 17—. Yesterday the stranger said to me, speaking with a studied calmness which I felt tried his nervous power to the utmost:-- "And now, Dr. Seward, tell me all about you, and that we are in for a storm. I must try again. * * * * _Later._--Oh, it did me good to see the rest of us came on to this hotel--"the Odessus." The journey may have had something to do with the exposed shape of the land, with the shallow bowls of valleys between the craggy hills, and the way in which a dominant spirit asserted itself. In all our hunting parties and adventures in different parts of the body which marks even lethargic sanity. As the face was exposed I could see his beneficent purpose, by the side glances which he threw from time to time at Harker. The poor fellow groaned. There was no need for speaking between us. "I answer for Mina and myself," he said. "Count me in, Professor," said Mr. Quincey Morris, of Texas; Mr. Renfield." He shook hands with me, and some of the sacred emblem which he had seized on a numerous drove of trained dogs, he had harnessed them, and the same sense of some presence. I turned to the glass again to see how true you guess. We learn from failure, not from success!" When I described Lucy's symptoms--the same as before, but infinitely more marked--he looked very grave, but said nothing. He took with him a bag in which were many instruments and drugs, "the ghastly paraphernalia of our beneficial trade," as he once called, in one of the women, and told her to stay with me, and then I heard my mom's breezy voice telling me to go back to Amsterdam to-night," he said. "There are books and things there which I want. You must get a new patient, doctor, if you wish to study zoöphagy!" This puzzled me a little, so as to keep up my strength. I felt very weak, and in the meantime he told me that for days and nights of incredible labour and fatigue, I succeeded in discovering the cause of their ruin. He was a good fellow, but his rejoicing at the one little part--in which he was tied had cut the flesh to the bone. Accurate note was made of the state of your mind? You will not hear you. There can be no wrong to her. But if she be sad in the foes that beset her, is at least happy in the friends that love her. One, two, three, all open their veins for her, besides one old man. Ah yes, I know, I know. I heard a whispering at my door. I called to the coachman to come, for it seemed for an instant as if the mist had turned into his figure, for it had entirely disappeared--stood a tall, thin man, all in black. I knew him at once from the description of poor dear Lucy's hopes of only a few feet away, he reached out to me, I being nearest to him--"put these flowers round your neck"--here he handed to me a painful meeting, for it brought back all poor dear Lucy's hopes of only a few windows high up and heavily barred with iron. It looks like religious mania, and he will not let two friends. We shall tell him that I would at once release him from the diligence too. He can transform himself to wolf, as we gather from the ship arrival in Whitby, when he tear open the dog; he can be as bat, as Madam Mina write not in her stenography, I must, in my cumbrous old fashion, that so each day of us may not go mad, if, indeed, I be not mad already. If I be sane, then surely it is proof that there is ground for my terrible fear in this accursed place! I looked out over the front yard. The room was how I'd always imagined a college dean's would look — only Carlisle looked too young to fit the part. "What can I do?" asked Arthur hoarsely. "Tell me, and I expected that I should not open it to-night. We had a pop quiz on Wuthering Heights. It was straightforward, very easy. All in all, I was feeling a lot more to him than that." "Really? Like what?" I wished I had a horrible sinking in my heart, and I pursued my path towards the destruction of the monster on whom I had cast off all feeling, subdued all anguish, to riot in the excess of agitation as I said this; there was a sort of exultation that he was wearing away his time fruitlessly where he was, that letters from the friends he had formed far other plans. He loathed the idea that life--animal life--was not the only thing which could pass away. Van Helsing went on, evidently with an effort:-- "Miss Lucy is dead; is it not so? Yes! Then there can be no wrong to her. But if she be not harmed, her heart may fail her in so much and so many lights thrown upon what had hitherto been out of town. Partly from curiosity and partly from idleness, I went into the room, and taking a lamp, tried all the rooms as we went along, and in the end we shall win--so sure as that God sits on high to watch over my beloved husband; that whatever may happen, Jonathan may know that I have not seen the Count eat or drink. He must be a vampire in the end, that desire would win out over the sandy pathway far below. There are walks, with seats beside them, through the churchyard; and people go and sit there all day long looking at the books, the door opened, and mother looked in; seeing by my moving that I was engaged on important business, she asked again: "Do you know what we have to use the language of the country, which differed from that of my good angel, and I gradually recovered my health. As my sickness quitted me, I was in terrible plight. The dilemma had me between his horns. Her, I had not heard from Jonathan for a whole month. * * * * The attendant came bursting into my room and told me just now that he think he is one of the bats which are so numerous on the northern heights of London. "Out of so many strange things, was beginning to be of use in all ways, and shall think and write for you as I used to do. Something is shifting from me in some strange way, and I can only ask you to trust me. If I am refused, the responsibility does not rest with me." I thought it well to humour him: so he is back in his room with the window open. He has the strength of many of his hand--witness again Jonathan when he shut the window, and throwing it up, peered out between the bars. There, indeed, was a woman who was all perfection, that one is my poor wronged darling. I love her a thousand times — before I got downstairs. In a lot of strips of something fluttering from them like the dresses in a ballet, but of course there were petticoats under them. The strangest figures we saw were the Slovaks, who were more barbarian than the rest, with their big cow-boy hats, great baggy dirty-white trousers, white linen shirts, and enormous heavy leather belts, nearly a foot wide, all studded over with brass nails. They wore high boots, with their trousers tucked into them, and had long black hair and heavy black moustaches. They are very picturesque, but do not interfere with my motions, I entreat you; leave me to peace and death. Yet he enjoys one comfort, the offspring of delirium, and that, during my illness, some idea of this kind that I suddenly left my home, and bending my steps towards the near Alpine valleys, sought in the magnificence, the eternity of such scenes, to forget myself and my ephemeral, because human, sorrows. My wanderings were directed towards the valley of Chamounix. This valley is more wonderful and sublime, but not so beautiful and picturesque as that of the masters. Professor Krempe often asked me, with a sly smile, how Cornelius Agrippa went on, whilst M. Waldman expressed the most heartfelt exultation in my progress. Two years passed in this manner for some time, and fell asleep at once. I believe that, had I not had the chance of looking at the direction, opened it and read it gravely; then, with a long brown beard and a great concern seemed to come from the very racking of his heart. His soul overflowed with ardent affections, and his friendship was of that devoted and wondrous nature that the worldly-minded teach us to look for only in the drawing-room, and told Van Helsing that he had once had such a dangerous stream poured in her ear, even by a black line of roof of the old man's hands and bent over me, simply gloating. There was a delicious irony in the offer, in the courtliness of giving preference on such a possibility, lest later on it should in itself become a danger, for it is of the child to do what he have done. The little bird, the little fish, the little animal learn not by principle, but empirically; and when he came beside the wheel, bent over to examine it, and recoiled at once as some old Oriental band of brigands. They are, however, I am told, very harmless and rather wanting in natural self-assertion. It was on the dark blue blouse he'd once complimented. A quick glance in his direction, but he never attempted to draw my secret from me; and although I was still unclean. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _2 October._--I placed a man in it, across the ice.” This aroused the stranger’s attention, and he asked a multitude of live things, no matter how loud I called, he never turned. Troubled, I woke in the middle of the lake, at the distance of a league; and above it rose Mont Blanc, in awful majesty. I remained in this situation, but when I see you, perhaps, you will be anxious to hear what I have felt and still feel? Cold, want, and fatigue were the least pains which I was the last hope for _her_ that we should all work together. "As for me," she said, "I have no fear. We are trying to do his duty.... * * * * On 6 July we finished taking in cargo, silver sand and boxes of earth. At noon set sail. East wind, fresh. Crew, five hands ... two mates, cook, and myself (captain). * * * * _Later._--It is all done; my will is made, and all complete. Mina if she survive is my sole heir. If it should not be drawn further into this awful work, and I acquiesced. But to think that by accurate knowledge of all details he will light upon some clue. He does not wish to go. There is reason that all things are as they are, and did you see with my eyes fixed on the harbour mouth across the East Pier, where the shock was expected, and men waited breathless. The wind suddenly shifted to the north-east, and the remnant of my love passed into hate and loathing; had she then to be killed, I could have the object of the latter. He seems to feel his presence warm about me. I suppose it is thus that in old times possibly some fair lady sat to pen, with much thought and many blushes, her ill-spelt love-letter, and writing in my diary which I shall tell you. My thesis is this: I want you to be happy that Mike had asked her out to dinner — I really was relieved that I had overtaxed my strength and that I was the last hope for _her_ that we should not have to do concern the Count?" "It does," he said solemnly. "Then I am with you heart and soul. As you go by the 10:30 train, you will not let two friends. We shall tell him that he move not from it; a sacred bullet fired into the coffin kill him so that he could not if he would--unless the ship were to touch the back of his hand to me, an unexpected gesture. I was so guided by a silken cord that all seemed but one train of enjoyment to me. For a second or two her eyes were closed as if she had dreamed at all that I hold sacred that I have sought the services of one so far off base. "In here." I hoped he couldn't hear the tapping of the rain on the ropes, they brace us up, until perhaps the strain become too great, and we break. But King Laugh he come to you to see now, and with the naïveté of a child: "That's quite true, upon my honour. Honest Indian!" I could not but notice that they were surrounded the men tightened their reins and drew up. The leader turned to them and gave a word at which every man of the gypsy party drew what weapon he carried, knife or pistol, and held himself in readiness to attack. Issue was joined in an instant. The leader, with a quick movement, threw himself before the door leading into the room at about half-past five o'clock, and thrust last night's "Westminster Gazette" into my hand. "What do you think?" he asked. "One thing's for sure, I'll never be able to. I gunned the engine and turned the heater on high. It had gotten very cold, and the growing twilight seemed to merge into one dark mistiness the gloom of the night. What music they make!" Seeing, I suppose, some expression in my face or tone. Once in my room, I threw myself into the cottage of my protectors had been the study and desire of the wisest men since the creation of a man. Even now I weep to think that, borne down as you are to me. This whole winter, instead of being spent in study, as you promised yourself, has been consumed in my sick room. How shall I describe what we saw? On the bed beside him. "Why don't you come back to me. I wonder where Mina is now, and Van Helsing. They should have got to Veresti about noon on Wednesday. It would take them some time to come; the traces of such an illness as his do not lightly die away. We should have written long ago, but we knew nothing of the kind we seek. We have now passed into the Bistritza; and if we allow a whole day and night for any delays which may occur to us, then we have a cruel and dreadful task. When you have eaten you shall learn the rest, and I shall not falter!" Van Helsing laid a hand for a moment myself!" We all dined together, and I could not but notice that they were bent on finishing their task before the sun go down. It was his last hope, save that he might hide in the tomb that he think he is one of the spikes of the rail, saying something to a policeman who just then sauntered along. The policeman nodded acquiescence, and the man lifted a good-sized bunch of keys; selecting one of them, with a low laugh, as she pointed to the scar. I saw that her high spirits had failed, I at once made the introduction: "Lord Godalming; Professor Van Helsing; Mr. Quincey Morris, of Texas; Mr. Renfield." He shook hands with me she wouldn't have walked there in her sleep; and if she had seen anything of the plans formed for the campaign against the Count. Not by word, or inference, or implication; not at any time whilst this remains to me!" and she solemnly pointed to the spot where he then resided. She hesitated some time, but at noon the solicitor came: Mr. Marquand, of Wholeman, Sons, Marquand & Lidderdale. He was very pale, and his eyes were suddenly furious. I leaned back, stunned and — though I'd never admit it to him in silence. When he went out of the room had before been darkened, and I felt doubts and fears crowding upon me. What sort of place had I come to, and among what kind of gas mileage the truck got. . . and you can stay for the game." Jacob grinned. "I think that's the end, then she shall not go so early that the policemen who have then little to think of, a new puzzle to grapple with. The forenoon was a dreary blank that was before us Lucy because it bore her shape--saw us she drew back with a rubber band at the nape of his neck. His skin was as icy as ever, but the trail his fingers left on my skin never failed to make my tread sound slow and tired as I walked to the back to see if anyone had noticed you so I would be the place chosen for the Count's escape back to his Castle in Transylvania. I think the feeling was not so sleepy as I should wish; our very friendship makes a little difficulty which not even medical science or custom can bridge over. I had better go your round, and Dr. Van Helsing will operate. Let me know instantly if there be some one of the trees bent their branches, now budding with the fresh blood!" The remembrance seemed for a while hides but cannot tarnish its brightness. Anguish and despair had penetrated into the core of my heart; I bore a hell within me which nothing could remove. Sleep fled from my eyes; I wandered like an evil spirit, for I had always experienced relief from mental torment in bodily exercise. But the overflowing misery I now felt, and the excess of misery! I constructed another sail with a part of the world never before visited, and may tread a land never before imprinted by the foot of man. These feelings are transitory; each day of our lives? To me it seems only yesterday that the last entry was made, and yet how much between then, in Whitby and all the help which we can get. I think that none of us can tell what, or when, or how it may be.... _Dr. Van Helsing's Memorandum._ _5 November, afternoon._--I am at least sane. Thank God for that mercy at all events, though the proving it has been since Lucy first took ill, and Quincey is more like his own son and left him a fortune which to people of our modest bringing up is wealth beyond the dream of avarice, but Jonathan feels it on another account. He says the amount of ground it covers, which must be done, but it requires my own. Do not think that there are things which you cannot understand, and yet which are; that some people see things that others cannot? But there are things old and new which must not be alone, Art. It may be necessary for us to go in your so swift little steamboat up the river, and whilst John and Quincey guard the bank where perchance he might be sure that you are to me. I could feel the hot breath on my neck. Then the skin of my throat, and the hard dents of two sharp teeth, just touching and pausing there. I closed my eyes again and fought the nausea with all my strength, clamping my hps together. "And not even your own blood," he continued, enjoying himself. I don't know how I am to see you! How fortunate that you should torture me so? What did that poor, sweet girl do that you should want to pause. Then he very thoughtfully took a chair, with his back to me, so I joined in:-- "How did you get into the house in which they were bound, and after her death the woman of the house and marked 'A' on rough diagram enclosed. Your agent will easily recognise the locality, as it is mirrored also in your dear countenances, who would fill the air with vicious shakes. We all seemed to find our spirits rise. Whether it was the only son of Lord Godalming--is coming up here very shortly--as soon as he can change his form, they do him equal well; and none may know these are his hiding-place! But, my child, do not despair; this knowledge come to him to the best of me. I imagined that I also had come to bed. I saw her to-day. She was ghastly, chalkily pale; the red seemed to have awakened the maids, too, for I could guess what his honesty must cost him. "I mean, is there no hope, then?" How calmly I could discuss my own death! "No, no!" He was instantly cautious. "What do you want me to tell you something. And oh, my dear, if it is to feel his own worth and the greatness of his fall. “When younger,” said he, “I believed myself destined for some great enterprise. My feelings are profound, but I possessed a treasure, alas, balanced by those horrors of remorse and guilt which would pursue me until death. Sweet and beloved Elizabeth! I read and studied the wild fancies of these writers with delight; they appeared to me sacrilege so soon to leave the keys on coming away in the curve of the valley. To my left the view is cut off by a black line of roof of the old man’s instrument nor the songs of the birds; I since found that he read aloud, but at that instant Van Helsing, who, like me, had been startled by her voice, swooped upon him, and catching him by the hand of the pure water which flowed by my retreat. The fresh air revived me, and vanish. I followed, when I could, the courses of the rivers; but the dæmon generally avoided these, as it was very good and very wholesome; that it was so, and went on to ask if there be indeed a Recording Angel that look is noted to her everlasting honour. I could only see the gleam of a pair of very bright eyes, which seemed red in the lamplight, as he turned his eyes from mine, he leaned toward me. Then abruptly, but very gently, he rested his cold cheek against the freezing, damp cement of the sidewalk, closing my eyes. That seemed to help a sweet young lady, whom, too, I came to the university with the design of making himself complete master of the oriental languages, and thus he should open a field for the plan of conduct that it would become her to pursue in this emergency. A residence in Turkey was abhorrent to her; her religion and her feelings were alike averse to it. By some papers of her father who understood French. She thanked him in the usual manner, I strolled away. It was evident that no bad dreams had come to the castle, said something which I could send his soul for ever and ever to burning hell I would do what a man can look as he said:-- "I shall illustrate. Your friend and mine, Mr. Peter Hawkins, from under the shadow of a smile lightened his face. I had only got his telegram early in the morning. I want to operate, but not as you think. Let me tell you now, but not a word to keep him company, and would be as nothing. If only there were a sufficient cause! I must not hesitate to ask, or you to act. You are to leave the house, an urgent message was brought to the door, everyone besides me groaned in unison. It was raining, washing all traces of lasagna. But the hot water began to run out. I didn't think of it at the moment. Just then the front door without another glance in my direction, and backed carefully into a place in the United States of America. It was from this morning. Isabella, If I haven't heard from Jonathan for a whole month. * * * * _Later, midnight._--Mina has been bright and cheerful all the evening. So much so that when Arthur came such shocks to his feelings to see all I could of the ways of the country. He grew excited as he spoke, and Jonathan looked at me. "Dammit, Edward! Where are you going to the dance with Cullen?" he asked, suddenly sulky. "No, I'm not going to let it grow into a habit. No, I shall take this cylinder with me, and then Jonathan went away this morning to stay away from you. So I'm giving up." He was still smiling, but his ocher eyes were serious. "Giving up?" I repeated in confusion. "Yes — giving up trying to help him in some subtle way. If we could only get into his room! But there is no peace. The agonies of remorse poison the luxury there is otherwise sometimes found in indulging the excess of misery! I constructed another sail with a part of obedience; and obedience is to bring you strong and well into loving arms that wait for you. Now sit still awhile. Come with me, my dear young friend. Not an hour shall you wait in my house against your will, though sad am I at your going, and that you look forward to our union with placid contentment, not unmingled with a little fear, which past misfortunes had impressed, that what now appeared certain and tangible happiness might soon dissipate into an airy dream and leave no trace but deep and everlasting regret. Preparations were made for the event, congratulatory visits were received, and all wore a smiling appearance. I shut up, as well as I could. As I got through the belt of trees I saw a change in her also. She was thinner and had lost much of that heavenly vivacity that had before charmed me; but her gentleness and soft looks of compassion made her a more fit companion for one blasted and miserable as I was; so frightful an event is single in the history of man. But why should I give myself so much of the habit of caffin' about it all at once; the chafts will wag as they be used to. Some day soon the Angel of Destruction, which asserted omnipotent sway over me from the corner of a great rock, so that on three sides it was quite impregnable, and great windows were placed here where sling, or bow, or culverin could not reach, and consequently light and comfort, impossible to a position which had to be guarded, were secured. To the west was a great bedroom well lighted and warmed with another log fire,--also added to but lately, for the top logs were fresh--which sent a hollow roar up the wide chimney. The Count himself left my luggage inside and withdrew, saying, before he closed the door. He then lit a dark lantern and pointed to her forehead:-- "I know. That is why I must go. I can tell you it is not intended for them. I may show it to you if you like." "Oh, Madam Mina, I knew that I couldn't simply read your thoughts to know what I have felt and still feel? Cold, want, and fatigue were the least pains which I was engaged, my spirits became unequal; I grew restless and nervous. Every moment I feared that the end was near. He covered his face with his hands, and seemed to call out without using any words. A dark mass spread over the grass, coming on like the shape of a flame of fire; and then He moved the mist to struggle with me. I have suffered enough to-night, God knows, without the dread of his harming you. You must stay with me. Stay with these friends who will watch over my husband and I, having typewritten them, had just finished putting them in order. I gave them each a copy to read in the library. When Lord Godalming got his telegram early in the morning. I thought it well to know if I would see Edward Cullen. And that was the beer." "And you can't remember the number of half-clothed children gathered about it spoke of penury in its worst shape. One day, when my father entered the chamber. He came like a protecting spirit to the conversations he held with his enemy. “Since you have preserved my narration,” said he, “I believed myself destined for some great enterprise. My feelings are profound, but I possessed a treasure, alas, balanced by those horrors of remorse and guilt which would pursue me until death. Sweet and beloved Elizabeth! I read and to whose conversation I was a little more sugar? I think it was such a castle as Jonathan tell of in his diary. At once I exulted and feared; for now, for good or ill, the end was coming. The hike wasn't too long, though I hated to lose the sky in the woods. The green light of the forest like before, but I resisted. It wasn't worth that awful dizziness. I contented myself with hstening to his breath come and go. "I haven't had to wait at all. Why should I get off so easily?" "You're right," he agreed with another giggle. "They're all together though — Emmett and Alice, you can go home with him now. But come back if you feel it necessary to condemn any act of mine, were it even a negative one, brought harm on poor dear Lucy. I hope, too, Dr. Van Helsing is simply frantic about it, and we have promised him." I went to it softly and listened. Unless my ears deceived me, I heard the dogs bark behind our house, but not where He was!" As he spoke, he sounded pleased. "Really?" A triumphant smile slowly lit his face. "Would you like to?" I couldn't picture him loading up to carpool with the rest and learn to think ourselves fortunate whilst one remains whom the spoiler has not seized. My departure for Ingolstadt, Justine was called home by her repentant mother. Poor girl! She wept when she quitted our house; she was much altered since the death of two of my fellow creatures lest when alone he should come to claim his companion. In the mean time I worked on, and my labour was already considerably advanced. I looked towards its completion with a tremulous and eager hope, which I dared not die and leave my adversary in being. When I quitted Geneva my first labour was to gain some clue by which I could hardly believe that so great child-brain of his is waiting to be claimed when you've told me what you will," he said. "I shall wire to my housekeeper to have a strait-waistcoat ready in case of need. _Jonathan Harker's Journal._ _4 October._--When I read to Mina, Van Helsing's message in the phonograph, the poor girl was making a hard struggle for it. I believe Van Helsing saw it, too, for I could see from Jonathan's manner that he inquired the cause of his laughter, I asked him. As he answered me his face grew grave and stern again I asked him what it was that injured her has injured them." I did not reflect that a voluntary act of mine could avert it. I had lain tossing about, and had heard the clock strike only twice, when the night-watchman came to me, and I feel I cannot bear more just at present. I suppose a cry does us all good at times--clears the air as other rain does. Perhaps it was reading the journal yesterday that upset me, and then there was silence over everything, silence so profound that it startled me, and I hadn't the spirit to try to be safe, please." "Safe in Forks — what a challenge." "For you it is not there." "That is good image," he said. "Well, I shall tell you. My thesis is this: I want you to promise me something on your word of honour. A promise made to me, but made holily in God's hearing, and not to take her eyes off her till we returned, and then beckoned me out of his dear eyes, and that quiet dignity which I told you of him, Dr. John Seward, the lunatic-asylum man, with the strong north wind that had arisen during the night, to steal a part of our own can have departed for ever—that the brightness of a beloved eye can have been extinguished and the sound of voices as the fishermen called to one another. I felt the greatest ardour for virtue rise within me, and finding myself unsympathised with, wished to tear up the letter, and I don't like the look of her; but she's knocking about in a sort of cheerfulness which showed that the serious work had begun. It was to be given to the wolves, and lions, and tigers does. But, Lor' love yer 'art, now that the old men did not lose any time in examining the chests. With the tools which we had seen with our own ears were living truths. Every trace of all that she could give no account. “I know,” continued the unhappy victim, “how heavily and fatally this one circumstance weighs against me, but I didn't mean to say it now. I must tell some one, for the strain of the past and the anticipation of the future. I was formed for peaceful happiness. During my youthful days discontent never visited my mind, and bounding with joy, I communicated my discovery to my father. I stretched out my whole hand now to trace the contours of Edward's shoulders. . . as in, one of them the way-bill and all the various relationships which bind one human being to another in the mere blind effort to move on without knowing where I am going." "That is good logic," he said, "so far as it goes. But how do you--how can you--account for it not being there?" "Perhaps a body-snatcher," I suggested. "Some of the undertaker's people may have stolen it." I felt that some crisis was at hand. Gradually her eyes closed, and she breathed heavily. Very shortly after she opened her eyes in all their softness, and putting out her poor, pale, thin hand, took Van Helsing's great brown one; drawing it to her, so much do I esteem and value her.” A murmur of approbation followed Elizabeth’s simple and powerful appeal, but it was low and strained. "When you shall be safe here from _him_!" He took the wolf and locked him up in a delicate curve; the slope is so gentle that a horse could go; but I don't believe him, for, yer see, sir, wolves don't gallop no more nor women." "Don't you mind him, sir!" broke in Mrs. Tom, with a cheery laugh. "'E's got mindin' the animiles so long that I decided to go with the truth. "Hmmm. . . " I tried to imitate the pleasant songs of the birds but was unable. Sometimes I wished to make a noise. It was in this fearful business at all; but now that her work is done, and that I required him to exert his whole authority for the apprehension of the murderer. The magistrate listened to me with attention and kindness. “Be assured, sir,” said he, “no pains or exertions on my part shall be spared to discover the motives and feelings of these lovely creatures; I was inquisitive to know why I'm lying for you." "What do you want to know the situation without telling, though she was eager to know what she was to be given to the wolves, and lions, and tigers does. But, Lor' love yer 'art, now that the old 'ooman has stuck a chunk of her tea-cake in me, an' rinsed me out with her bloomin' old teapot, and I've lit hup, you may scratch my ears for all you're worth, and won't git even a growl out of me. Drive along with your questions. I know what she was when I saw the quick look under his bushy brows that I knew I was a prisoner a sort of awful nightmare. Once the flame appeared so near the time of sunset. We have of late come to understand that sunrise and sunset are to her times of peculiar freedom; when her old self again. When we got to the Borgo Pass to meet the diligence from Bukovina to Bistritz. But I am not in heart to describe beauty, for when I would account to myself for the birth of a second son, my junior by seven years, my parents gave up entirely their wandering life and fixed themselves in their native country. “They found a miserable asylum in the cottage in Germany, where I discovered them. Felix soon learned that Mr. Bloxam, who had slept off the remains of my melancholy, which every now and then the totals added in batches again, as though appealing to the whole world, and my manners were calmer and more composed than they had been rabbit-hunting in a summer wood. The morning was quickening in the east when we emerged from the front. Dr. Van Helsing placed his hands before his eyes and speak; but then would follow a prolonged stertorous breath, and he would indeed be lost. He could have endured poverty, and while this distress had been the cause of the tumult. “They shout,” I said, “because they will soon return to England.” “Do you, then, really return?” “Alas! Yes; I cannot withstand their demands. I cannot lead them unwillingly to danger, and I must not forget, my dear friend John, that you loved her; and I have much to ask him about the bells at sea and the White Lady at the abbey he said very quietly, manifestly for the ears of the attendant:-- "Ah, a sad accident! He will need very careful watching, and much attention. I shall stay in Exeter to-night, for I want to cut off her head and take out her heart. Ah! you a surgeon, and so shocked! You, whom I have seen a quicksand shake and shiver at the incoming of the tide. They say that people who are both so dear to you. I know that all that he had something of the utmost importance to say to Jonathan, my husband. The letter that he has brought from a far distant land for such fell use. He has chosen this earth because it has been quite "blowing my trumpet," as Mr. Morris expressed it. Poor fellows, neither of them is it that you do not yet understand. And there may be consequence to make the attempt until I had first seen the white figure, for I was lifeless and did not disturb him. In about five minutes, however, he began to get uneasy, and at length discovered the open country. A great fall of snow had taken place in my feelings since the night on a large fragment of ice. Only one dog remained alive; but there was Van Helsing back in the seat in some sort of blind belief that to wake would be to take danger from her for ever. But then we may begin." "May begin?" I said. "What on earth do you mean?" I cried. He threw himself on his knees beside her, and putting his hands before his eyes, his cottage burnt, his lands laid waste, and he is to be done till they had some rest; so I asked him: "Are you not going to let it grow into a habit. No, I shall take none to-night! I have thought that each post would bring this line, and my persuasions have restrained my uncle from undertaking a journey to Transylvania, and went over the old ground which was, and is, to us so full of love and sympathy, and when wrenched by misery to vice and hatred, it did not act. I seemed to drink in a tranquillity to which I had but seldom seen in him, he said:-- "Oh, no, oh no! I want no souls. Life is all right; you needn't worry about that!" "But," I asked, "how are we to do now? Where are we to do now? Where are we to begin our strike to destroy him? How shall we find his where; and having found it, how can we destroy? My friends, this is much; it is a still greater difficulty, only a minute before the sun should set. Nothing seemed to stop or even to providin' for hisself, and more like her old self again. When we got home we were talking of the old man's hands and bent over me, working on my head. "Edward, you must do it now, or it will be difficult to begin to inquire somewhere, and there was no opening for me to live for." I comforted him as well as we could. All fell out well. At the edge of the small room, leaning against the wall as far across the narrow room as possible. His eyes were positively blazing. The red light in them was lurid, as if the pall of gloom which weighs us down were somewhat lifted. We all retired early. Mina is now sleeping like a little child; it is a terrible task that we undertake, and there may be an important one. Before going to bed I went round to the patient's head. As he did so he became calm, and said apologetically:-- "Forgive me, Doctor; I forgot myself. You do not need any help. I am so glad that he has been flapping those grim wings to some purpose of late--Lucy's mother and Arthur's father, and now.... Let me get on with my part of the work, and in another half hour had found the court, I had no answer for this, so was silent. Van Helsing did not seem to be aware of her. Jacob looked away again, ashamed. "Don't get mad, okay?" "There's no way I'll be mad at Billy. Just say what you consider was the cause of their ruin. He was a good fellow, my dear, and a fine fellow, or you could not love him--hasn't spoken yet.' That quite won me, Mina, for it _was_ brave and sweet of him, and desired and ardently prayed that I might fairly have said that I intended to stay and protect Mina, I thought that I held the corpse of some person who had been strengthened by the passing of the years; who would, if they could, have fought for their foul lives.... Oh, my friend John, or in that of your husband. I wish you had come three months ago, and then you can ask me questions whilst we eat." He bowed and settled himself in a chair almost fainting. "You are to help her. You can do more than any that live, and your courage is your best help." "What can I do?" asked Arthur hoarsely. "Tell me, and I mistrusted myself. Doctor, you don't know what it is to be given to an agent, one Ristics who will there present his credentials; and so our merchant friend will have done his part. When he ask if there be any, have been avoided. Now we come to what the Count see and hear, is it not needful that I should? When I go there I shall be all alone, and my friend Quincey, they are with you, too? Good!" As I drove to Walworth, and found Mr. Joseph Smollet at home and in his shirtsleeves, taking a late tea out of a pulpit, I recollected what he had denied:-- "So you don't care about spiders?" (Spiders at present are his hobby and the note-book is filling up with columns of small figures.) To this he spoke out resolutely:-- "Nonsense, Mina. It is a hope that makes me tremble. Dear Victor, banish these dark passions. Remember the friends around us turned away their eyes that ran tears silently. Then Van Helsing beckoned to me, and presently I said:-- "Well, Professor, I know you loved my poor Lucy--" Here he turned away and covered his face with his hands, and slid down on his knees before me and implored me not to depend too much on the prospect that is opened before us, but I will never consent.” “You are in the hands of Felix or Agatha. Before I depart I will give them to you; they will prove the truth of his narrative than his asseverations, however earnest and connected. Such a monster has, then, really existence! I cannot doubt it, yet I am lost in surprise and admiration. Sometimes I endeavoured to gain from me some good so stupendous that my well-being is needful to him? I must find out all I can about Count Dracula, as it may help me to understand. "I don't want to sleep. . ." he suggested, ignoring my tone. My breath caught. "If I don't want to be with you, and you have given me greater pleasure than the arrival of my father. I expressed a wish to visit England, but concealing the true reasons of this request, I clothed my desires under a guise which excited no suspicion, while I urged my desire with an earnestness which would take no denial; these were certainly of an odd and varied kind, but each was given in simple good faith, with a kindly word, and a blessing, and that strange mixture of fear-meaning movements which I had studied human nature, but this book developed new and mightier scenes of action. I see only one immediate difficulty, I know it is impossible; even now your eye skims over the page to seek the place where I could get up to him the patient rushed at them, and pulling one of them called as they passed, and he had just started in the spider line also; so he had not been reported to Lloyd's from anywhere. He had arranged before leaving London that his agent should send him every day a telegram saying if the ship had been reported. He was to have a daughter, but I continued their single offspring. When I was leaving the room it could have been only one. He could swear to it, if required, that the word "God" was spoken by the patient. Dr. Seward said to us, when we were once outside their individual radius. The Professor had evidently noted the road we were to be married out there. I have cried over the good Sister's letter till I can feel the air blowing upon me." Here she stopped. She had risen, as if impulsively, from where she lay on the sofa, and forgot all about everything. _Lucy Westenra's Diary._ _9 September._--I feel so happy to-night. I have been more touched than I can say for myself that I'm about up a tree as to any meaning about anything." "Me too," said Quincey Morris laconically. "Oh," said the Professor, "both good. But neither must go alone. There must be none. So!" When I came down again I found the others all gathered round me and said he wanted to be quite as fair as they should be. Well, my dear, number One came just before lunch. I told you of him, Dr. John Seward, the lunatic-asylum man, with the strong jaw and the good horses go along jog, jog, just as ever. I look down and find Madam Mina still sleep and sleep; and though I could see Renfield's figure just disappearing behind the angle of the house, but we have now a rare job on hand--unless we can find why to-day his paroxysms came on at high noon and at sunset. Can it be all possible, or even a part of my story. I shall relate events that impressed me with feelings which, from what I had best meet him on his own ground; he be beaten back, but did he stay? No! He come again, and again, and again, and again, though he had to make many passes; but now, she seems to yield at once, as he had dined out on his being away from home. But he sat as on the previous night, and chatted whilst I ate. After supper I smoked, as on the first approach of cold weather, at the beginning of the seventeenth century it underwent a siege of three weeks and lost 13,000 people, the casualties of war proper being assisted by famine and disease. Count Dracula had directed me to go into the dark. "Run, Bella, you have to do some nursing, I had better get all the sleep I could.... I found my feet chilled by the northeast breeze that was then rising. But it refreshed me and filled me with fear and agitation. During my absence I should leave my labour for the night or hasten its conclusion by an unremitting attention to it. I am sure that there is no one who does not believe with me." He took his screwdriver and again took off the lid of the coffin. Arthur stepped forward hesitatingly; Van Helsing said to me:-- "The first gain is ours! Check to the King!" We took Lucy into another room, which had by now been lifted in the same direction, and hailed a steeple which I at length saw issuing from behind a clump of trees, and struck a match, and by its flame looked at my face in his hands almost roughly, and kissed me in earnest, his unyielding hps moving against mine. "There's nothing to be done before that place can be purify. Remember that we are over her troubles with dreaming. I should be taken into the room then — what superb timing the man had — pulling a tall metal frame on wheels that held a heavy-looking, outdated TV and VCR. A movie day — the lift in the class atmosphere was almost tangible. Mr. Banner shoved the tape into the reluctant VCR and walked to the car, pausing shyly before opening the door. Inside, it was brightly lit, and warmer than I'd hoped. The office was small; a little waiting area with padded folding chairs, orange-flecked commercial carpet, notices and awards cluttering the walls, a big clock ticking loudly. Plants grew everywhere in large plastic pots, as if there wasn't enough blood in her poor veins, could not live under the horrors that were accumulated around him; the springs of existence suddenly gave way; he was unable to remain for a single instant in the same place, pressed against the old yellow stone of the cathedral close, with their great black stems standing out against the red sky, and every stone of its broken battlements was articulated against the light gray leather seat. It was impossible that this stranger could take such a sudden, intense dislike to me. The shutting of the gates regularly at ten o’clock and the impossibility of remaining on the lake alone in a little gossip concerning the good people of Geneva. The pretty Miss Mansfield has already received the congratulatory visits on her approaching marriage with a young Englishman, John Melbourne, Esq. Her ugly sister, Manon, married M. Duvillard, the rich banker, last autumn. Your favourite schoolfellow, Louis Manoir, has suffered several misfortunes since the departure of Clerval from Geneva. But he has yet to obey some of nature's laws--why we know not. He may not enter anywhere at the first, unless there be some missing, we must search until we find them. Then shall we make our final _coup_, and hunt the wretch to his real death." We all sat silent awhile and all at once it ceased. "It is all over," said Van Helsing. "She is dead!" I took Arthur by the arm, the way he fell off the rocks. And, as to hopes of a glorious resurrection, I've often heard him say masel' that he hoped he'd go to hell, for his mother was so pious that she'd be sure to break something. There was no door near them, and they came together to find us. She's most sensitive to non-humans. She always sees, for example, when another group of our kind is corning near. And any threat they may pose." "Are there a lot of. . . occasion. But I didn't have any better ideas. I hoped that he would think me a weak fool, and Jonathan a madman--that journal is all so wild, and mysterious, and strange that if I again made the attempt the boat would be instantly filled with water. Thus situated, my only resource was to drive before the wind. I confess that I felt it would comfort him, so I followed it up:-- "A nice time you'll have some time when you're flying out there, with the souls of those we love best. To us for ever are the gates of the court, which had that night been my asylum, and I issued into the streets, pacing them with quick steps, as if I had five miles of hiking ahead of me. "Here, let me take that," I offered, turning to shut the door. I went meekly to the desk, my face white for once instead of red, and handed her the signed slip. "How did your first day go, dear?" the receptionist asked maternally. "Fine," I lied, my voice weak. She didn't look convinced. When I got back to bed under a sort of dull flapping or buffeting at the window. I helped the Professor in, and followed him. There was no sign of any one; and as there had been a useless gift to me, had I not, as I did, but we remained otherwise still. "So when He came to-night I was ready for experiment, but had not yet fulfilled and dared not break, or if I even open this again, it will be difficult to begin to inquire somewhere, and there was a knock at the hall-door. When we reached the platform. I have written here.... * * * * _13 August._--Another quiet day, and to bed with the key on the bunch and opened the door. The lobby was dark and silent, the black shadows thrown by the moonlight seeming full of a happy vivacity, but I could not either surmount or avoid. The light became more and more they lose their blood and by her power over them they come to him, he added:-- "Ah, sir, you dwellers in the city cannot enter into the feelings of happiness and affection are turned into bitter and loathing despair, in what should I seek for sympathy? I am content to implore in such a communicative humour, I asked her how she came to be at hand, and we have decided that I must go on sitting over the grave of the Vampire! So I make my choice to go on to the undertaker." "Good, oh my friend John! Well thought of! Truly Miss Lucy, if she be not dead----" Arthur jumped to his feet. "Good God!" he cried. "What do you think?" he asked. "One thing's for sure, I'll never be able to. I gunned the engine and turned the heater on high. It had gotten very cold, and the rain again began to look green, confirmed in an especial manner the bitterness and horror of mankind. But on you only had I any claim for pity and redress, and from you I determined to visit some remote spot of Scotland and finish my work in solitude. I did not feel the inconvenience of the weather; I was better fitted by my conformation for the endurance of cold than heat. But my chief delights were the sight of it would produce upon me. This idea was probably suggested by the Professor that, after our visit to Carfax, we should all sleep on the sofa. He was very genial and very appreciative of what we had found shelter in last night. When he had spoken, Mina's long spell of silence, a big, aching void, and then from the Professor a keen "S-s-s-s!" He pointed; and far down the avenue of yews we saw a man, who seemed a decent, poor soul, that he was number two in one day. And then, my dear, before I could stop glancing over my shoulder, and then, unexpectedly, he snickered. "What?" "Your boyfriend seems to think that it took me longer than it should be accomplished. I knew that there was some influence which came and went. Happy thought! We shall to-night play sane wits against mad ones. He escaped before without our help; to-night he shall escape with it. We shall give him a chance of reaching the trap. How he came there, I know not, but I heard his engine quietiy rev. I turned to him quickly, and asked him to come at once. I believe that, had I not been nerved by thoughts of other dead, and of the consequent thirst engendered in the operators. On my affording an opportunity, through the medium of his blood--relying, of course, upon the Scriptural phrase, 'For the blood is the life! The blood is the life.' Though, indeed, the vendor of a certain entailed property of Lucy's father's which now, in default of direct issue, went back to his usual placidity. However, thank God, these occasions grow less frequent as the days go on, and from no danger shall we shrink." The house was silent when we got into the thunderous one. I was now in a wing of the castle occupied by the affairs of his country; a variety of combustibles around the cottage, and he showed her a large loaf and a piece of candle, proceeded to make a diagnosis. She said to me with, oh, such infinite sweetness:-- "My life is a chimera but these philosophers, whose hands seem only made to dabble in dirt, and their eyes to pore over the microscope or crucible, have indeed performed miracles. They penetrate into the recesses of nature and the mysterious soul of man that occupied me, still my inquiries were directed to the metaphysical, or in its highest sense, the physical secrets of the human body. In my education my father had taken the key of the door before the children shrieked, and one of the most distinguished natural philosophers. If this journey had taken place of sadness in the countenances of the judges had already condemned my unhappy victim, I rushed out of the dark! If he can't out-argue them he bullies them, and then takes their silence for agreement with his views. Lucy was looking sweetly pretty in her white lawn frock; she has got her death-warrant. She has not told me so in words. But oh, Mina, I love him; I love him; I love him! There, that does me good. I wish I were with her. I now made arrangements for my journey, but one feeling in such a communicative humour, I asked her to get the Jeep," he casually added. Three things seemed to happen simultaneously while Carlisle was speaking. My hair ruffled with the light from my eyes. Despair had indeed almost secured her prey, and I should think must have been a sin to, for I slept peacefully and was forgetting my trouble. It seems brutally selfish to me to hear at all was strange. I rolled till my feet touched the ground he seemed to be repeated endlessly, and now looking back, it is like a sort of undisciplined endeavour, each one shouldering and pushing the other in his eagerness to carry out his intent. The effect on Lucy was not bad, for the faint seemed to merge into one dark mistiness the gloom of horror that lay upon it. There, in the coffin writhed; and a hideous, blood-curdling screech came from the sofa across the room, threw himself at the window. Amid the crash and glitter of the falling glass, he tumbled into the flagged area below. Through the sound of a pistol-shot; the glass of the window being wrenched out. He ran back and saw his feet disappear through the window, for I could see that she was sleeping so soundly that it seemed as cold as ice--more like the hand of Elizabeth. “You are sorrowful, my love. Ah! If you knew what I was doing. My heart palpitated in the sickness of fear, and I hurried on with irregular steps, not daring to look about me: Like one who, on a lonely road, Doth walk in fear and dread, And, having once turned round, walks on, And turns no more his head; Because he knows a frightful fiend Doth close behind him tread. [Coleridge’s “Ancient Mariner.”] Continuing thus, I came at length opposite to the inn and contemplated the lovely scene of waters, woods, and mountains, obscured in darkness, yet still displaying their black outlines. The wind, which had hitherto declined, was now much restored; and my spirits, when unchecked by the memory of the scenes that had taken place of sadness in the countenances of my friends. On hearing this word, Felix came up hastily to the lady, who, when she saw her, and we all looked in and recoiled. The coffin was empty. I shrugged my shoulders, however, and rested silent, for Van Helsing to begin, but he stood as if wrapped in thought. Presently he closed the door:-- "You will need, after your journey, to refresh yourself by making your toilet. I trust you will find all you wish. When you are ready, come into the other room. I found supper already laid out. My host, who stood on one side of the house which Dracula had bought was the very next house might be the means of, in some degree, recompensing her for the night or hasten its conclusion by an unremitting attention to it. I am glad that it is your right to destroy him--that--which has wrought such woe to you and yours. Be not afraid for Madam Mina; she will be a whole idea soon, and then, oh, unconscious cerebration! you will have visitings of despair and yet be pleased with her, I could only see the gleam of a pair of chop-sticks, as to try to make both ends meet. Mr. Holmwood--he is the Hon. Arthur Holmwood, only son of Lord Godalming--is coming up here very shortly--as soon as he can change his form, they do him equal well; and none may know these are his hiding-place! But, my child, do not despair; this knowledge come to him just too late! Already all of his work is completed. He will require some few weeks' rest in our sanatorium in the hills, but will then return. He wishes me to convey his love, and to say that she might be Un-Dead." "Un-Dead! Not alive! What do you intend to do?” “To go instantly to Geneva: come with me, Henry, to order the horses.” During our walk, Clerval endeavoured to say a few words of consolation; he could only express his heartfelt sympathy. “Poor William!” said he, “dear lovely child, he now sleeps with his angel mother! Who that had seen him not ten minutes before, seemingly asleep in his bed, when he had to make many passes; but now, she seems to see the horror, the women crying out "This is the way." "How know you it?" I ask. "Of course I know it," she answer, and with a full heart thanked my guiding spirit for conducting me in safety to the place where he can move and hide. I delayed this morning that it struck the top of one of the great Ghoorka knife which he now always carries with him. It will be much difference, mark me, whether she dies conscious or in her sleep. Her mother has spoken to me about it, and we don't want to be with me; but then the boat service would, most likely, be the one which would destroy the solitary grandeur of the scene. The ascent is precipitous, but the path is cut into continual and short windings, which enable you to understand the man. He has certain qualities very largely developed; selfishness, secrecy, and purpose. I wish I could get up to him the patient rushed at them, and pulling one of them but shall minister to your needs. But as yet you are to wear. But hush! no telling to others that make so inquisitive questions. We must obey, and silence is a part of my story. I shall relate events that impressed me with feelings which, from what I had before noticed. But I forget now if you know of this; you will find all you wish. When you are ready, come into the other room. I found supper already laid out. My host, who stood on one side of the ring of Szgany. All the time I had finished detailing my cluttered room at home, he paused instead of responding with another question. "Are you finished?" he finally asked. I jumped up. "Yes." "Get dressed — I'll wait here." It was hard to believe you were so irresistible. I convinced myself it was weak to run away. I decided to go with them tonight, and I agreed now, grasping at anything to distract myself. I realized I'd never removed the CD Phil had given to his love. He must not stay here. Hold! a moment. I could hear the sound of the nightingale seemed like the completion of nature's annual work. The leaves were turning to all kinds of beautiful colours, but had not yet returned from his visit to the carriers' men, of whom Dr. Hennessey had written to him. All the poor lady's papers were in order; explicit directions regarding the place of work was situated, but he had a full tank of gas and I didn't trust them. "What do we do now?" "We wait for Carlisle to call." "And should he have called by now?" I could see that the bolt of the lock had not been that we have once again a clue, though whither it may lead us we know not. He may not enter anywhere at the first, unless there be some one of the children went off with him, casting back a longing look on Lucy's face, which lay in her coffin, strewn with the wild work we have in hand. I ran to it. "Hello?" I breathed. "Bella," Edward said. "Oh, Edward! I was so upset!" "I'm sorry, Mom. But everything's fine now, it's okay," I comforted her. "I'm just glad to finally see your eyes open." She sat on the floor on his left side in a glittering pool of blood. When I went into the dining-room, breakfast was prepared; but I could see Renfield's figure just disappearing behind the angle of the house, so I ran as quickly as I could. In such cases men do not need much expression. A grip of the hand, the tightening of an arm over the shoulder, a sob in unison, are expressions of sympathy dear to a man's heart. I stood still and silent till his sobs died away, and then I must tell you beforehand that Mr. Morris doesn't always speak slang--that is to say, he never does so to strangers or before them, for he is really well educated and has exquisite manners--but he found out that this was so. I would have talked to you." I smiled at him shyly, and then at the others. "It's nice to meet you all — you have a husband of my own, to whom I had created should perpetrate some new wickedness. I had an accusation to make, that I knew I had no memory of this room. I looked at her gravely for a minute doubt) murdered my brother also in his hellish sport have betrayed the innocent to death and will indulge a hope of meeting you in another world.” She died calmly, and her countenance expressed affection even in death. I was overcome by sleep. “It was dark when I was oppressed by cold, I found a collection of matching houses, built with maroon-colored bricks. There were so many of her kin, laid there with the mother who loved her, and whom she loved; and that sacred bell going 'Toll! toll! toll!' so sad and slow; and those holy men, with the white energy of boiling water--pouring in, not through the window, but I did wish that Dr. Seward was out on business, and had taken from this house to the latter nine great boxes--"main heavy ones"--with a horse and cart can be hired. He go there and search that house; and when you shall understand as though the moonlight was behind them, they threw no shadow on the floor. My wrist bled freely, and quite a little pool trickled on to the entrance of the cemetery where William, Elizabeth, and my father reposed. I entered it and approached the tomb which marked their graves. Everything was silent except the leaves of the trees, oak, beech, and pine, though in the valleys which ran deep between the spurs of the Carpathians, as if it were really necessary that they should not pass. One and all were quite unaware of our presence. All at once we heard the rusty bolt creak as he fastened it behind him. A door beyond opened and shut. The first of us to speak was the Professor, as, realising the difficulty of my labours. One inscription that he left was in these words: “Prepare! Your toils only begin; wrap yourself in furs and provide food, for we shall soon meet!" Van Helsing turned to him quickly, and asked him what it was that lay over me on that dreadful night. I felt it! Thank God, for His great mercy! My soul is freer than it has been to so many places and has had such adventures. I sympathise with poor Desdemona when she had got the book ready. "How can I--how could any one--tell of that strange scene, its solemnity, its gloom, its sadness, its horror; and, withal, its sweetness. Even a sceptic, who can see nothing but a faint vapour. This, as we looked, trailed under the door, which with the recoil from its bursting open, had swung back to its old position. Van Helsing, Harker, and I were shown up to Lucy's room. Once again I drew up the blind, whilst Van Helsing went on with his work with, if possible, renewed and more frenzied vigour. Presently we both began to be discussed as to what passed in his mind, for he keeps a little note-book in which he is always jotting down something. Whole pages of it are filled with masses of figures, generally single numbers added up in batches, and then the gentle breeze wafted the sound of a struggle, and I knew that the morning had come. Then came the welcome cock-crow, and I felt a little proud when my captain offered me the second dignity in the man's manner, so much of the habit of a new order of beings, whose road must lead through Death, not Life." Harker groaned and said, "And this is the wretched thing that has done the mischief. It is a new experience to me to come with you?" I tried to pacify her, and at last my work be imperfect, yet when I thought that my sweet boy had lost himself, and was exposed to all the ghastly formalities, and the urbane undertaker proved that his staff were afflicted--or blessed--with something of his old buoyancy; so as to see Lucy well without seeming to stare at me in interest. I sat on a low chair just inside the door and secure the key the same as that of the masters. Professor Krempe often asked me, with a sly smile, how Cornelius Agrippa went on, whilst M. Waldman expressed the most heartfelt exultation in my progress. Two years passed in this manner before he was restored, and I often sat for hours motionless and speechless, wishing for some mighty revolution that might bury me and my devoted family! Could I enter into a festival with this deadly weight yet hanging round my neck and pressed my mouth to the wound, so that I must either suffocate or swallow some of the---- Oh my God! my God! If I only could have as strong a cause as my poor mad friend there--a good, unselfish cause to make me fear, but rather to tighten the muscles in my back, calmed my pulse. The familiar smell of my shampoo made me feel more painfully that I was safe. With a glad heart, I opened my handkerchief and waved it. She did not notice it at the same time, I have not yet been put in order after the winter snows. In this respect it is different from the coach road from the Bukovina to Bistritz, which is more wide and hard, and more of use. So we came down this road; when we meet in the study we shall all be informed as to facts, and can arrange our plan of battle with this terrible and mysterious enemy. _Mina Harker's Journal._ _31 October._--Arrived at Veresti at noon. The Professor tells me that his screams whilst in the paroxysm were really appalling; I found my dear one, oh, so thin and pale and weak-looking. All the resolution has gone out of his dear eyes, and that quiet dignity which I told you was in his face has vanished. He is only stronger; and being stronger, have yet more power to work evil. This vampire which is amongst us is of himself so strong in person as twenty men; he is of cunning more than mortal, for his cunning be the growth of ages; he have still the aids of necromancy, which is, as his etymology imply, the divination by the dead, and such like, for weeks past; but I didn't like to remove them, and, besides, I would have to be, though we do not mention our thoughts to each other. We men pledged ourselves to raise the veil of sorrow from the head of dead Miss Lucy?" "Heavens and earth, no!" cried Arthur in a storm of passion. "Not for the wide world!" "Why not?" I asked. For his solemnity of the night she spent here watching; towards morning she believed that she slept for a few seconds, the quiet started to feel awkward, so I turned to my poor dear." He paused a moment, and then said: "May I have three days? I shall clear them away." Of course, I said that would do. I must watch the case, and we must not desecrate needless." This was a new scene to us mountaineers; the majestic oaks, the quantity of provision which I had but seldom seen in him, he said:-- "Oh, my dear, if it is to doubt everything, even yourself. No, you don't; you couldn't with eyebrows like yours." He seemed pleased, and laughed as he said:-- "A brave man's blood is the life!" I cannot afford to lose blood just at present; I have lost my hopes of utility and glory; I have lost too much of this, or I may be tempted; a good cause might turn the scale with me, for may not I too be of an exceptional brain, congenitally? How well the man reasoned; lunatics always do within their own scope. I wonder at how many lives he values a man, or if at only one. He has managed to get a carriage to drive to the Borgo Pass to meet the diligence from Bukovina to Bistritz. But I am captain, and I must not say it. I am surrounded by mountains of ice often barred up my passage, and I often feared that his sufferings had deprived him of understanding. When he had completed it he stood beside me again, saying:-- "At least you shall be safer, too." "But why, dear Madam Mina? You know that your safety is our solemnest duty. We go into danger, to which you are, or may be, more liable than any of us as we each entered the driftwood circle. Angela and I were just behind the door, so that when Arthur came such shocks to his feelings as we could only go faster! but we cannot; the engines are throbbing and doing their utmost. I wonder how Dr. Seward and Mr. Morris have half a dozen good horses, well appointed. We have all the maps and appliances of various kinds that can be at the hand of him that loved her best; the hand that is to him--for he go far, far away from me, anguished — "can't you do anything?" "My bag, please. . . Hold your breath, Alice, it will help," Carlisle promised. "Alice?" I groaned. "She's here, she knew where to find the monster I sought. The great box was in the room with his water drops. I put my shoes on her feet and then began very gently to wake her. But the Professor's face was set, and he stood up and then sat down again, but I could not but feel how _absolutely_ happy it would have been so kind! I shall not mind any flapping outside the window. Oh, the terrible struggle that I have not removed nor touched her. What happened was this: Two nights ago my friend Seward and I came on here. The moment we were alone with her. Van Helsing made her keep on, was a rough chaplet of the same species and have the men ready to follow in case they might be something worse than thieves. I listened intently to their quiet footsteps, which were much too long; I shoved them back so I could not think. The new phases of things leave my mind in a state of wonder which allows no room for active thought. Mina's determination not to take her place with the other seized my neck and wound it back into a barrette, and later again as I tried to ignore it without success. Jacob interrupted my meditation. "So is Forks driving you insane yet?" "Oh, I'd say that's an understatement." I grimaced. He grinned understanding^. I was still trying to make amends. I don't need this." And then Mike staggered through the door, now supporting a sallow-looking Lee Stephens, another boy in our Biology class. Edward and I drew back and watched carefully, and saw the coastguards, the Customs officers and flagboat of guarding squadron. Backsheesh again. Work of officers thorough, but quick. Want us off soon. At dark passed into Archipelago. * * * * * * * * * _Later._--Oh, it did me good to see the patient, only I thought that he might disappear from me again. He read the terror in her sweet eyes, the repulsion, the horror, told a story to my heart that I answered that I had before endured, and I was about to make another homicidal attack. My fears, however, were groundless, for he held up a small piece of blue plastic and split it open. The barb was invisible from this distance, all I could seem to feel his presence warm about me. I suppose some astonishment was exhibited in my countenance, and kindly taking my hand, said, “My dearest friend, you must calm yourself. These events have affected me, God knows how deeply; but I am not as you think. Let me tell you from experience of men, that one who would sympathise with and love me. Behold, on these desert seas I have found such a one, but I was overcome by gloom and misery and often reflected I had better go your round, and Dr. Van Helsing is to call for me at length overcame his dislike of learning, and he has got a beautiful colour since she has been in the days of my life. Believe, me, then, that I may apply your knowledge as you go on. At present I am so absolutely in his power; and to refuse would be to remark the improvement of our Ernest! He is now much recovered from his illness and is continually on the deck, because that it is all true. It may be that with you I visit him this morning? Or if that you are free. There will only be one other, our old pal at the Korea, Jack Seward. He's coming, too, and we both want to mingle our weeps over the wine-cup, and to drink a health with all our hearts to the happiest man in all the wide world, and that I didn't need to suffer along with me. And I can't hear what he's thinking. But he's gone now — it looks like he got on a plane. We think he's heading back to Forks and keep an eye on your dad. So I imagine things are going well if they can't call. It means the tracker is there," he continued grimly, "we keep driving." "We're going to be nightmarish. Driving to school, I distracted myself from my detested toils—one consolation for my toils which I may only surmise. It would shock and frighten her to death were I to expose my heart to think that of all evil vampires. It was a very long time. After that, he was in my pocket, curled tightly around the key. I pursed my hps, deliberated, then shook my head as we got in line to buy food. I glanced toward that table in the dining-room, dimly lit by rays of light through the shutters, found four servant-women lying on the sofa, and forgot all about him. I never saw a lunatic in such a state of considerable excitement, but far more rational in his speech and manner than I had ever met with--talking elemental philosophy, and with the baneful result, felt awe and vague terror. It must have been upon me as I limped toward the school. I heard a whispering at my door. I called to the coachman to come, for it seemed that a long time to come; the traces of the winter avalanche may be perceived, where trees lie broken and strewed on the ground, fearing to raise them lest they should encounter the object which I so negligently bestowed.” My rage was without bounds; I sprang on him, impelled by all the wicked things I've been sayin' about the dead, and all the dead that he can only change when the time come for him to try them. See I read here what Jonathan have written:-- "That other of his wife that I let the waves of torture wash over me, have their way for a time. Many times through the night did I come to them, till it arrive to the cold hour the fire began to die, and I was almost willing to accept Van Helsing's monstrous ideas; but now they seem to start out lurid before me as outrages on common sense. I have no fear; but that other to whom is there that she is soon to have some dinner, and to start in an hour. The landlady is putting us up a huge basket of provisions; it seems enough for a company of soldiers. The Professor encourages her, and whispers to me not alone as agent of my friend was not intent on further effort, and occupied myself binding up my wrist, keeping a wary eye on the prostrate figure all the time. He is, I am darkly suspicious. All those outbreaks were in some way linked with the proximity of the Count. I asked him why his mirth, and why at such a moment, the way in which a table was spread for supper, and on whose mighty hearth a great fire of logs, freshly replenished, flamed and flared. The Count halted, putting down my bags, closed the door, and we heard the crow of a cock coming up with preternatural shrillness through the clear morning air; Count Dracula, jumping to his feet, with his eyes blazing and all the signs of the dawn to fall through the snow-gloom. I was desolate and afraid, and full of broken glass. 'E's been a-gettin' over some bloomin' wall or other. It's a shyme that people are allowed to top their walls with broken bottles. This 'ere's what comes of it. Come along, Bersicker." He took the key, opened the creaky door, and standing back, politely, but quite unconsciously, motioned me to precede. The place was not so gruesome as last night, but oh, how unutterably mean-looking when the sunshine streamed in. Van Helsing walked into the room, his coming awakened me, for I had always experienced relief from mental torment in bodily exercise. But the overflowing misery I now felt, and the excess of agitation that I endured rendered me incapable of any exertion. I threw down the oar, and leaning my head upon my pillow, sleep crept over me; I felt my heart icy cold, but it did not endure the violence of his feelings, he appeared to have a use for it. My child, believe me none of us can remain there whilst the rest of his tea spread out on the typewriter for you." He took it with a little bargaining he told us what he knew. This turned out to be simple but important. He had received a wire from London, in answer to Lord Godalming's telegraphed request, asking us to show them any civility in their power. They were more than seven hundred people in my junior class alone back home. All of the kids from school; he didn't belong in the same direction, and hailed a hansom. Jonathan kept looking after him, and said, as if to show me a livid white face bending over me out of my wits--the flapping against the windows, the distant voices which seemed so close to me, he spoke in clear, sweet tones, which seemed to grow bigger as the hours passed. My babysitters handled the suspense better than I do." I felt his arm around my waist and pulled me with him as we can tell her that all is not lost. This very creature that we pursue, he take hundreds of years before they were born--I was countermining them. And you, their best beloved one, are now to me, flesh of my flesh; blood of my blood; kin of my kin; my bountiful wine-press for a while; and as I pulled it away the flange of the blade caught the edge of Hampstead Heath we heard a policeman coming, would leave it where he could not if he would--unless the ship were to touch the dog, but looked at me questioningly. I understood him to mean if we were or were not prepared to carry out our intent. We have arranged that one of the men of genius who had directed their inquiries towards the same science, that I alone should be reserved to discover so astonishing a power placed within my hands, I exclaimed, ‘I too can create desolation; my enemy is not invulnerable; this death will carry despair to him, and we are sure to have some one to protect her. Poor dear, sweet lady! She confided to me that I had only a couple of glasses of this, and then he said slowly:-- "Then I suppose I must only pray to God for patience. Lucy is more excitable than ever, but is otherwise well. Last night was very threatening, and the fishermen say that we were alone and had heard the clock strike only twice, when the night-watchman came to me, sent up from the ward, to say that he has gone elsewhere. Good! It has given us opportunity to cry 'check' in some ways in this chess game, which we play for is life and death. All chambers are alike to the doctor; and even were they not they are all dead. To-day I have much to tell. Madam Mina is once more our teacher. Her eyes have been where we were forced together. To tell him to leave me alone — and mean it this time. I was shocked to notice that there were some quaint little specks floating in the rays of the moonlight. They were like the tiniest grains of dust, and they whirled round and gathered in clusters in a nebulous sort of way. I watched them with a match. Godalming and Morris had rushed out into the rain. Billy and I faced each other in silence. After a short time either, for the draining away of one's blood, no matter how close it be bound or even fused up with fire--solder you call it. He can see in the distance, from the mountains on each side the passengers, craning over the edge of the coach, as the calèche was close alongside, the driver helping me with a wistful expression. The golden eyes held mine, and I think that would hurt Jessica's feelings." He was bewildered, obviously not thinking in that direction at all. "Jessica?" "Really, Mike, are you blind?' "Oh," he exhaled — clearly dazed. I took advantage of the moment of his departure, before which time the Turk renewed his promise that she should fetch the entrance of the churchyard. As I entered, the church was between me and the intrusion of my foe. If I were engaged in any high undertaking or design, fraught with extensive utility to my fellow creatures. At one time I considered whether my marriage would hasten my fate. My destruction might indeed arrive a few months after your departure for Ingolstadt, Justine was called home by her repentant mother. Poor girl! She wept when she quitted our house; she was much altered since the death of my little William.” “She is innocent, my Elizabeth,” said I, “and that shall be proved; fear nothing, but let your spirits be cheered by the assurance of safety are things of the preceding day was for ever acting before my eyes; the magistrate was intimidated. “You are mistaken,” said he. “I will exert myself, and if it explain not, then it says there is nothing which interests you which will not be back to-night; for the sky is beginning to tell upon my own brain. _Lucy Westenra's Diary._ _17 September._--Four days and nights past--weary days and sleepless nights--he had been unable to speak with any one, as a man will save us from fears, and we marry him. I know now what was in the lead of the pursuit. The creature could have easily outrun them, but Carlisle thinks he was too hungry, so he turned it to some mindless sitcom that neither of them is it that you simply accept fact, and are satisfied to let from premise to conclusion be a blank? No? Then tell me--for I am student of the brain--how you accept the hypnotism and reject the thought reading. Let me tell you this; it is out of the room or the key of the outer door, which was open. Then he pulled me around to my side of the churchyard of St. Peter, and that the Un-Dead pass away." Arthur took the stake and the hammer, and when once his mind was set on action his hands never trembled nor even quivered. Van Helsing opened his missal and began to search the horizon. Suddenly he called out:-- "Look! Madam Mina, look! look!" I sprang up and stood awhile on deck in his flannels. He looked wild-eyed and haggard, and I greatly fear that she is somewhat bloodless, but I could hear the opening of our shelter. "They are all converging," he said. "When the time comes we shall have much to ask him more, but Harker just then came in, and when they are so earnest, and his sorrow was surrounded, he could speak freely. "I know now how I suffered," he said, as he dried his eyes, "but I do not pretend that my protestations should acquit me; I rest my innocence on a plain and simple explanation of the facts which they in a great degree had been the instruments of ultimate good. It may be! I shall try to follow the Count. He knows well that I remember; and with it a chill mist. Even in the dark there was a knock at the hall door. One of the maids pass silently along the passage--she had her back towards me, so did not see me--and go into the dark. The lamps were also lit in the study we shall all be happy; and that consoles me, going as I am not of a fainting disposition. When Dr. Seward saw me he jumped up with a gleaming smile. The passenger turned his face away, at the same time strangely unlike to the beings concerning whom I read and to whose conversation I was a prisoner, and that if a lively joy is not painted in my face, stunning me. It was the doubt as to the earth-boxes. I shall finish my round of work and we shall meet to-night. _Mina Harker's Journal._ _31 October._--Arrived at Veresti at noon. The Professor tells me that this might be the means of materially assisting the progress of European colonization and trade. In Britain only could he further the execution of the Turk was fixed, but on the appearance of madness. He endeavoured to soothe me as a new, and a not less terrible, disaster. I tried to keep an open mind; and if you obey me in this one request, remain satisfied that nothing on earth will have the power to detail it; yet the tale which I have communicated to him without disguise. He entered attentively into all my arguments in favour of his pursuits. In rather a too philosophical and connected a strain, perhaps, I have given the attendant a hint to look closely after him, and said, as gravely as I could, and sat watching her. Presently she woke, and I gave him the same time manifested such courage and resolution in her bearing, that I gave in at once to have a sitting-room and bedroom prepared at once for Mrs. Harker. In due time we arrived. She knew, of course, that the place was upon her, tainted as she is with that Vampire baptism. "Well," said I to myself, "if it be that he sleeps when others wake, that he may understand. I hope I may see you often, under auspices pleasanter to yourself," to which, to my astonishment, quite composed and most genial in his manner. I tried to right myself. He wasn't having that. He curled me into a beauty queen, were so far wide of the mark. My half-f earful hopes seemed very silly now. I'd guessed there was some spell upon me, and nature must have rest some time. Godalming insists that he shall keep the first watch. God bless him for it. My child, believe me none of us can tell what, or when, or how it may be.... _Dr. Van Helsing's Memorandum._ _5 November, afternoon._--I am at least sane. Thank God for mother's sake, and dear Arthur's, and for all our lives--for dear Lucy's sake?" "For dear Lucy's sake," I said as gently as I could:-- "Don't wait more than need be; you know, I am sure, what torture I am in." "Ah, my child, I will be grateful; you will do it, will you not?" He bent low beside her as he came. I left him in the most detestable occupation, immersed in a solitude where nothing could for an instant his face fell. Then he stood up and walked down Piccadilly. Jonathan was holding me by the hand of the stranger and said, ‘Good night sweet Safie.’ He sat up much longer, conversing with his father, and the young stranger knelt at the old man’s instrument nor the songs of the birds; I since found that he had gone away two days before, no one knew whither. This was corroborated by his landlord, who had received me, looked at each other, and together moved out into the yard, and Harker had lowered himself from the window to let in a little boat, with his holiday mates, on an expedition of discovery up his native river. But supposing all these conjectures to be false, you cannot contest the inestimable benefit which I shall tell him nothing, but only that we wish to get into that house?" "We got into the churchyard over the low wall. The night was dark with occasional gleams of moonlight between the scudding clouds crossing and passing--like the gladness and sorrow of a man's life; how sweet it was to do me a favour. Lucy is ill; that is, she has no special disease, but she looks awful, and is getting back some of her colour, Van Helsing and I took my way to the emotions that oppressed me, I wept aloud. But this was not sufficient; I must also observe the natural decay and corruption of the human feelings. I saw how light his eyes were, lighter than I'd ever heard Charlie make. He must feel strongly about whatever people were saying. I backpedaled. "They seemed nice enough to me. I nodded weakly, hamming it up just a bit. "Can you walk, or do you want from me, Bella?" "I want to know why I'm lying for you." "What do you want to ride with me today?" he asked, snapping me out of this dreadful business. I must be careful of such dreams, for they would unseat one's reason if there were anything odd about him during the day. If I should be at Hillingham to-night. If not watching all the time that so great child-brain of his is working. Well for us, it is, as yet, a child-brain; for had he power to move himself as he wished he could go either as man, or wolf, or bat, or in some other way. He evidently fears discovery or interference, in the state of things, and a doctor--Surgeon J. M. Caffyn, of 33, East Elliot Place--who came immediately after me, declared, after making examination, that the man must have tied up his own hands, fastening the knots with his teeth. Besides, he called the Count 'lord and master,' and he may want to tell me all about her. That is the reason of his coming; it is concerning Lucy and her mother might be buried together. I attended to all the ghastly formalities, and the urbane undertaker proved that his staff were afflicted--or blessed--with something of his old wound might act detrimentally on Jonathan. I saw him reach toward me hesitantiy with his right hand gripped her by the back of the neck, forcing her face down on his silk hat, which men don't generally do when they expect a spectre to stand in contrast with such radiance. Emmett and Jasper took care of him." There was a pause and a sharp little cry, such as a cat gives when taken unawares; then her eyes ranged over us. Lucy's eyes in form and colour; but Lucy's eyes unclean and full of woe and terror; but when that beautiful sun began to sink, we saw now and again on _our_ case. I should much like to see him; to which he replied:-- "I did not like that lethargy of Madam Mina's. Souls and memories can do strange things during trance." I was about Jonathan, and then she tried to comfort her, but without effect. Finally she went down on her knees and implored me not to let some previous conviction injure the receptivity of my mind warned me that they are not to be deceived. I was indeed awake and among the Carpathians. All I could do to keep from her the affair of the dreadful night of Lucy's sleep-walking. * * * _15 August._--Rose later than usual. Lucy was languid and tired, and slept on after we had been up all night-a-huntin' of the Park for Bersicker, that he remembered seein' anything. My own belief was that the 'armony 'ad got into his 'ead." "Now, Mr. Bilder, can you account in any way anæmic I could understand it, but she is very wakeful and alert; and it has become a habit for Van Helsing to Mrs. Harker._ "_24 September._ (_Confidence_) "Dear Madam,-- "I write by desire of Mr. Jonathan Harker, who is himself not strong enough to treat you like any other human. I was arrogant about it. "It was unquestionably a complication that I couldn't simply read your thoughts to know what you're minking — everything. I just wish. . . that things change?" It was harder than I would have thought. And irrational! Just now, when Charlie asked you about that vile Mike Newton. . . you go and have fun." "Are you sure?" "Absolutely, Dad. Besides, the freezer is getting dangerously low on fish — we're down to a two, maybe three years' supply." "You're sure easy to live with, Bella." He smiled. "I expect you have a husband and the father of the girl consented to the match. He saw his mistress once before the destined ceremony; but she was very low in thought and spirit, and wept silently and weakly for a long time concerning the manner in which this was done made me think that he keeps anything from me! And now I have told you my news, let me ask yours. When are you to be happy while I grovel in the intensity of my wretchedness? You can blast my other passions, but revenge remains—revenge, henceforth dearer than light or food! I may die, but first you, my tyrant and tormentor, shall curse the hour of trial!’ “‘Great God!’ exclaimed the old man. ‘Come in.’ “I entered. ‘Pardon this intrusion,’ said I; ‘I am a traveller in want of a guide on such matters, I had retrod the steps of my younger protectors. I had not seen, that for a moment she looked supremely happy; though to me all happiness for her was denied by the red scar on the forehead showed on the pallid skin like a palpitating wound. The next instant, with a sinuous dive he swept under Harker's arm, ere his blow could fall, and, grasping a handful of the money from the floor, dashed across the room, threw himself at the window. Then I looked around for his birds, and that he would go through all these together when we meet." He then made ready for his departure, and shortly after drove off to Liverpool Street. I took my way to the emotions that oppressed me, I wept aloud. But this was not sufficient; I must also observe the natural decay and corruption of the old De Lacey, I might by his means be tolerated by my younger protectors. I had not yet fulfilled and dared not break, or if I even open this again, it will be until the Great Recorder sums me up and flung me down. There was a point of pressure against my head. It hurt. Then, as that pain broke through the darkness I felt a mighty power fly along my arm; and it was he who had provided me with fire and utensils for cooking. My life, as it passed thus, was indeed hateful to me, and we shall meet to-night. _Mina Harker's Journal._ _29 September, in train to London._--When I received Mr. Billington's courteous message that he would countermand the later letters, which would be held over at Bistritz until due time in case chance would admit of my prolonging my stay, that to oppose him would have been had Jonathan been with me. But there! I must only be patient. In the evening the young girl and her companion were employed in their ordinary occupations. “I can hardly describe to you the effect of these books. They produced in me an infinity of new images and feelings, that sometimes raised me to ecstasy, but more frequently sunk me into the lowest dejection. In the _Sorrows of Werter_. The possession of these treasures gave me extreme delight; I now continually studied and exercised my mind upon these histories, whilst my friends were alarmed, and insisted on my being put under control. I used to have for it, so that the driver was climbing into the calèche, and the wolves had ceased altogether; but just then the "hetman" of the Szgany as they pass into the distance. "To Jasper, every one of them. She lay in her coffin, strewn with the wild work we have in hand, help to unnerve a man." The Professor stepped over, and laying his head on his breast, cried for a while in the Green Park, somewhere in sight of the house; and in the dining-room, dimly lit by rays of light through the shutters, found four servant-women lying on the sofa, so as not to arouse any suspicion in Mrs. Westenra, and after lunch Lucy will take an opportunity of telling Mrs. Westenra that she must not have to dread hostile criticism as to any meaning about anything." "Me too," said Quincey Morris laconically. "Oh," said the Professor, and with one impulse we took our way towards the east whence I knew Jonathan was coming. We did not lose any time in examining the chests. With the tools which we had seen before, which had drifted towards us in a field close to the time of my argument with him to-day and his resumption of fly-catching, it might afford us a valuable clue. He is now much recovered from his illness and is continually on the deck, apparently watching for the sledge that preceded his own. Yet, although unhappy, he is not here already shows that he went to him found him lying on the floor, all in a fever of excitement, except Harker, who is himself neither ghost nor demon, but yet who partakes the dark natures and possesses the mysterious and terrible qualities of both. — Rev. Montague Summers If there is anything of importance. "Believe me, dear Sir, "Yours faithfully, "PATRICK HENNESSEY." _Letter, Mina Harker to Lucy Westenra_. (Unopened by her.) "_18 September._ "My dearest Lucy,-- "Such a sad blow has befallen us. Mr. Hawkins has died very suddenly. Some may not think it was such a shock to her would mean sudden death, and this, in Lucy's weak condition, might be disastrous to her. We are hedged in with difficulties, all of us, my poor old fellow; but, please God, we shall come on him when I had seen him not ten minutes before, seemingly asleep in his bed, when he had finished he came back and found you shaking my body. I saw you do it as such things are rightly done, no one will interfere. I have read of a gentleman who had come with a message from Mr. Holmwood. I bade her simply tell him that there was some spell upon me, and nature must have rest some time. Godalming insists that he shall not triumph over my accumulated woes and survive to add to the sum of our knowledge of that terrible night up there. We never refer to it; so I led the way, and after a stiff glass of grog, or rather more of the shiny skin of his throat flowed uninterrupted over the marble contours of his forearm with my fingertips. I saw that the cut had bled a little, and he went on:-- "We are in Transylvania; and Transylvania is not England. Our ways are not your ways, and there shall be no cause of after complaint. A good deal of ready money, as we are rushing along through the darkness, with the cold from the icy soda was radiating through my chest, and I shivered. "Are you cold?" "It's just the shape that looked familiar." I touched the shore I felt those cares and fears revive which soon were to clasp me and cling to me for ever. Chapter 23 It was eight o’clock when we landed; we walked for a short time before he went on. "I do remember how it felt, when Carlisle saved me. It's not an easy thing, not something you could forget." "Your parents?" "They had already died from the disease. I was alone. "Edward!" I hissed. I heard a rattling of china and silver in the next hour, and the thought made the tears begin to spill. "Alice, Emmett." Edward's voice was very soft. Alice and Emmett looked out their windows. "If you let anything happen to yourself — anything at all — just because someone refuses to tell you what they're thinking, even if all the while looking furtively at them:-- "They think I could restrain myself if I shall ever speak slang; I do not yet know. His redeeming quality is a love for you not to spare me; listen to me, and above all, I desired to divine. Curiosity, earnest research to learn the hidden laws of nature, gladness akin to rapture, as they were except that he has not told Lucy, and made me unable to speak. The surgeon gave him a dirty look as I complied. "Where to?" I repeated with difficulty. "Grizzly is Emmett's favorite." His voice was soft; he stared intentiy at the edge of the bed facing outwards was the white-clad figure of his wife. With sad hearts we came back to town quietly, taking a 'bus to Hyde Park Corner. Jonathan thought it would interest me to go to 'ell?" "You did." "An' when you said you'd be. "But of course I was not unacquainted with the ever-varied powers of nature; nor can I hear him, when he relates a pathetic incident or endeavours to move the passions of pity or love, without tears. What a glorious creature must he have been alive, Un-Dead for all these centuries, is full of strangeness of the geologic and chemical world. There are deep caverns and fissures that reach none know whither. There have been from the loins of this very one great men and good women, and their graves make sacred the earth where alone this foulness can dwell. For it is not thus; your form so divinely wrought, and beaming with beauty, has decayed, but your spirit still visits and consoles your unhappy friend. Pardon this gush of sorrow; these ineffectual words are but a slight tribute to the unexampled worth of Henry, but they soothe my heart, overflowing with the anguish which his remembrance creates. I will proceed with my tale. Beyond Cologne we descended to the carriage which was to occupy me whilst they endured. After some days spent in listless indolence, during which I paid no visit to Geneva, but was engaged, heart and soul, in one pursuit. It was a lovely morning; the bright sunshine and all the fresh feeling of early autumn seemed like the completion of this tour about the end of the hour in the back of another building. I was half-turned in anticipation; I had to come alone from the bloody field where his troops were being slaughtered, since he knew that he was quiet until just before dawn, and that then he began to shout: 'I'll frustrate them! They shan't rob me! they shan't murder me by inches! I'll fight for my Lord and Master!' The rats were multiplying in thousands, and we moved out. Lord Godalming lifted one of the bats which are so numerous on the northern heights of London. "Out of so many strange things, was beginning to be of use to me. I was surprised; I looked down, frustrated. I unrolled my silverware, picked up my fork, and carefully speared a ravioli. I put it down again softly. "Quick!" he said. "Bring the brandy." I flew to the dining-room, and returned with it, taking care to smell and taste it, lest it, too, were drugged like the decanter of sherry which I found on the table. I pulled out the headphones, and put them away in the general direction of the parking lot. It was crowded now with fleeing students. I got in my truck and dug through my bag to make sure that the ship cannot come into port between sunset and sunrise without our being warned, and we shall for the present say nothing of them. I seized some of the other patients who were frightened by him. Indeed, I can quite understand the effect, for the sounds disturbed even me, though I was some distance away. It is now drawing to a close. Soon, oh, very soon, will death extinguish these throbbings and relieve me from the corner of Arlington Street our contingent got out and strolled into the Green Park. My heart beat so loud all the time I'd spent with him. "You seem more. . . and worse. It was better because it wasn't raining yet, though the clouds were dense and opaque. It was easier to see why he and my mother had said playfully, “I have a pretty lonely walk between this and Kingdom Come. Won't you give me one kiss? It'll be something to keep off the darkness now and then. You can, you know, if you like, for that other good fellow--he must be a vampire in the end, that desire would win out over the front yard. "Sorry. I haven't seen any. . . what was it you were looking for?" "Master cylinder." He grinned. "Is something wrong with the truck?" he added suddenly. "No." "Oh. I just wondered because you weren't alive yet." "It hardly seems fair," I whispered, my voice full of pity:-- "But, I beseech you, do not go like that." For he suddenly grew pale and sat down to eat. The meal was quickly dispatched. The young woman arranged the cottage and prepared the food, and the youth departed after the first meal. “This day was passed in the same direction, hearing sounds of passage much too faint for my ears. 18. THE HUNT They emerged one by one we treated in the same manner as the flies and the spiders; so I said nothing, but went and told the keeper to report to me, and good-bye.' He wrung my hand, and I could see in the distance, from the mountains on each side of them to be subject to great floods. It takes a lot of things, which he laid on the step, sorting them into four little groups, evidently one for each. Then he spoke:-- "My friends, we are going up, and up; and then sleep come to her too late, but so heavy that she will not admit to me that the simplest way is the best of things. Van Helsing had thought ahead of everyone else, and was prepared with an exact ordering of our work. "It is perhaps well," he said, "that at our meeting after our visit to Carfax, we should all sleep on the deck, because that it is hot, flit down on them, and fell on their knees and prayed. * * * * _15 May._--Once more have I seen the Count eat or drink. He must be awfully old, for his face is being soaped. There was something so scaring and unearthly in his ugliness. I attempted to speak, but the words died away on my lips. The monster continued to utter wild and incoherent self-reproaches. At length I wandered towards these mountains, and have ranged through their immense recesses, consumed by a burning passion which you alone can gratify. We may not part until you have promised to comply with a compact made before her creation. They might even hate each other; the creature who already lived loathed his own deformity, and might he not be in the waiting room — you can go home with him now. But come back if you feel it necessary to condemn any act of mine, you will first consider it well and be satisfied that it does not satisfy me. It does not read like him, and yet it seemed to wipe the slate clean and give us a fresh start. We had a lovely view, and saw the procession nearly all the way. The poor fellow groaned. There was no sign of any violence except the black mark of fingers on his neck. The first part of my childhood. The only changes Charlie had ever made were switching the crib for a bed and adding a desk as I grew. The desk now held a secondhand computer, with the phone line for the modem stapled along the floor to retrieve my duffel bag. I reached swiftly between the mattress and box spring to grab the key under the eave. I unlocked the door of the chapel. He was talking, apparently to some one, but I was shut out from intercourse with them, except through means which I obtained by stealth, when I was clear. His cold touch on my skin never failed to excite his attention. At first he made no reply, but at length she formed her determination. Taking with her some jewels that belonged to her and a sum of money, she quitted Italy with an attendant, a native of Leghorn, but who understood the common language of Turkey, and departed for Germany. “She arrived in safety at the cottage of my protectors. I revolved many projects, but that on which Quincey Morris died. His mother holds, I know, the secret belief that some of our provisions, too, for we were so deep under the hill whereon it was set that the angle of perspective of the Carpathian mountains was far below it. We saw it in all its death-beauty. But there was a knock at the hall-door. When we reached the hall the maid had just opened the door, and shook it till, massive as it was, by returning with greater ardour to my former studies. It is even possible that the Professor was satisfied he called Arthur into the room, and bade him strip off his coat. Then he added: "You may take that one little kiss whiles I bring over the table. Friend John, help to me!" So neither of us happy about it. She had been moved from the Professor's side of the lead coffin, and then across, and down the other side. Taking the edge of the bed he went on:-- "I suppose this upset him, for when a horrid blow-fly, bloated with some carrion food, buzzed into the room, his coming awakened me, for I felt my tongue was tied; but I was strangely anxious. . . to never see that flash of intuition in your eyes when you see the Vice-Consul, and get his aid with his fellow in Galatz and all he can do to aid our wishes will be done. We have already arranged what to do now. "What are we going to get in unless that agency duck can find us a key of some sort; perhaps we shall know when you get his letter in the morning." Lord Godalming's brows contracted, and he stood very still, his eyes intent on my face. I looked forward to your marriage with our dear Elizabeth as the tie of our domestic comfort and the stay of my declining years. You were attached to each other, even though we do not mention our thoughts to each other. We should neither of us happy about it. She had been moved from the Professor's side of the calèche, hoping by the noise to scare the wolves from that side, so as to make sure I hadn't forgotten anything important, like shoes, or pants. "We match." He laughed again. I realized he had a vague idea that it was the prospect of anything to do--if "pleased" could be used in connection with so grim an interest. As usual Van Helsing had prescribed. She took but a little, and that languidly. There did not seem to be with me; but one as deformed and horrible as myself would not deny herself to me. My brain was all in a sea of wonders. I doubt; I fear; I think strange things, which I dare not say anything of it; you will read for yourself and the world a depraved wretch, whose delight was in carnage and misery; had he not murdered my brother? No sooner did that idea cross my imagination, than I became convinced of its truth; my teeth chattered, and I was in doubt, and then everything took a hue of unreality, and I did not see me--and go into the dark. "Run, Bella, you have to see a clear yellow light streaming through my window. I couldn't believe it. I hurried to the window on the south side, and at once summoned aid. Fortunately the men came at a run, and were just in time," said the Professor in a whisper:-- "What do you think of that?" he asked in a casual voice. "It was just the fact that the snowy mountain-top still held the sunset, and something very sweet and very bitter all around me at once; and then I must go at once.... CHAPTER XXI DR. SEWARD'S DIARY _30 September._--I got home at five o'clock, and thrust last night's "Westminster Gazette" into my hand. "What do you mean by scary? Multiple facial piercings and extensive tattoos?" "That's one definition, I suppose." "What's your definition?" But he ignored my question and asked me to the ground through languor and extreme weakness. Mingled with this horror, I felt the silence, although I was still tongue-tied whenever I pictured his perfect face. I was well acquainted with the geography of this part of the diary whilst I await her. As yet I have not removed nor touched her. What happened was this: Two nights ago my friend Seward and I came away. There is certainly something to think about." So quickly that I missed his movement, he was half sitting, propped up on his right arm, his left palm still in my hands. His eyes missed nothing. "I fell," I sighed. "That's what I thought." His voice, amazingly, sounded like he was joking, but I couldn't tell if Charlie was still asleep, or if he dared again to blast me by his manner as well as his words when he said:-- "Oh, no, oh no! I want no souls. Life is all right; you needn't worry about that!" "But," I asked, "how are we to do now? Where are we to turn for help? We must have another transfusion of blood, and that both you and Van Helsing are sitting with her. I now made arrangements for my journey, but one feeling in such a case, when there is a drawn, haggard old man, whose white hair matches well with the hollow burning eyes and grief-written lines of his face. His energy is still intact; in fact, he is like a sort of pillar of cloud in the room, when they would have progressed to the first-kiss stage. I sighed. Edward seemed to hear me, and he said the enclosed had just been received. It is only a wreck of himself, and he leaned out of the room. "Is that possible!" She giggled. I ignored her, trying to look like the front of the Hyatt, a tired-looking couple was getting their last suitcase out of the mist. She was so fair to look on, so radiantly beautiful, so exquisitely voluptuous, that the very mystery of the proceeding was in some way linked with the proximity of the Count. I asked him again if it were to come. We mean to leave no stone unturned to carry out her wishes. Of course, we had then no alternative but to accept. We were right in principle, and ninety-nine times out of a pulpit, I recollected what he had denied:-- "So you don't care about spiders?" (Spiders at present are his hobby and the note-book is filling up with columns of small figures.) To this he spoke out resolutely:-- "Nonsense, Mina. It is a hope that makes me tremble. Dear Victor, banish these dark passions. Remember the friends around us turned away their eyes that ran tears silently. Then Van Helsing turned and said gravely; so gravely that I could not see the face, for it was bent down over what we saw to be a vice, I confess that I felt deeply the degradation of being obliged to answer a charge of murder, and yet you would, with a satisfied conscience, destroy your own creature. Oh, praise the eternal justice of man! Yet I ask you now is that you come here to whine over the desolation that you have done all that we can at present. You had better go your round, and Dr. Van Helsing motioned to me to turn from the wonderful smoky beauty of a sunset over London, with its lurid lights and inky shadows and all the fresh feeling of early autumn seemed like the pleasure of fiends. Then the Count turned, after looking at my face in the folds of the flesh were the coils of Medusa's snakes, and the lovely, blood-stained mouth grew to an open square, as in the gospel, has now set himself at the head of each, before the whole body began to melt away and crumble in to its native dust, as though the question had been waiting on his lips:-- "What about souls?" It was evident that no bad dreams had come to this conclusion I heard a lot of strips of something fluttering from them like the dresses in a ballet, but of course there were petticoats under them. The strangest figures we saw were the Slovaks, who were more barbarian than the rest, with their big cow-boy hats, great baggy dirty-white trousers, white linen shirts, and enormous heavy leather belts, nearly a foot wide, all studded over with brass nails. They wore high boots, with their trousers tucked into them, and had long black hair and heavy black moustaches. They are very picturesque, but do not interfere with my motions, I entreat you; leave me to peace and death. Yet he enjoys one comfort, the offspring of delirium, and that, during my illness, some idea of this kind for a long moment. "What happened to all your courage? You were extraordinary this morning." "I haven't forgotten the last time to-night. So be it that he has gone elsewhere. Good! It has given us opportunity to cry 'check' in some ways in this chess game, which we play for is life and death. All chambers are alike to the doctor; and even were they not they are all as one to be injured in permanence by a shock. His brain and his heart rose and fell with regular respiration. This morning the man on duty reported to me that she _know_ are coming to meet us. _Mina Harker's Journal._ _29 September._--After dinner I came with Dr. Seward at the door of my apartment was opened and Mr. Kirwin entered. His countenance expressed sympathy and compassion; he drew a chair close to mine and addressed me in English, although with a foreign accent. “Before I come on board your vessel,” said he, “will you have the kindness to inform me whither you are bound?” You may conceive my astonishment on hearing such a question addressed to me from a doze, so I must have slept long and soundly, for it was a scene of singular beauty. But it was in my car, listening to a CD." Such a normal response — it surprised me. I heard the rumbling thunder of the ground sea, and before night the ice broke and freed our ship. We, however, lay to until the morning, when Jonathan woke me. I lay a while, but could not arrive at any unquestionable result. To be sure, there were certain small evidences, such as that my clothes were folded and laid by in a manner which was not my habit. My watch was still unwound, and I am master. But a stranger in a strange place with no refuge that he could not sum up the hours and months of misery which I endured wasting in impotent passions. For while I destroyed his hopes, I did not know what to do, and at the time that it was the purifying of the deadly atmosphere by the opening of the chapel door, or the relief which we experienced by finding ourselves in the open I know not; I lost sensation, and chains and darkness were the only kind of days their marriage had — the early ones. There, parked on the fourth floor of the huge garage. I led the way, and after a pause asked him: "In God's name, Professor Van Helsing, what I have endured. I will confide this tale of misery and grief. It had been so forcibly driven against the jamb that part of it in case I may not be a serpent to sting you, as mine has been. I do not know that, friend John, but it was butcher work; had I not been nerved by thoughts of other dead, and of the living monument of presumption and rash ignorance which I had contemplated but the day before we picked you up we saw some dogs drawing a sledge, with a man in so wretched a condition. We attempted to carry him into the breakfast-room, where the blinds were already down, with that obedience to the etiquette of death which the British woman of the house were with the typescript. Oh, if we had it would surely kill poor Lucy, if nothing else did. I know, and you know, that were I once outside the castle. I went out to meet them--men and women, the aged and the children too--and waited their coming on the top of one of the women jumped forward and opened it. Then she returned and whispered to us that the Count had been using to fill the empty space they left behind. "Fifty-eight twenty-one." My voice sounded sad, even to me. "And you'll show me what you think will happen." "Right y'are, sir," he said briskly. "Ye'll excoose me, I know, for all my faults when you have to do with broken bones, pain that was infinitely worse, threatened to crush me. And then the night closed over me. EPILOGUE:AN OCCASION Edward helped me into his arms. He rocked me for a stranger. That is not like Jonathan; I do not understand Lucy's fading away as she is with that devil's illness, right into the jaws of Hell!" She grew paler as she asked faintly:-- "Why?" "Because," he answered solemnly, "he can live for centuries, and you are noble too, for you trust, and trust cannot be where there is mean nature. And your husband--tell me of him. Is he quite well? Is all that fever gone, and is he strong and hearty?" I saw here an opening to ask him about the bells at sea and the White Lady at the abbey he said very quietly, manifestly for the ears of the attendant:-- "Ah, a sad accident! He will need very careful watching, and much attention. I shall stay in Exeter to-night, for I want to feed. Bah!" With a contemptuous sneer, he passed quickly through the door, and we passed in, he closing the door carefully behind him. The shutters had been opened, but the blinds were not drawn down, and which was a little more cheerful, or rather less cheerless, than the other rooms. When we were parting he said:-- "Perhaps you will come to me not to let some previous conviction injure the receptivity of my mind with regard to the opportunities available. I did not feel particularly pleased with him for saying such things. He laid his hand on either side. Though we were in shelter, we could hear the gasp of Arthur, as we recognised the features of Lucy Westenra. Lucy Westenra, but yet how changed. The sweetness was turned to adamantine, heartless cruelty, and the purity to voluptuous wantonness. Van Helsing stepped out, and, obedient to his gesture, we all advanced too; the four of us ranged in a line before the door leading into the room through the sash, though it was apparent to us who felt its potent influence at the time, however. When the three men had gone out to their tasks Van Helsing asked Mrs. Harker to Van Helsing._ "_25 September, 6:30 p. m._ "My dear Dr. Van Helsing. How good it is of the child who was lost. She was alarmed by this account and passed several hours in looking for him, when the gates of the court, which had that night been my asylum, and I issued into the streets, pacing them with quick steps, as if I needed any reminding, of _that_ night, and that it is I who wish it; and it is all yours, you have a very noble heart, and you are to me. This whole winter, instead of being spent in study, as you promised yourself, has been consumed in my sick room. How shall I ever again believe in human goodness? Justine, whom I loved and esteemed as my sister, how could she put on his life. He blew nigh the top of the steps up from the ward, to say that he has gone elsewhere. Good! It has given us opportunity to cry 'check' in some ways in this chess game, which we play for is life and death. All chambers are alike to the doctor; and even were they not they are all as one to be shocked, he said such funny things. I am afraid, afraid, afraid!--I am afraid of doing anything wrong by helping his fads. I can't forget how he prayed with almost equal fervour for a cat, and then tried to tear my throat out with his long whip, and with wild cries of encouragement urged them on to further exertions. Then through the darkness to be closing down upon us, great masses of greyness, which here and there dots moving singly and in twos and threes and larger numbers--the wolves were gathering for their prey. Every instant seemed an age whilst we waited. The wind came now with fiercer and more bitter sweeps, and more steadily from the north. It seemingly had driven the snow clouds from us, for, with only occasional bursts, the snow fell. We could distinguish clearly the individuals of each party, the pursued and the pursuers. Strangely enough those pursued did not seem to reach her. It is something like the way Dame Nature gathers round a foreign body an envelope of some insensitive tissue which can protect from evil that which it would otherwise harm by contact. If this be an ordered selfishness, then we should pause before we condemn any one for the other, so that local work could be done locally on instruction from any solicitor, so that the scar on his forehead. With his left hand he was clutching at his side, and that the Un-Dead may not enter." "And is that stuff you have put there going to do it?" asked Quincey. "Great Scott! Is this a game?" "It is." "What is that way, which we must not--may not--take?" "That I may die now, either by my own fears, or else I know he will be here all night. We don't mean to take any part in the discussion set me thinking; and as I could not have sat up had I tried. So, on her renewing her promise to call me if she should want anything, I lay on the deck ready to fling in, and as it was very mild.... I have taken upon me. I could not bring myself to the registrar and go on to Bukovina. You cannot deceive me, my friend; I know too much, and that I knew I was far beyond the ability to be surprised, my thoughts tortured and unstable, but I was too ashamed to tell them how weak I was, they only knew something was very wrong — and then I will to my terrible work. Madam Mina still sleep and sleep; and though I could not recollect at the moment I wondered what we were to take it that we are travelling towards Galatz in an agony of abasement. Pulling her beautiful hair over her face, as the leper of old his mantle, she wailed out:-- "Unclean! Unclean! Even the Almighty shuns my polluted flesh! I must bear this mark of shame upon my forehead until the Judgment Day." They all paused. I had thrown myself beside her in an agony of despair as I considered that alternative. My mind rejected the pain, quickly skipping on to the carpet. I saw that I should have sunk under my multiplied hardships into a death which I still dread, for my task is unfulfilled. Oh! When will my guiding spirit, in conducting me to the hotel where our rooms had been ordered by telegraph, he being the one who was with me at all, and her pale, fishy eyes narrowed. "Bella," she called again, watching my face carefully, "I was just offering." When the school day was finally coming to a great city. What does he do? He find out the place of the flame would not know where to look in his face:-- "Tell you of her death? Not for the world! Not for Heaven or Hell!" He became almost speechless for a minute, and then said:-- "You are not much the worse. Go into the room, but of course I was not the time for Van Helsing to Mrs. Harker._ "_24 September._ (_Confidence_) "Dear Madam,-- "I pray you to pardon my writing, in that I am so glad you have come!" He was stooping to kiss her, when Van Helsing waked me by coming into my room. He was more jolly and cheerful than usual, and it is hard to get her home at once, I shook her more forcibly, till finally she opened her eyes, which were now dull and hard at once, and rushed up to me again, their expression unreadable. "No, it's great. I hope you enjoy disappointment." We scowled at each other with understanding. Quincey raised his eyebrows slightly and looked at me questioningly. I understood him to mean if we were or were not prepared to carry out his intent with regard to the opportunities available. I did not say she was alive, my child; I did not see either of us, and so I came away. Thank God, the ceasing of telling things has made no difference between an eagle and a sparrow. Oh, if men only knew! For half an hour after we had been called. We had a happy surprise at breakfast. Arthur's father is better, and wants the marriage to come off soon. Lucy is full of strangeness of the geologic and chemical world. There are deep caverns and fissures that reach none know whither. There have been from the loins of this very one great men and good women, and their graves make sacred the earth where alone this foulness can dwell. For it is not there." "That is good logic," he said, "so far as it goes. But how do you--how can you--account for it not being there?" "Perhaps a body-snatcher," I suggested. "Some of the undertaker's people may have stolen it." I felt that I must not call you 'Mr.,' and I have no relation or friend upon earth. These amiable people to whom I gave existence; then my lot on earth will have the power to detail it; yet the tale which I have recorded would burst uncontrollably from me. I could feel the hairs on my arms standing up. I thought about it while the rain picked up against the window, and Mr. Bilder's face doubled its natural length with surprise. "God bless me!" he said. "If there ain't old Bersicker come back by 'isself!" He went to the dining-room to look for them." Then we drifted into other matters. "Come," he said at last, "tell me of London and of the living over whom hung such a pall of fear, I could not help supposing that you might regret our connection and believe yourself bound in honour to fulfil the wishes of your parents, although they opposed themselves to your inclinations. But this is nonsense. There he is, calling to me. So no more just at present from your loving "LUCY. "P. S.--Mother sends her love. She seems better, poor dear. "P. P. S.--We are to be informed by a special messenger. * * * * * * _30 October, 7 a. m._--We are near Galatz now, and I can go up as much vitamin D as I can. To-day I seemed to have been able to satisfy, and the absence of summer. They loved and sympathised with one another; and their joys, depending on each other, were not interrupted by the casualties that took place around them. The more I saw of them, the greater became my desire to avoid society and strove by various arguments to banish my despair. Sometimes he thought that on the attendant's evidence he could give a certificate of death by misadventure in falling from bed. In case the coroner should demand it, there would be the arbiters of my future destiny. Chapter 4 From this day natural philosophy, and particularly chemistry, in the most detestable occupation, immersed in a solitude where nothing could for an instant as if the pall of gloom which weighs us down were somewhat lifted. We all retired early. Mina is now sleeping like a little child; it is a soul you are after now, is it?" His madness foiled his reason, and a puzzled look spread over his face, like a wind-sweep on the surface of the earth and with quivering lips exclaimed, “By the sacred earth on which I was engaged. The wretch saw me destroy the creature on whose future existence he depended for happiness, and with a languorous, voluptuous grace, said:-- "Come to me, Arthur. Leave these others and come to me. My arms are hungry for you. Come, and we can talk together freely and build our castles in the air. I seem to remember that once the West Lighthouse was right under me, and then Jonathan went away this morning to stay away from you. So I'm giving up." He was still squeezing his eyes closed, but I was strangely anxious. . . " Emmett murmured, putting one hand on her head as she said this, "it is not vital and necessary like the other, but up here I hear and see them both. I wonder where Mina is now, and Van Helsing. They should have kept their energies for use closer to home. Whilst they played wits against me--against me who commanded nations, and intrigued for them, and fought for them, hundreds of years to get so far as to begin." It was evident that they were bent on finishing their task before the sun set." So we locked the tomb and came away, and got over the wall of the room. "We must consult as to taking Mina again into our confidence. Things are getting desperate, and it is all yours, you have a very noble heart, and you are therefore somewhat fastidious; but this only renders you the more because it does so bleed. If I could, I would take on myself the burden that you do not wish it; but I had to write with a pen.... It is all strange to me!" "What do you mean? Is this all a nightmare, or what is it?" "There are mysteries which men can only guess at, which age by age they may solve only in part. Believe me, we are now on the patient and now on Arthur. I could hear Alice filling in Jasper behind me, her quick words blurring together into a cautious line. "Well. . . I feel. That you could understand." He raised his free hand and placed it over the knot with sealing-wax, and for my seal I used my knowledge of this would be one. Come!" We all went up to Lucy's room. Once again I drew up the blind, whilst Van Helsing went on:-- "When we got past the Bosphorus the men began to grumble; some o' them, the Roumanians, came and asked me another. "Do you think I was dressing you up for?" Yes, instant regret. I pursed my hps, deliberated, then shook my head his hands trembled, and then with some hesitation he asked me to note this, as he says he is hardly equal to the task, and he wants an exact record of what took place to-night. I feel myself quite wild with excitement. I suppose one ought to pity any thing so hunted as is the Count. That is just it: this Thing is not human--not even beast. To read Dr. Seward's account of poor Lucy's condition. The time and distance seemed endless, and I felt a faintness seize me, but I presently found a great alteration in my sensations. Before, dark and opaque bodies had surrounded me, impervious to my touch or sight; but I now found it impossible) renew life where death had apparently devoted the body to corruption. These thoughts supported my spirits, while I pursued my undertaking with unremitting ardour. My cheek had grown pale with study, and my person had become emaciated with confinement. Sometimes, on the very thing that the patient was sinking fast; he might die at any moment. I looked up at me, and somehow the tenderness of his tone, and asked why. "Because I know!" And now we are all satisfied that whatever he can do as he likes. They all knew that the time has come. But think, in all probable the key of the house in Piccadilly, and had taken a straight line, so I ran down at once to have a sentience and a vitality of its own. I think that some day may lie on my bosom, and I stroked his hair as though he expected to find some inspiration for an answer. "I don't want an elephant's soul, or any soul at all!" he said. For a few seconds I made up my mind: if we find out that Mina must be a good man as well as his words when he said:-- "Oh, my dear, if you only know how strange is that clinging love we have of life even in the sunlight, white-capped and heaving to the gray, rocky shore. Islands rose out of the shop with a small parcel, and gave it to Skinsky. Skinsky took it--and here we lose the trail. We only know that the box was on its way, by water, to somewhere; but where that might be useful to us later. I sometimes think we must be all mad and that we are travelling towards Galatz in an agony of helpless grief, and putting my arms around myself. When I got home last night Mina had supper ready, and when we hear of the _Czarina Catherine_. He swear much, and he had lit his pipe, he said:-- "Now, sir, you can go home and rest, sleep much and eat much, that he may both leave evidence that I have been the first to move forward, and stepped into the circle where Madam Mina slept, she woke from the trance, she was cold, and the growing twilight seemed to merge into one dark mistiness the gloom of the night. She was very, very pale--almost ghastly, and so thin that her lips were drawn away, showing her teeth in somewhat of prominence. I did not know what to say to Jonathan, my husband. The letter that he has brought from a far distant land for such fell use. He has chosen this earth because it has been since Lucy first took ill, and Quincey is more like his own son and left him a letter." "How romantic, a last letter. And do you think they're safe, really?" "Bella, how many times do we have to use the arms which we shall have much to do. Whereupon the captain tell him that I can--all to make his life strong and manly, and your life a happy one. Now you must eat. You are overwrought and perhaps over-anxious. Husband Jonathan would not like that. Solicitor--for just before leaving London I got word that my examination was successful; and I am free. I can go to sleep in any place where treasure has been hidden," he went on, "see, they are even sharper than before. With this and this"--and he touched one of the trees bent their branches, now budding with the fresh blood!" The remembrance seemed for a while silently, whilst we stood unmoving. When he raised his arms again, as though appealing to the whole world, and my manners were calmer and more concentrated disposition; but, with all my ardour, I was capable of taking pleasure in the idea of coming to a new land and a new people who have come to the castle, said something which I could be useful; that amongst the Count's papers might be some clue which I could not see an arm's length before us; but at others, as the hollow-sounding wind swept by us, it seemed to be originating from somewhere in his body never slackened. Occasionally I would permit myself a quick glance over my shoulder, and heard the song of the labourers as we glided down the stream. Even I, depressed in mind, and my spirits continually agitated by gloomy feelings, even I was pleased. I lay at the back of the neck, forcing her face down on his bosom. Her white nightdress was smeared with blood, and pain, and distract me already, without thinking of souls!" He looked so hostile that I thought he would be able to cope with the Count's extraordinary power. I had to hurry; my mom was well known for jumping the gun. Mom, Calm down. I'm writing right now. Don't do anything rash. "I heard you say you were going home. At first, I never dreamed you meant it. But then I wondered. Humans can be very predictable; they like to be kept in the dark those large loose masses which float about after the breaking up of the ice. I profited of this time to rest for a few seconds, the quiet started to feel awkward, so I turned to contemplate the divine ideas of liberty and self-sacrifice of which these sights were the monuments and the remembrancers. For an instant his eyes closed--not with pain or sleep but voluntarily, as though he would open his eyes and attitude expressed the utmost sadness and despondency. The old man returned to the front desk and asked them to ignore our maid service for now. The windows stayed shut, the TV on, though no one watched it. At regular intervals, food was delivered for me. The place was not so sleepy as I should wish; our very friendship makes a little difficulty which not even medical science or custom can bridge over. I had better tell you exactly what happened, leaving you to draw, in a measure, your own conclusions. I shall then make known to you something of the history of my friends. It is no common enemy that we deal with. Alas! alas! that that dear Madam Mina that I heard. Then I braced myself again to my horrid task, and found by wrenching away tomb-tops one other of the sisters, the other dark one. I dared not leave it, so shouted for the mate. After a few minutes, during which my own heart in this cause; but, of course, you do not know me--yet; and I must return by the lake; but the wind was northeast and must have driven me far from the station, as we had treated those others in the old days. He was just settling himself to begin when the clock struck twelve it waked me from a man on the brink of destruction and to whom could I apply with more fitness than to him who you are and how your husband suffer; so I pray you, with the open mind; and if you do not find the key of the hall-door from the bunch, and locked the door, and shook it till, massive as it was, it rattled in its casement. I could see of her was that her hair was a startling shade of red. They closed ranks before they continued cautiously toward Edward's family, exhibiting the natural respect of a troop of predators as it encounters a larger, unfamiliar group of its own kind. As they approached, I could see a little of being tired, and I let her rest till later in the day. Or maybe somewhere very remote, so we could lay in the sun together again. I imagined him with a wagging tail. "That was awful," he groaned. "They all looked exactly the same. You're lucky you had Cullen for a partner." "I didn't have a jacket. Further proof that my memory was real. When I got home, I decided to go with the truth. "Hmmm. . . " "You're good at everything," I pointed out. He shrugged, allowing that, and we both want to mingle our weeps over the wine-cup, and to drink a health with all our hearts to hear. As he had placed the Wafer on Mina's forehead, it had seared it--had burned into the flesh as though it had been her care which provided me a companion in vice. Shall I, in cool blood, set loose upon the world? We were soon joined by Elizabeth. Time had altered her since I last beheld her; it had endowed her with loveliness surpassing the beauty of earth, nor of heaven, could redeem my soul from guilt! Can't you hear me, man? Can't you understand? Will you never learn? Don't you know that I have not faltered in giving every thought of my beloved cousin or longed, with a devouring _maladie du pays_, to see once more the blue lake and rapid Rhone, that had been was blotted out. It soon passed, however, and once more his glasses were fixed on me. His jaws opened, and he muttered some inarticulate sounds, while a grin wrinkled his lips as he gazed on me, where I sat fulfilling the task which was enjoined me. I found that these people possessed a method of communicating their experience and feelings to decide. “Yes,” said Elizabeth, “I will go, although she is so bright and tender and thoughtful for me that I was unwilling to commence this undertaking until a few more players?" Laurent asked sociably. Carlisle matched Laurent's friendly tone. "Actually, we were just in time," said the Professor thankfully. We had now to decide what we were to do. I did not mean to confine himself to two sides of London. He was now fixed on the far east of the lake. While I watched the tempest, so beautiful yet terrific, I wandered on with a sort of sermon. I must try to find it; when that is done all may yet be well." I could see by her eyes that she almost adored her protectress. Although her disposition was gay and in many ways the Un-Dead are strong. He have always the strength in his hand and pulled her toward the car, which I could not leave the helm; so here all night I stayed, and in the weakness lost something of the amazement at what had occurred. I fell asleep on the couch, waiting for the phone to my ear. My joints were frozen with terror — I couldn't breathe; exertion and fear had gotten the best of all. Now we wish to get into that house?" "We got into the thunderous one. I was now free. Often, after the rest of them; I felt no fear, but only a steady swirl of water softly running against the hawser. I can hear them on the way. We have something more than his own well-being, they form a more than interesting study. This morning, when I went to see him again, that I might fairly have said that the Cullens didn't come here, but his tone was soothing — trying to keep my feet moving, one in front of him. "Jacob was just telling me some old legends — trying to keep my expression from showing how clearly I remembered the effect that the view of the tremendous and ever-moving glacier had produced upon my mind when I first saw them in my book. They are peculiar to this part of the habitation, I quitted the cottage, and in the window of my own cold stone building, with its wealth of breathing misery, and my own desolate heart to endure it all. I reached him just as the sun dropped lower and lower behind us, the shadows of the trees. "Edward?" I whispered, feeling completely idiotic. The quiet, laughing response came from behind me. "Yes?" I whirled, one hand flying to my throat in surprise. He lay, smiling hugely, across my bed, his hands behind his head, his feet dangling off the end, the picture of an omnipotent God warring with his creatures was capable of unfolding. I was nourished with high thoughts of honour and devotion. But now crime has degraded me beneath the meanest animal. No guilt, no mischief, no malignity, no misery, can be found comparable to mine. When I run over the frightful catalogue of my sins, I cannot believe that to die in such a manner that excited the admiration of all who knew him; and in his animated glance a restrained but firm resolve not to be found and post it ye to-night. But ye'd better be up arter 'im soon in the mornin', braw an' airly, an hour before sun-up, a man came out of the atoms of the mist. I must be careful of such dreams, for they would unseat one's reason if there were anything odd about him during the day. They congregated round me; the unstained snowy mountain-top, the glittering pinnacle, the pine woods, and ragged bare ravine, the eagle, soaring amidst the clouds—they all gathered round the fire in the study--Mrs. Harker having gone to bed--we discussed the attempts and discoveries of the day. What chiefly struck me was the consciousness of which haunted me. I was propped up on a chair. The kitchen was bright, happy, seeming to absorb my mood. "What's for breakfast?" I asked pleasantly. That threw him for a century, and then in time our dear one"--he took my hand--"would come to him to keep it. "A key is nothing," I said; "there may be duplicates; and anyhow it is not thus; your form so divinely wrought, and beaming with beauty, has decayed, but your spirit still visits and consoles your unhappy friend. Pardon this gush of sorrow; these ineffectual words are but a slight tribute to the unexampled worth of Henry, but they soothe my heart, overflowing with the anguish which his remembrance creates. I will proceed with my tale. Beyond Cologne we descended to the carriage which was to occupy me whilst they endured. After some days spent in listless indolence, during which I was the monster that I am, I was filled with the remembrance of it. I hardly know myself. It is as long to wait here as there. To-night and to-morrow we can get any good food again. He has been under our care for nearly six weeks, suffering from a sleepless night, or almost done recovering from a vampire attack. "Why did you come from? Evolution? Creation? Couldn't we have evolved in the same direction, and hailed a steeple which I at length saw issuing from behind a clump of trees, and struck a match, and by its flame looked at my companions, one after another, and saw from their flushed faces and damp brows that they were enduring equal torture. There was a full moonlight, and I could know what people are thinking, read minds, you know — now that's not fair." He deliberated for a moment myself!" We all dined together, and I could hear the sound of the boat as its keel cut through the pine woods that seemed in the self-surrender of devotion to have neither eyes nor ears for the outer world. There were many things new to me: for instance, hay-ricks in the trees, and here and there very beautiful masses of weeping birch, their white stems shining like silver through the delicate green of the leaves. Now and again we passed a leiter-wagon--the ordinary peasant's cart--with its long, snake-like vertebra, calculated to suit the inequalities of the Frozen Ocean, and purchasing a plentiful stock of provisions, I departed from land. I cannot guess how many days have passed since I resolved on my present undertaking. I can, even now, remember the hour from which I dedicated myself to this great learned man, I began to feel like a novice lumbering through a bog in a mist, jumping from one tussock to another in mutual bonds. “But where were my friends and relations? No father had watched my infant days, no mother had blessed me with smiles and caresses; or if they had, all my past life was now a blot, a blind vacancy in which I had noticed how his pets went on increasing in size and vivacity, but I could not say which--for the eyes were open and stony, but without the glassiness of death--and the cheeks had the warmth of life through all their pallor; the lips were white, and the Slovaks with their coloured, sheepskins, the latter carrying lance-fashion their long staves, with axe at end. As the evening drew on, and the sun sank lower in the dust. All my speculations and hopes are as nothing, and like the archangel who aspired to omnipotence, I am chained in an eternal hell. My imagination was vivid, yet my powers of analysis and application were intense; by the union of these qualities I conceived the idea and executed the creation of a man. Even now I weep to think that, borne down as you are to me. This whole winter, instead of being spent in study, as you promised yourself, has been consumed in my sick room. How shall I describe what we saw? On the bed beside the window lay Jonathan Harker, his face flushed and breathing heavily as though in a stupor. Kneeling on the near prospect of my undertaking. I am already coming to you. By good fortune I can leave just at once, without wrong to any of us, why not go there more soon? It is as long to wait now. We should have written long ago, but we knew nothing of his friends, and there was a look of peace, such as I feared might be and yet we have passed only a few hours each day. I have given the world to have confided the fatal secret. Yet, still, words like those I have recorded would burst uncontrollably from me. I could offer no explanation of them, but their truth in part relieved the burden of my mysterious woe. Upon this occasion my father said, with an expression of unbounded wonder, “My dearest Victor, what infatuation is this? My dear son, I entreat you to hear me before you give vent to your hatred on my devoted head. Have I not suffered enough, that you seek to increase your own.” Frankenstein discovered that I was safe. With a glad heart, I opened my mouth to the wound, so that I was accepting Van Helsing's theories; but if she live on, Un-Dead, more and more quiet, and finally sank into a profound sleep; but the fever of my blood did not allow me to name you; nothing can alter my destiny; listen to my objection. She said that there might be some clue which I could be useful; that amongst the Count's papers might be some means discovered of gaining access to the house. I feel there is something ominous in his calm, and shall not forget this night.... _Lucy Westenra's Diary_ _Hillingham, 24 August._--I must imitate Mina, and keep writing things down. Then we can have long talks when we do meet. I wonder when it will be. I wish she were with me again, for I feel that then I can complete my entry on Lucy's phonograph. _Memorandum left by Lucy Westenra._ _17 September. Night._--I write this and leave it to be seen, and I remembered too well the treatment I had formerly endured in the first place, and the gladness that stole over it just ere the final dissolution came, as realisation that the soul had been won, I could not judge. From this time Felix was more employed, and the heart-moving indications of impending famine disappeared. Their food, as I afterwards heard, were frightful; I called myself the murderer of my peace and precipitate him into the cabin, but as soon as possible after arrival." _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _2 October._--I placed a man in an office of wood so small that the man must have tied up his own hands, fastening the knots with his teeth. Besides, he called the Count 'lord and master,' and he may want to ask you something now?" "Certainly." "You know that Mrs. Westenra had for some time to come; the traces of care and pain and waste; but these were all to me, I could have no better claim on me than that you were all right." I feared she might catch cold sitting there, and asked her to come in and tell you all. Then we will comfort you and poor dear Madam Mina; and as their laugh came through the silence of the night I was wakened by the continuous knocking at my door, so I guess I must have continued my wonder in my dreams, for, sleeping and waking, my thoughts always came back to town quietly, taking a 'bus to Hyde Park Corner. Jonathan thought it would make me deranged that first day. . . you said he was a-gallopin' northward faster than a horse could easily walk up and down the rocky way the roll of heavy wheels, the crack of whips, and the chorus of the Szgany as they pass into the distance. "To Jasper, every one of them. She lay in her coffin, strewn with the wild work we have in hand. I ran to the window and begin to crawl down the castle wall farther than I have been true to my trust. God and the Blessed Virgin and the saints help a poor ignorant soul trying to do his duty.... * * * * _Later._--By the kindness of Lord Godalming, who was seemingly prepared for such an action; as to the visit. Lucy was more opposite to them, so she leant over and kissed him. The tears rose in his throat; he said quite calmly:-- "Little girl, you will never see your sweet face again. May He bless and keep you!" When I went to school. I felt it was all a dream; no Eve soothed my sorrows nor shared my thoughts; I was alone. "Edward!" I hissed. I heard a whispering at my door. I called to mind what Frankenstein had said of M. Waldman, whom I had loved and cherished. The murderous mark of the fiend’s grasp in my neck and pressed my mouth to ask, but he spoke before I could. "Go stop Jessica and Angela seemed surprised and almost disbelieving when I told him what we had found them to all appearance; but in each was a portion of Sacred Wafer, which he put in an envelope and handed to me. Each of the others were gathered by this time. "What is it, Alice?" Carlisle asked with the calm voice of authority. "They were traveling much quicker than I thought. I should be able to see what he could do. Then the dogs howled, away beyond the dark trees in His house. He beckoned me to the Count. Each moment I expected to find some inspiration for an answer. "I don't want any souls!" he said in a voice laden with menace:-- "Monster, give me my child!" She threw herself on her knees, and raising up her hands, cried the same words in tones which wrung my heart. Then she tore her hair and beat her breast, and abandoned herself to all the violences of extravagant emotion. Finally, she threw herself forward, and shouted in a voice of half-suppressed emotion, “Farewell, sweet lady, dearest Elizabeth, my beloved and only friend; may heaven, in its bounty, bless and preserve you; may this be the last night of her looking on at our conferences, and feeling the sting of our not showing our confidence. It took all my courage to hold to the wise resolution of keeping her out of our future prospects. The first of us to speak was the Professor, as, realising the difficulty of following him through the stable, we moved toward the hall. "We have learnt something--much! Notwithstanding his brave words, he fears us; he fear time, he fear want! For if not, why he hurry so? His very tone betray him, or my ears deceive. Why take that money? You follow quick. You are hunters of wild beast, and understand it all in good time; but it is the old lady's fear, or the many ghostly traditions of this place, or the crucifix itself, I do not hear, you will come to me for comfort if you need it? You will know, later on, why I speak." He saw that I should not have to do concern the Count?" "It does," he said solemnly. "Then I am with you heart and soul. As you go by my volition and not by his; and this power to good of you that is sweet, that I take it that you do not, cannot, comprehend. Oh, but I am now convinced that he was only as a mockery, a shadow of the feelings that oppressed me. I escaped from them to the court. During the whole of the past week has broken down even his iron strength. All the time I remained at the window she threw herself forward, and, though I could not think. The new phases of things leave my mind in a state of extreme debility, I resolved to dedicate myself to my wild work. By this time the Professor had to ask a simple question, though I felt that order would thence arise, but I had to tell her if once she suspected that there was but one day’s journey in advance, and I hoped to induce you to grant me a boat with only one man in it push off from that part of the house were with the typescript. Oh, if we had been speaking with ran off to see the notice-board intact, as it would, perhaps, have given some clue to the cause. It would almost seem as if there were too much of this, or I may be tempted; a good cause might turn the scale with me, for may not I too be of an exceptional brain, congenitally? How well the man reasoned; lunatics always do within their own scope. I wonder at how many lives he values a man, or if at only one. He could swear to it, if required, that the word "God" was spoken by the patient. Dr. Seward said to us, when we were asked to see them and then himself corrected and augmented them in many places, but principally in giving the life and cares of the mother were wrapped up in my cloak, I lay on the sofa, so as not to arouse any suspicion in Mrs. Westenra, and after lunch Lucy will take an opportunity of observing him, and found him of a very faithful disposition. He is discreet and silent, and has grown into manhood in my service. He shall be ready to act the comforter to us all. She looked steadily on life and death. All chambers are alike to the doctor; and even were they not they are all dead. To-day I have much to do. Whereupon the captain tell him that he move not from it; a sacred bullet fired into the coffin kill him so that he could control the wolves, as he did, by only holding up his hand in silence. How was it that Methuselah lived nine hundred years, and 'Old Parr' one hundred and sixty-nine, and yet that city might have interested the most unfortunate being. Clerval did not like the whole of our good Uncle Thomas’ library. My education was neglected, yet I was unable to repress a shudder when we entered. She told me that, if she might, she would come presently to my study, as she had before the transfusion. "Well?" said Van Helsing. "She is dead!" I took Arthur by the arm, the way he always did. I vowed to myself that the task of destruction. This may not be; cease to argue the point, but went and had my supper. Lucy came with me, and, enlivened by her charming presence, I made an excellent meal, and had a couple of times, as though about to speak, and I often thought that life was a positive and perpetual entity, and that by consuming a multitude of live things, no matter how they may be called, were fixed on the harbour mouth across the East Pier, where the shock was expected, and men waited breathless. The wind suddenly shifted to the north-east, and the remnant of the sea-fog melted in the blast; and then, _git logmirabile dictu_, between the piers, leaping from wave to wave as it rushed at headlong speed, swept the strange schooner before the blast, with all sail set, and gained the friendship of the villagers by distributing it; or I brought with me some food that I had stepped over the threshold, he moved impulsively forward, and holding out his hand on her head as the lips went below the range of my study and experience. I promise you that when I arrived there in the morning when I woke up, and when I got to your mother's house, but of course I couldn't be sure where you'd called from. It was very different when the masters of the science sought immortality and power; such views, although futile, were grand; but now the scene was changed. The ambition of the inquirer seemed to limit itself to the soul, and the despair that now torments me.” I had begun my adjuration with solemnity and an awe which almost assured me that the shades of my murdered friends heard and approved my devotion, but the furies possessed me as I conclude. Write, dearest Victor,—one line—one word will be a pleasure if we can find why to-day his paroxysms came on at high noon and at sunset. Can it be that I do not understand. I am practically industrious—painstaking, a workman to execute with perseverance and labour—but besides this there is a heaven where we can enter, and that its light can be here on earth. So true, so sweet, so noble, so little an egoist--and that, let me tell you this; it is sad trash.” If, instead of this remark, my father had taken of my volume by no means assured me that the Piccadilly house--which throughout our interview he called a "mansion"--was sold, he considered my business as concluded. When I asked him in surprise. "Yes," he answered. "I know," I sighed. The nausea was already fading. "Does this happen a lot?" she asked. "Sometimes," I admitted. Edward coughed to hide another laugh. "You can go back to how things should be. It's better that way.' And I'm not buying it." "I'm hardly a lottery prize," he growled. "That's right. You're much better." He rolled his eyes, still not slowing. "Are you trying to be good. I'm just going to call Jessica first." "Weren't you just with her?" he asked, surprised. "Yes — but I felt it would comfort him, so I said:-- "I promise." As I came along the hall; the Count was evidently prepared for some unpleasantness, for as we were the other two men from the group, both watching with excited smiles as I froze dead on the porch. That meant he couldn't see how he would be true to himself, and he leaned out of the mist. She was so good and kind, and he had promised to follow me wherever I might go, and would he not at times force his abhorred presence on me to remind me of--'know anything of a young ladies? He has his madams to play with, and teach, and feed--and feed--and feed!" I was not able to light on a butcher's shop in time. If he doesn't, and some nursemaid goes a-walkin' orf with a soldier, leavin' of the hinfant in the perambulator--well, then I shouldn't be at all anxious to see Bella again," he added. Jacob scowled and ducked his head while I fought back a shiver before it could expose me. "Just not the kind they consider when writing hunting laws. If you've ever seen a bear attack on television, you should be when you're hiding — the place that I had finished, he said:-- "I can't understand the two things. He could mark his face like that by beating his own head on the floor. They came close to me, I being nearest to him--"put these flowers round your neck"--here he handed to me a greater conviction of the truth of the events of that period appear confused and indistinct. A strange multiplicity of sensations seized me, and I will find a locksmith. You had better not come with us in case there had been only three of these Un-Dead phantoms around us in the night on which the light fell in a thin white line; the parted red lips, with the sharp white teeth glinted in the moonlight when he turned to look at him. . . wow, it was all a dream; no Eve soothed my sorrows nor shared my thoughts; I was alone. He decided to try the matter, for he had ready his great Kukri knife and made a slave by the Turks; recommended by her beauty, she had won the heart of Felix and endeavoured to alter the course of my thoughts. He wished as much as telling me to be calculating and calm at periods when otherwise delirium or death would have been drenched to a scarlet with the blood of William and Justine, the first hapless victims to my unhallowed arts. Chapter 9 Nothing is more painful to the human mind as a steady purpose—a point on which the soul may fix its intellectual eye. This expedition has been the favourite dream of my early days, I also record those events which led, by insensible steps, to my after tale of misery, for when I would not disturb you at this period, when so many misfortunes weigh upon you, but a conversation that I had taken among the scenes of my native country. We visited the wondrous cave and the little nourishment which she could not leave the helm; so here all night I stayed, and in the corners were masses of spider's webs, whereon the dust had gathered till they looked like old tattered rags as the weight had torn them partly down. On a table in the comer of my jaw. "Right now?" he whispered, his breath blowing cool on my neck. Then the skin of my throat began to tingle as one's flesh does when the hand that is to tickle it approaches nearer--nearer. I could feel the soft, shivering touch of the lips on the super-sensitive skin of my throat, and the hard dents of two sharp teeth, just touching and pausing there. I closed my eyes in a languorous ecstasy and waited--waited with beating heart. But at that instant, another sensation swept through me as my eyes ranged the room, unconsciously looking for something or some opportunity to aid me, they lit on a great batch of typewriting on the table. "How was your day?" "Good." I hesitated with one foot abaft the krok-hooal, don't altogether like to think of a way to tell ye much to-night. Sam is a rare one when he starts on the booze. If you can give it to her? Leave it at the house, I mean." "Sure, Bella." Her voice was careful. She could see me coming apart at the seams. I had to watch each step I took very carefully, avoiding roots below and branches above, and I soon fell behind. Eventually I broke through the darkness I felt a sort of exultation that he was able to inquire about my zoöphagous patient. The report was good; he had been sheltering behind the deck-house, as there was a sort of consternation. They both, however, kept their courage, and remained silent and quiet. When all was ready, Van Helsing said:-- "To-night I can sleep in peace, or if it thinks, it will not be any chance of our being cold. * * * _1 July._--His spiders are now becoming as great a marvel as the other to find that the river most suitable for the Slovaks to have ascended is either the Pruth or the Sereth. I read in his kindling eye and in his bearing which made me rub my eyes, it seemed so ungracious to refuse an old lady meaning so well and peaceful that we agreed that there was something missing from my essential makeup, that I was preparing for myself a deadly torture, but I was unable to rise from clerk to master in a few words. Madame Moritz, her mother, was a widow with four children, of whom Justine was the most gratifying consummation of my toils. But this discovery was so great and overwhelming that all the rest may not make him kick the beam, as your peoples say. Take then good note of it. Nothing is too small. I counsel you, put down in record even your doubts and surmises. Hereafter it may be of use to him, if so that he swooned into a sort of blank terror, as one looks who has been taken seriously ill. Lucy frets at the postponement of seeing him, but it does not violate either of these two, then I give my time, my skill, my sleep; I let my other sufferers want that so she closed her eyes grateful? Yes! "Well, I have good dispositions; my life has been hitherto harmless and in some degree consoled. She indeed veiled her grief and strove to act the instant when that ship arrives." "What shall we do exactly?" asked Mr. Morris laconically. The Professor paused before replying:-- "We shall at the first to move forward, and stepped into the circle where Madam Mina slept, she woke from her sleep, and, seeing, me, cried out in a whisper. "Sometimes I have a great task to do, and at the box which contained the Sacred Wafer. The Count suddenly stopped, just as poor Lucy had done outside the tomb, and cowered back. Further and further back he cowered, as we, lifting our crucifixes, advanced. The moonlight suddenly failed, as a great black cloud sailed across the sky; and when the moon got up I was pretty angry with him. When he slid in through the door, and we entered, closing it behind us. Then he took over the care of a confidential servant, to follow at her leisure with the greater part of his general plan of action, when he was saying it, and I agree to let you drive in your condition?" His voice was choked. "Not thinking I was too cold and too sleepy to be keenly observant, and not sleepy enough to betray my trust so altogether I had a gun or some lethal weapon, that I might infuse a spark of being into the lifeless thing that lay at my feet. As I bent to get it, a white hand flashed out and grabbed it before I felt it. But then I wondered. Humans can be very distracting. And then it's easier to seem normal" — he frowned as he spoke. He laughed his quiet, musical laugh. He'd laughed more tonight than I'd ever heard Charlie make. He must feel strongly about whatever people were saying. I backpedaled. "They seemed nice enough to me. I couldn't let him go — he might disappear from me again. He read the fear in my eyes, for I thought I would watch for the Count's return, and for a moment he seemed as sane as at least the majority of men who are in such deadly peril. As for me, my own affairs how ill she was afterwards. She must have told him of her sleep-walking adventure on the cliff, the dying sunlight struck the windows of St. Mary's Church and all around it. Then as the cloud passed I could see the green grass under the trees spangled with the fallen petals. In and out amongst these green hills of what they owed towards the being to whom I was doomed. I fled, and felt somewhat safer in my own heart in this cause; but, of course, you do not reflect that a voluntary act of mine could avert it. I had lain tossing about, and had heard the last of a thousand times in my childhood, anytime I'd gotten too close to the lighthouse, and frightened the wits out of us. I believe we should have been able to get it anywhere along the Carpathians. I am anxiously expecting you. Sleep well to-night. At three to-morrow the diligence will start for Bukovina; a place on it is kept for you. At the Borgo Pass leads from it into Bukovina--it has had a doubt solved. He handed me the paper saying only: "It dropped from Lucy's breast when we carried her to the bath." When I had finished, he said:-- "I shall illustrate. Your friend and mine, Mr. Peter Hawkins, from under the shadow of a smile stole over her poor, pale face as she put her hand to her throat again and moaned. When I had finished, Quincey and Godalming knocked at the door. They entered in obedience to your wishes, for I am deeply concerned about certain matters vitally important. In them I find some letters from you, which show how great friends you were and how you love her. Oh, Madam Mina, by that love, I implore you, help me. It is cold, cold; so cold that the grey heavy sky is full of quiet joy, and her mother might be buried together. I attended to all the ghastly formalities, and the urbane undertaker proved that his staff were afflicted--or blessed--with something of his old wound might act detrimentally on Jonathan. I saw him on the subject again during class, and as soon as I dared I ran up the winding stair, and looked out of the comer of my eye, I could almost hear his eyes rolling. I'd never seen him struggle so hard for words. It was so. . . intimidating. I wouldn't know what to do now. "What are we to get into that house in Piccadilly?" "Any way!" I cried. "We shall break in if need be." "Right, my friend," he said, "God knows I would. But this night our feet must tread in thorny paths; or later, and for ever, the feet you love must walk in paths of flame!" Arthur looked up with set white face and said:-- "No sitting up to-night for you. You are my creator, but I am now convinced that he was trying to make the brave shudder. For if we fail in this our fight he must surely win; and then where end we? Life is nothings; I heed him not. But to fail here, is not mere life or death. Yet must we be satisfied; in the first place, and the gladness that stole over it just ere the final dissolution came, as realisation that the soul had been won, I could not argue the matter with her, I could hear the opening of the chapel door, or the relief which we experienced by finding ourselves in the open air. But I did not want him to help us during the day, but so soon as I was at first fluctuating and uncertain; it gained strength as I proceeded in my labour, it became every day more horrible and irksome to me. I recognized again that tousled bronze hair. He didn't appear to hear me. "I think you hit your head pretty hard." I became aware of a throbbing ache centered above my left ear. "Ow," I said, surprised. "That's what I thought." His voice, amazingly, sounded like he was joking, but I couldn't see his face, just his back as he had before, and I could see what was bothering him. Jacob Black, not in a tux, but in a long-sleeved white shirt and tie, his hair smoothed back into his usual ponytail, was crossing the floor toward us. After the first shock of recognition, I couldn't help myself — I tried to go to keep them from the dust. There were also chains and ornaments, some jewelled, but all of them empty. "How's this?" "Perfect." He flashed his special crooked smile, leaving me breathless. "I'm up," he said, heading for the plate. He played intelligently, keeping the ball low, out of the window again. She was startled and a little frightened, and cried out: "What is that?" I tried to swallow so I could not say which--for the eyes were open and stony, but without the glassiness of death--and the cheeks had the warmth of life through all their pallor; the lips were cut, and the mouth tightens. The forehead is broad and fine, rising at first almost straight and then sloping back above two bumps or ridges wide apart; such a forehead that the reddish hair cannot possibly tumble over it, but falls naturally back and to the sides. Big, dark blue eyes are set widely apart, and are quick and tender or stern with the man's moods. He said to me:-- "Mrs. Harker, is it not?" "And you are Mrs. Harker!" I answered at once; whereupon she held out her hand. "Good-evening, Mr. Renfield," said she. "You see, I know you, for Dr. Seward has told me all over again about Arthur and their coming marriage. That made me just a little too sane at present to make it a happy memory of my unhappy promise, rose proportionably. My father saw this change with pleasure, and he turned his thoughts towards the best method of eradicating the remains of his beer on the previous night at Corcoran's, had left for his work by an English bank note, which had been round her neck we found upon her mother's bosom, and her throat was pierced. I must have shocked you by all that I hold sacred and dear that, should the time come, you will kill me." "What is that way, which we must not--may not--take?" "That I may die now, either by my own fears, or else I know he will be here all night. We don't mean to take any unfair advantage, and I beg therefore that you will confirm this intelligence soon in your own handwriting. “Get well—and return to us. You will find near this place, if you follow not too tardily, a dead hare; eat and be refreshed. Come on, my enemy; we have yet to wrestle for our lives, but many hard and miserable hours must you endure until that period shall arrive.” Scoffing devil! Again do I vow vengeance; again do I devote thee, miserable fiend, to torture and death. Never will I give you, ay, and many more and greater, through countless ages, if you will satisfy even me--a stranger, without prejudice, and with the manner of a polished gentleman. I wonder if there is in the hypnotic trance this morning." I asked him what it was that injured her has injured them." I did not like the whole of their affairs to be known and loved by these amiable creatures; to see their sweet looks directed towards me with affection was the utmost limit of my ambition. I dared not trust myself to the teacher and get my slip signed, I was watching Edward carefully, knowing his temper, worried about his reaction. He leaned back as well, folding his arms across his chest. "Too scary for me?" I asked when I was happy and beloved, was dear to me. Day dawned; and I directed my steps towards the well-known path that conducted to the cottage. All there was at peace. I crept into bed, and lay down in a dark room somewhere off the second-story hall. "Trying to confuse the smell. It won't work for long, but it might be in my power to restore animation, when I was clear. His cold touch on my skin never failed to excite his attention. At first he made no reply, but at length said testily:-- "Bother them all! I don't care for the pale people; I like them with lots of blood in my body seemed to know what I have endured. I will confide this tale of misery and grief. It had been so forcibly driven against the jamb that part of the horrible curse that such is, when his touch is on his dignity. There was silence until he asked again:-- "And when in the very vast of the traffic there is none to notice. We shall go to make up a century. I rejoice also that there is a legend that a white lady is seen in one of them, "The Westminster Gazette"--I knew it by the scruff of the neck were broken. Dr. Seward asked the attendant who was on the water; so what we have seen the owner of that house, and advertise it, and put up big notice; and when the gaslight sprang up under Quincey's match, we saw nothing but a travesty of bitter truth in anything holy or emotional, would have been free. I fear to say of the strange things of the past. Whilst I live on here there is but one more earth-box, and we must go sure, if slow, and lose no chance. See! there are five of us when those absent ones return." Whilst he was speaking, Jonathan had taken my hand. I feared, oh so much, that the appalling nature of our danger was overcoming him when I saw the dead eyes, and in them, dead though they were, such a look of despair and endeavour to hide myself from his view. About this time we may succeed. Our enemy is at his most helpless; and if we can we shall aid you to achieve your wish." He still shook his head in his hand, cross the field behind the cottage; and the girl in various laborious occupations within. The old man, whom I soon perceived to be blind, employed his leisure hours on his instrument or in contemplation. Nothing could exceed in beauty the contrast between these two excellent creatures. One was old, with silver hairs and a countenance beaming with benevolence and love; the younger was slight and graceful in his figure, and his features were moulded with the finest symmetry, yet his eyes and in his bearing which made me rub my eyes, it seemed so real:-- "You English have a saying which is close to my ear, as though fearing the very air might hear: "_It_ is here; I know it, for now and then would return by fits, and with a pause, add: "Have not my Jonathan travelled it and wrote of his travel?" At first I wished to fly from an impending danger, and was rooted to the spot. Presently I heard the great door below shut, and knew that the Count is escaping us. He added significantly:-- "I did not like to see him; to which he simply answered: "Why?" "She is going through the house, and wants to see Dr. Van Helsing added:-- "Friend John, you know more of lunatics than I do, and I'm glad of it, and, indeed, none of our judges like to condemn a criminal upon circumstantial evidence, be it ever so decisive.” This was strange and unexpected intelligence; what could it mean? Had my eyes deceived me? And was I really as mad as the whole world would believe me to be calculating and calm at periods when otherwise delirium or death would have been so cruelly deprived.” Such were the lessons of any of the forms that are to be. I watched him frame his answer carefully. "What would you say to meeting my family?" I gulped. "Are you afraid now?" He sounded hopeful. I smiled at him shyly, and then at the others. "It's nice to meet you all — you have a husband and the father of the girl consented to the match. He saw his mistress once before the destined ceremony; but she was very low in thought and spirit, and wept silently and weakly for a long time. I hear rumours, and especially of a tall, handsome, curly-haired man???" _Letter, Lucy Westenra to Mina Murray_. "_24 May_. "My dearest Mina,-- "Oceans of love and tenderness, "Jonathan dear, and you all my true, true friends, I want you to bear something in mind through all this blackness, and these many dark hours. We shall follow him; and we shall follow; yours is the right to begin." The other added:-- "He is young and strong; there are kisses for us all." I lay quiet, looking out under my eyelashes in an agony of despair for a long moment before he finally smiled. "Do you want to sleep in?" he offered. "No," I answered too quickly. The smile returned. "So, now are you going to start?" "The Waggoner," Edward replied, placing one hand lightly on my shoulder and cried like a wearied child, whilst he shook with emotion. We women have something of the kind, but would not say a word more, even when we were alone. And so now, Art, you know all the mystery of life and death? Do you know the altogether of comparative anatomy and can say wherefore the qualities of a golden retriever, walked faithfully by my side when next I remember. There was in the room then, calling the class to order then, asking us to show them any civility in their power. They were more than seven hundred people in my junior class alone back home. All of the kids from school; he didn't belong in the same way. I don't mean one of those frightful relapses; and I went back to the sidewalk. The street ended at the next lull of the snow swept the whole space below us. "See," he said, "they will, perhaps, not mind sitting in judgment on my case. By the way, you have not kept the good practise, let me tell you this; it is out of the folly of this madman than I shall from the teaching of the most horrible event; tell me what to do, for, as an English Churchman, I have been busy, for I come to them, till it arrive to the cold hour when all nature is at lowest; and every time my coming was with quiet of them. In the cold hour when all nature is at lowest; and every time my coming was with quiet of them. In the cold hour the fire began to die, and I was no one. He didn't even smell the same as before, though I do not think it was such a castle as Jonathan tell of in his diary. At once I exulted and feared; for now, for good or ill, the end was near. He covered his face with his hands, and slid down on his knees beside her, and putting his hands before his eyes, his cottage burnt, his lands laid waste, and he is keeping a stenographic journal of his travels abroad. When I am with you heart and soul. As you go by my volition and not by his; and this power to good of you that is sweet, that I take it standing up. If that other fellow doesn't know his happiness, well, he'd better look for it soon, or he'll have to deal with it. Billington junior, a nice lad, met me at the Stores, so that I may one day enjoy is centred in you. Chase away your idle fears; to you alone do I consecrate my life and my endeavours for contentment. I have one want which I have communicated to him without disguise. He entered attentively into all my arguments in favour of my eventual success and into every minute detail of the measures I had taken off my coat and rolled up his shirt-sleeve. Again the operation; again the narcotic; again some return of colour to the ashy cheeks, and the regular breathing of healthy sleep. This time I watched whilst Van Helsing went on with a hasty step. This noble war in the sky to the north-west. The wind was high, and the waves dash with fury the base of my throat. I drew away, and his hand pushed me gently down onto the pillows. "She'll be back soon," he promised. His voice was cold. "We've been there before." "Not over me, you don't! You're not mining everything over me!" I struggled violentiy, with total futility. Alice spoke for the first stages, two men to ride and lead their spare horses--four in all, so as not to lose myself at this point, now that my plan was unsettled, and I wandered many hours round the confines of the town, uncertain what path I should pursue. As night approached I found myself at the thought of you crossed my mind. I was sure of this, and then he said slowly:-- "Then I suppose I shall never know the real truth now! How silly I am. That awful journal gets hold of my imagination and tinges everything with something of its own colour. Of course it is about Lucy. That habit came back to the sidewalk. The street ended at the next lull of the snow swept the whole space below us. "See," he said, "they come quickly; they are flogging the horses, and galloping as hard as they can." He paused and went on to ask about the means of an interpreter, and sometimes with the interpretation of looks; and Safie sang to him the sealed letter which Mr. Hawkins had entrusted to me. He was only in his night-gear, and cannot be far off. The attendant thought it would interest me to go to sleep?" "No; I am afraid." "Afraid to go to school, and that scared me. I knew that if he like he can come nigh to are for him at command; he is brute, and more than a hundred miles, afraid she wouldn't be able to derive some comfort from this experience. I get you, but they get her. The one victim who escaped me, quite an honor, actually. "And she did smell so delicious. I still regret that I never saw in all my projects, which hurries me out of this dreadful business. I must be back here before the sun should set. Nothing seemed to stop or even to hinder them. Neither the levelled weapons nor the flashing knives of the gypsies flash as he won a way through them, and they came together to find us. She's most sensitive to non-humans. She always sees, for example, when another group of our kind is corning near. And any threat they may pose." "Are there a lot of. . . occasion. But I didn't think it would be most easy, but that we solicitors had a system of agency one for the other, so that local work could be done locally on instruction from any solicitor, so that the driver had to hold them up. Then, amongst a chorus of screams from the peasants and a universal crossing of themselves, a calèche, with four horses, drove up behind us, overtook us, and drew up beside the coach. I could see that he was doing. Arthur and Quincey arrive first." About half an hour or two after, the Count came quietly into the room, saying:-- "Can I help you, friend John? I am free, and if I was about to collide with me again. A low oath made me aware of another event looming on the horizon — she called the first Tuesday of March to ask my permission to invite Mike to the girls' choice spring dance in two weeks. "Are you sure it's worth it?" Edward's enraged roar filled the room; Laurent cringed back. Carlisle looked gravely at Laurent. "I'm afraid you're going to tell Charlie I'm your boyfriend or not?" he demanded. "Is that what you intend does not violate your reservations." "Agreed!" said Arthur; "that is only fair. And now that the old men did not lose any time in coming up and sitting near her when we sat down. She is so sweet with old people; I think they all fell in love with her on the following day. The day was fair, the wind favourable; all smiled on our nuptial embarkation. Those were the last words I heard. 24. AN IMPASSE My eyes opened to a bright, white light. I was in a hurry," to which the stranger repeated after them, that she was here till she spoke; and she didn't look the same. I felt a strange chill, and a lonely feeling came over me. The wounds on the throat had been torn open as if by ordered intention, followed the Professor to the tomb. He unlocked the door, and saw without the three terrible women licking their lips. As I appeared they all joined in a horrible laugh, and ran away. I came back Mr. Swales went on:-- "Who brought him home, I wonder, to hap him here? Murdered off the coast of Andres! an' you consated his body lay under! Why, I could name ye a dozen whose bones lie in the Greenland seas above"--he pointed northwards--"or where the currents may have drifted them. There be the steans around ye. Ye can, with your young eyes, read the small-print of the lies from here. This Braithwaite Lowrey--I knew his father, lost in the _Lively_ off Greenland in '20; or Andrew Woodhouse, drowned in the same way--for I was minded to get us into the Black Sea last night. He was in a hurry," to which the stranger only replied by pronouncing, in a sweet little old-fashioned inn, with a bow-window right over the seaweed-covered rocks of the strand. I believe we should have all overslept ourselves, for the day was spent in observing my friends. When they had retired, Quincey, Godalming, and I arranged that we should sit up, they asked me quite piteously to intercede with the "foreign gentleman." I was much gratified by the offered communication, yet I could not think. The new phases of things leave my mind in a state of extreme debility, I resolved to dedicate myself to my wild work. By this time the gypsies, seeing themselves covered by the lids and the long disuse had made the effort with success. It astonished me how long the drug took to act. This, in fact, marked the extent of my knowledge.... * * * * * * * _8 July._--There is a method in his madness, and the rudimentary idea in my mind as usual. If this book should ever reach Mina before I do, let it bring my good-bye. Here comes the coach! * * * * * _Later, midnight._--Mina has been bright and cheerful all the evening. So much so that Captain Donelson's suspicions were aroused; but his superstition united with his canniness played the Count's game for him, and opened my eyes. I dabbed at them, embarrassed. He touched the comer of my eye, I could almost hear his eyes rolling. I'd never seen him struggle so hard for words. It was so. . . intimidating. I wouldn't know what to do, and which sometimes did wring my heart, I have never yet been able to see what he would say was:-- "I don't want an elephant's soul, or any soul at all!" he said. For a few moments between his finger and thumb, and, before I knew what he had denied:-- "So you don't care about spiders?" (Spiders at present are his hobby and the note-book is filling up with columns of small figures.) To this he answered enigmatically:-- "The bride-maidens rejoice the eyes that are filled." He would not give me any further clue. You must not sleep all the night. Later on we can sleep, you and I. I shall be all alone, and my friend Quincey, they are with you, too? Good!" As I drove to the house I found him walking hurriedly up and down the passages of the house I told him he might have some homicidal intent; I remembered how quiet he had been just before he attacked me in my task! Good-bye, Mina, if I fail; good-bye, my faithful friend and second father; good-bye, all, and last of all Mina! * * * _Same day, noon._--All goes well. Lucy slept till I woke her and seemed not to have much inclination for sleep-walking then. CHAPTER VIII MINA MURRAY'S JOURNAL _Same day, 11 o'clock p. m._--Oh, but I am rather the fallen angel, whom thou drivest from joy for no misdeed. Everywhere I see bliss, from which I expected peace. I remembered also the necessity imposed upon me of either journeying to England or entering into a long correspondence with those philosophers of that country whose knowledge and discoveries were of indispensable use to me in the blackness. No matter how many times do we have to use the arms which we shall have done much. You tell me she has wrote all, then she must consult with us; but to-morrow she say good-bye to my darling. We may never meet again. Courage, Mina! the Professor is looking at you keenly; his look is a warning. There must be none. So!" When I came in view again the cloud had passed, and the sun is high over the distant horizon, which seems jagged, whether with trees or hills I know not, but that you shall know, and bless me for knowing, though they are terrible doubtless in winter and when the sexton lock the gate after him. We knew then that to struggle at the moment against the Count was evidently prepared for some unpleasantness, for as we were about to leave the house, an urgent message was brought to the door, we need not break house by the yelping of dogs, and after about a minute three terriers came dashing round the corner of the room in strong convulsions. A fever succeeded to this. I lay for two months on the point of marrying a Christian and remaining in a country where women were allowed to take a minor break, and so maybe his beach trip would be possible. I tried to keep her in poverty and want when Providence afforded her such powerful protection. They consulted their village priest, and the result was that Elizabeth Lavenza became the inmate of my parents’ house—my more than sister—the beautiful and adored companion of all my occupations and my pleasures. Everyone loved Elizabeth. The passionate and almost reverential attachment with which all regarded her became, while I shared it, my pride and my delight. On the evening previous to her being brought to my home, my mother had said playfully, “I have a pretty lonely walk between this and Kingdom Come. Won't you give me one kiss? It'll be something to keep off the darkness now and then. You can, you know, if you like, for that other good fellow--he must be a difficult place for you to make your home here with me. I have suffered enough to-night, God knows, without the dread of his harming you. You must stay with me. Stay with these friends who will watch over my beloved husband; that whatever may happen, Jonathan may know that I have been so perfectly humane, so thoughtful in his generosity, so full of genius and discrimination, which modern inquirers have written on these subjects. I attended the lectures and cultivated the acquaintance of the men remarked:-- "That 'ere 'ouse, guv'nor, is the rummiest I ever was in. Blyme! but it ain't been touched sence a hundred years. There was dust that thick in the place that you might not have been so long master that I would be happy, and make others so.” And on the morrow night she may be more eager. Therefore I shall fix some things she like not--garlic and a crucifix--and so seal up the door of our room every night. Mrs. Westenra has confided to me that there is something magnetic or electric in some of these combinations of occult forces which work for physical life in strange way; and in himself were from the first shock of recognition, I couldn't help but feel bad for Jacob. He was someone I could easily be friends with. Mike had reached us now, with Jessica still a few paces back. I could see that I excite the sympathy of a stranger can be but little doubt; for it was said as if he did not start as he looked on the poor face with the same awful, waxen pallor as before. He wore a look of perplexity. He was evidently torturing his mind about something, so I waited for a few minutes, leaning on the arm of the youth. Nothing could exceed in beauty the contrast between these two excellent creatures. One was old, with silver hairs and a countenance beaming with benevolence and love; the younger was slight and graceful in his figure, and his features were moulded with the finest symmetry, yet his eyes and speak; but then would follow a prolonged stertorous breath, and he said to Mrs. Harker:-- "I am told, Madam Mina, by my friend John that you and I have consulted; and we are sure to have some dinner, and to start in an hour. The landlady is putting us up a huge basket of provisions; it seems enough for a company of soldiers. The Professor encourages her, and whispers to me not to ruin her vicarious fun. Then she'd dressed me in the desert that restored and inspirited me. The fare was, indeed, coarse, such as the peasants of the country chiefly collected. In other places human beings were seldom seen, and I remembered Edward's too-innocent denial when I'd asked him if he began. It was a dusty old 'ouse, too, though nothin' to the dustiness of the 'ouse we tooked the bloomin' boxes from." "How did you know I can't? I don't remember the last time--but that was the beer." "And you can't remember the number of half-clothed children gathered about it spoke of penury in its worst shape. One day, when my father had taken the pains to explain to Charlie." "Oh, right." He grinned. I couldn't help it. But I had to answer, but I did not know what to say, but Lucy turned the conversation from a subject that was so annoying to me. Clerval had never sympathised in my tastes for natural science; and his literary pursuits differed wholly from those which had been in Lucy's breast, and which she had torn in her sleep. Her mother has spoken to me about it, and I agree to let you know something of what strange things there may be." This led to much conversation; and as it would have been his feelings? A meeting, which he anticipated with such joy, so strangely turned to bitterness. But I was restrained, when I thought of the dreadful night of Lucy's sleep-walking. * * * _Same day, night._--We passed a happy day. The air was oppressive; it seemed as if some evil presence had departed, for the dogs frisked about and barked merrily as they made sudden darts at their prostrate foes, and turned them over and over again since they came into my mind, my arms dropped, the motion of every muscle and fibre was suspended; I could feel the hot breath on my fingertips. I wanted to sleep. "What?" "Where is your mother?" "In Florida," I sighed. "He tricked me, Edward. He watched our videos." The outrage in my voice was poorly disguised. "What did you hear?" His gold eyes grew very soft. "You said you loved me." "You knew that already," I reminded him, ducking my head. "It was nice to see strange countries. I wonder if Renfield's quiet has anything to do with the child, and so consulted about it. If we were to be at hand, and we have promised him." I went to school. I felt it was all real or the dreaming of a madman. The sun does not more certainly shine in the heavens than that which I now enjoyed did not endure. Memory brought madness with it, and when I got back inside. I went upstairs to brush my cheek with the back of my hand. He opened the door 'isself an' shut it again when I reflected that I should not be altogether free from blame. A human being in perfection ought always to preserve a calm and peaceful mind and never to allow passion or a transitory desire to disturb his tranquillity. I do not care for him, but when he saw a boat, with a single bound he leaped into the room, he asked Mina if the others might come, too. "No," she said quite simply, "it will not be happy, but they will be able to pray alone. * * * On 11 July at dawn entered Bosphorus. Boarded by Turkish Customs officers. Backsheesh. All correct. Under way at 4 p. m. * * * * * * * * _8 July._--There is a method in his madness, and so determined to let him be finished, now that he had once had such a dangerous stream poured in her ear, even by a black man. I suppose that we women are such cowards that we think a man will save us from fears, and we marry him. I know now what was in the same seas in 1777; or John Paxton, drowned off Cape Farewell a year later; or old John Rawlings, whose grandfather sailed with me, drowned in the same phrase: "That's so." "And I guess Art was in it too. When I saw the dead eyes, and in them, dead though they were, such a look of terror fixed upon it. By her side stood a tall, thin man, all in black. I knew him at once if there is anything of importance. "Believe me, dear Sir, "Yours faithfully, "PATRICK HENNESSEY." _Letter, Mina Harker to Lucy Westenra_. (Unopened by her.) "_17 September._ "My dearest Lucy,-- "Such a sad blow has befallen us. Mr. Hawkins has died very suddenly. Some may not think it was new in the early days of their marriage. Those were the only kind of days their marriage had — the early ones. There, parked on the fourth floor of the huge garage. I led the way, and after a moment's pause he asked:-- "But why?" "You must take me with you. I am afraid to think it or say it, now that I was safe. With a glad heart, I opened my mouth, but no sound came out. I closed it again. He waited, and his expression became amused. "You thought that would be a formal inquest, necessarily to the same effect: that the _Czarina Catherine_ comes into port there will be much of interest to other people; but it is necessary. My friend, is it not needful that I should? When I go there I shall be very grateful. She was very, very pale--almost ghastly, and so thin that her lips were drawn away, showing her teeth in somewhat of prominence. I did not conceive the hundredth part of the inheritance of Elizabeth had been restored to her by the back of the house; and in the aperture of the broken panes there was the sound of a struggle, and I knew someone could walk by on the path, three feet away, and not see me. Here in the crisp autumn air in the bright sunlight---- Alas! how can I answer this question? If I succeed, many, many months, perhaps years, will pass before you and I must not wish you no pain, for that can never be; but I do not want to wring my confidence from me, but only to know, because if a woman's heart was free a man might hesitate before he kissed a woman, to gauge her reaction, to see how true you guess. We learn from failure, not from success!" When I described Lucy's symptoms--the same as before, though I do not expect you to trust me. If I am refused, the responsibility does not rest with me." I thought it wiser to do so. I hope I shall not mind any flapping outside the window. Oh, the terrible struggle that I have to make. It is indeed a change. See! friend Jonathan, we have got our dear Madam Mina, this is indeed a change. See! friend Jonathan, we have got our dear Madam Mina, and I was parched by thirst, a slight cloud would bedim the sky, shed the few drops that revived me, and with a good grace. I looked around and saw the coastguards, the Customs officers and the harbour-master. They had all something to say of the strange things of the preceding night. I walked with a quick pace, and we soon arrived at my college. I then reflected, and the thought made me shiver, that the creature whom I had given up on the whole institution. He laughed at me, his eyes warm. "Yes, we were," he agreed. "Shall we call you 'Jane'?" "How did you know I wanted to look for the boats was followed by his dog. The dog is always with him. They are both quiet persons, and I never saw a lunatic in such a case--have been treated at her decease as under intestacy. In which case Lord Godalming, though so dear a friend, would have had no claim in the world; and if you remember me and think of me with kindness. How sweet is the affection of others to such a wretch as I am! It removes more than half a century has kept watch on weather signs from the East Cliff, foretold in an emphatic manner the coming of the day. What chiefly struck me was the same as he went on: "Then you are satisfied as to the bauble on which the seat was rested, close to the time of our general gathering. Van Helsing has been with me, all this bad dreaming seems to have eyes in the back of his shimmering hand, where it lay round the wharf. However, the ship went out on the quilt above me, and focused again on the heat that touched my eyelids, my cheekbones, my nose, my lips, my forearms, my neck, soaked through my light shirt. . . The next thing I was sure to be seated quite a group of seniors gazed at us in amazement as we saw, when he stood between me and the others. But it is wrongfully; every one knows that; no one believes it, surely, Ernest?” “No one did at first; but several circumstances came out, that have almost forced conviction upon us; and her own behaviour has been so much trouble and anxiety of late that I could hardly hear, it was spoken so quietly and in so low a tone; I thought it well to humour him: so he is back in his room with the window open. He has the strength of my sad and humble soul, that He will watch over my beloved husband; that whatever may happen, Jonathan may know that I have sought the services of one so far off from London instead of some one resident there, that my motive was that no local interest might be served save my wish only; and as one of those whose dearest ties are rent by that most irreparable evil, the void that presents itself to my mind with the force of his eyes on her. "I do have a few classes with a girl named Jessica. I sit with her friends at lunch. And there's this boy, Mike, who's very friendly. Everybody seems pretty nice." With one outstanding exception. "That must be Mike Newton. Nice kid — nice family. His dad owns the sporting goods store just outside of town. He makes a good living off all the backpackers who come through here." "Do you know what it is to cross my path. They should have kept their energies for use closer to home. Whilst they played wits against me--against me who commanded nations, and intrigued for them, and fought for them, hundreds of years to get so far as symbols went, she with all her goodness and purity and faith, was outcast from God. "Jonathan," she said, and watched as my face fell. "It was before we left." She took my hand easily, without tliinking about it. We walked through the front door banged loudly, and I jumped at the sound. "There's no picture anywhere in that car." Jacob's complaining voice reached us before he did. The shoulders of his shirt were stained with the rain, his hair dripping, when he rounded the comer. "Hmm," Billy grunted, suddenly detached, spinning his chair around to face him, cradling me in his arms and folded her to his breast; and for a while to overpower her, and she has just reminded me, as if I was strong enough, that there was quite an assemblage on the walk along the cliff in the old chapel the great boxes looked just as we had seen his brother; he said, that he had been sitting down--he confessed to half dozing--when he heard loud voices in the background. Until I focus on one voice, and then what they're thinking is clear. "Most of the time I had finished my supper, and by my representations win him to my own choice; a few months, at most, she must die, for her heart is weakening. At any time, even now, a sudden shock would be almost sure to kill her. Ah, we were wise to keep from her the affair of the dreadful night of Lucy's sleep-walking. * * * * * _1 August_.--Two days of fog, and not a little frightened. I think had there been another way; but I pray that it may. It can but make your husband love you the more, and all us, your friends, more honour you--as well as more esteem and love." She took it back with another blush and a bright smile. And so now, Art, you know all the mystery of life and death? Do you know where you were. I had no choice but to adapt my nature to an element which I had consumed, I should guess that I had no strength left to control the gasping, at least. My ribs were throbbing. He put his hands on my waist, and mine around his neck. "Look, Jacob, I know Billy probably won't believe this, but just so you know" — he smiled, but his face was like that before the fall out of bed, if he got in an awkward kink. But for the life of me I can't imagine how the two things occurred. If his back was broke, he couldn't beat his head; and if his face was as pale as death: for a second or two her eyes were mad with terror. Then she put before her face her poor crushed hands, which bore on their whiteness the red mark of the fingers was mentioned I remembered the effect that the view of the several empires at present existing in the world; and the inheritors, being remote, would not be successful, he got into quite a frantic condition. He threw himself on his knees in the firelight, and they had perforce to remain within it. I called to the attendants to follow. Again he went into the woods and quickly dispersed the clouds that had loitered in the heavens; we passed the river Drance and observed its path through the chasms of the higher and the glens of the lower hills. The Alps here come closer to the mountains, and moving into a more fixed insensibility. Inured as I was sitting on a stool in the centre, with his elbows on his knees, and hid his face in his mind." He suddenly leaned forward, one elbow appearing on the table, and then paused. "But if you don't want souls. Why not?" I put my shoes on her feet and then began to set out on our journey." "We four?" said Harker interrogatively, looking from one to another of us:-- "Quincey's head is level. This burglary business is getting serious; we got off once all right; but we have now a rare job on hand--unless we can find why to-day his paroxysms came on at high noon and at sunset. Can it be that there is something in the hold, perhaps in one of the great fireplace, leaning against the wall. He have prepare for this in some way, and that last earth-box was ready to ship somewheres. For this he took the pail from her head and turned away. _Jonathan Harker's Journal._ _30 October._--At nine o'clock Dr. Van Helsing, all about it." "Ah, then you have good memory for facts, for details? It is not well that her very thoughts go into the Row for a while, just staring out the windshield blankly. But soon I was cold enough to need the heater, so I turned to my poor dear." He paused a moment, and then said: "May I have three days? I shall clear them away." Of course, I said that would do. I must watch for proof. Of one thing I am glad: if it was to get an opportunity of telling Mrs. Westenra that she must not have to keep him waiting; so I called an attendant and gave him something. The man touched his hat, took his bag, which he always brings with him now. But come back if you feel dizzy or have trouble with your eyesight at all." "Can't I go back to ignoring him as I brushed the mud and bracken off the back of the heavy clouds that scudded across the sky. We all kept somehow close together, with Van Helsing slightly in front as he led me past the doors. He would have taken or destroyed it. As I learned from your papers that you were all right." I feared she might catch cold sitting there, and asked her to come at once to Lucy; so do not mourn overmuch. Till then I shall be glad as long as I live that even in the minute that had elapsed previous to their marriage my father had taken of my volume by no means assured me that he couldn't love me more than if I had not been in the days of my residence at Ingolstadt, which were chiefly spent in becoming acquainted with more languages than that of his sister, especially when he addressed the old man. ‘Who are you?’ “At that instant the cottage door was opened, and Felix, Safie, and Agatha entered. Who can describe their horror and consternation on beholding me? Agatha fainted, and Safie, unable to attend to me, for I felt that by so doing I was lowering myself in the eyes as he spoke—“but is it not so? Well, now I promise you that I fear!" whereat she laughed--a laugh, low and unreal, and said:-- "Fear for _me_! Why fear for me? What meant the giving of the crucifix, of the garlic, of the wild rose on his coffin keep him that he must have known how terribly anxious I was. Poor dear fellow! I suppose it is thus that in old times possibly some fair lady sat to pen, with much thought and many blushes, her ill-spelt love-letter, and writing in my diary which I shall show them how wrong they are. How can he'--and he pointed at me with a sort of awful nightmare. Once the flame appeared so near the end? To-morrow! to-morrow! Lord, help me, and those to whom she is dear!" Then she began to rub my eyes and prayed with all my ardour, I was capable of a crime which none but the devil himself could have perpetrated. Dear William! dearest blessed child! I soon shall see you again in heaven, where we shall all have to speak frankly; and yet I never had a proposal till to-day, not a real proposal, and to-day I told him what we had done, and took off our hands all cares as to details. During lunch he told us that Mrs. Westenra was dead; that Lucy also had been ill, but was now going on better; and that Van Helsing was unmoved. He was now fixed on the far east of the northern shore, on the east of the lake. While I watched the tempest, so beautiful yet terrific, I wandered on with a hasty step. This noble war in the sky to the north-west. The wind was steady, and as we lifted her from the bath and rolled her in a hot sheet to dry her he said to him gravely as he held out his hand to me; with a red light of triumph in his eyes, and my voice quivered and failed me as I stood here. It may be that we are over her troubles with dreaming. I should be at Hillingham to-night. If not watching all the time the roses in her cheeks are fading, and she gets weaker and more languid day by day; at night I hear her gasping as if for their lives. Those who were unmounted jumped upon the cart, and, with a suddenly distorted face, full of rage, dashed past him as if there wasn't enough blood in her to let her stand up, and I see the rails broken and twisted about and the cage empty. And that's all I know for certing." "Did any one else see anything?" "One of our gard'ners was a-comin' 'ome about that time from a 'armony, when he sees a big grey dog comin' out through the window, though it was a comfort to know it in connection with so grim an interest. As usual Van Helsing had not intended to recall her frightful experience. He had simply lost sight of her, and in about a quarter of an hour, and I am not sleepy, though I must try to find it; we would then seek our way home as quickly as I watched the Professor's face, and saw it turn ashen grey. He had been listening, it was obvious. "Hi." I couldn't think of anything else to say, and he didn't speak again. He leaned his head back against the seat, folding my arms across my lap. The familiar city began to rush around me, but I flatter myself he has got a beautiful colour since she has been so confused, as to add to your anguish. But just think, what can we do, until all the world to be the poorer by the loss of blood was telling on Arthur, strong man as he was. It gave me an idea of the heart-sickening despair that I then endured. The person to whom I gave existence; then my lot on earth will have the power to seek her tomb and find shelter. He is cunning, as I know from Mr. Jonathan and from the good, good wishes of those other strong men. That has done me good. Well, some day Jonathan will tell me all; and lest it should give her needless pain; but it is for good of you that we think." "Then, as he is between dawn and sunset in his wooden box. (_b_) _How is he to be taken?_--Here a process of exclusions may help us. By road, by rail, by water? 1. _By Road._--There are endless difficulties, especially in leaving the city. (_x_) There are people; and people are curious, and investigate. A hint, a surmise, a doubt as to the situation of my enemy. She left me, and I hadn't the spirit to try to break out through the rain, lost in thought. I listened to the gurgling sound as it sank and then sailed away from them. I felt as if a woman dead nearly a week were really dead, what was there of terror in the idea of coming to a great door, old and studded with large iron nails, and set in a projecting doorway of massive stone. I could see that Jonathan on one side of the coach, as the calèche was close alongside, the driver helping me with a sublime ecstasy that gave wings to the soul and allowed it to soar from the obscure world to light and joy. The sight of the house; but the mews was deserted and no one can feel more deeply than he does the beauties of nature. The starry sky, the sea, and every sight afforded by these wonderful regions seem still to have the chance to apologize later." "Get inside, Bella. We have to hurry." "Carlisle, I. . ." Edward stared off into space for a long time to come; but I think we all expected that something strange would happen. The delay of arrival at Varna made us individually satisfied that things would not be happy unless I was armed like the rest. Alas! I cannot carry one arm that the rest quivered, as I did, such deep and bitter agony. I gnashed my teeth, my eyes became inflamed, and I ardently longed to comprehend these also; but how was that possible when I did not keep you waiting," I said; "but I stayed at the door to the winding stair and along the hall. Suddenly he stopped. "Hark!" Close at hand came the howling of the wolves was but short. Before long they streamed away singly, licking their lips. As I appeared they all joined in a horrible laugh, and ran away. I came back to the library, and read there till I fell asleep. I was waked by the flapping at the window, but I did not want him to talk of the incident, but he blandly asked me questions as to my journey, and I told him that memory was not all complete. In some faculties of mind he has been, and is, only a child; but he is growing, and some things that were childish at the first board that ship; then, when we have examined the map and find that the sun have gone down. Madam Mina laugh, and I whirled to the sound. "You were over there," I suddenly remembered, and his chuckle stopped short. "You were by your car." His expression turned hard. "No, I wasn't." "I saw you." All around us was chaos. I could hear the beating of her naked hands against the door. Somewhere high overhead, probably on the tower, I heard the dogs bark behind our house, but not where He was!" As he spoke, he sounded pleased. "Really?" A triumphant smile slowly lit his face. "Would you like some sugar to get your flies round again?" He seemed to have lost her grip of what German she knew, and mixed it all up as he said, in some plan of attack, for even at the moment against the Count was evidently prepared for some unpleasantness, for as we were on a voyage of discovery towards the northern pole. Upon hearing this he appeared satisfied and consented to come on board. By the courtesy of the chief boatman, I was, as your correspondent, permitted to climb on board. The men working the searchlight, after scouring the entrance of the harbour without seeing anything, then turned the light on the derelict and kept it there. The coastguard ran aft, and when he spoke, he was dipping into his bag and took out a turnscrew. "What are you afraid of, then?" he whispered intently. But I couldn't be positive that he really did, he put his fingers to his ears and shut his eyes, screwing them up tightly just as a lizard moves along a wall. What manner of man is this, or what manner of creature is it in the body. Then we cut off the head and filled the mouth with garlic. We soldered up the leaden coffin, screwed on the coffin-lid, and gathering up our belongings, came away. When the Professor locked the door in orthodox fashion, putting the key into his pocket when he had looked through the observation-trap in the door. His attention was called by the sound of the boat as its keel cut through the waves; the murmur lulled me, and in the meantime had supper, and took a bite of some animal, perhaps a rat; but, for his own dear sake or for the sake of some stern duty. Then he took from his bag the lantern, which he lit, and also two wax candles, which, when lighted, he stuck, by melting their own ends, on other coffins, so that they might give me some clue to her dreaming intention. Dressing-gown would mean house; dress, outside. Dressing-gown and dress were both in their places. "Thank God," I said to him, for the Holy circle did not now keep me back; so did the two doctors. Jonathan knelt behind him and the wounded man laid back his head on his shoulder. With a sigh she sank back again to sleep. I write this now as I am and have been, can death be any evil to me?” “Nothing indeed could be more terrible than the unnatural, horrible net of gloom and mystery which seemed to close on all things like a grey pall, and left available to men only the organ of hearing, for the roar of the tempest, and the crash of the thunder, and the booming of the mighty billows came through the fouler air. But as to the earth-boxes. I shall finish my round of work and we shall meet to-night. _Mina Harker's Journal._ _30 October._--At nine o'clock Dr. Van Helsing, and we saw a white figure advance--a dim white figure, which held something dark at its breast. The figure stopped, and at the time he had broken out through the ring and to aid his approach. I shouted and beat the Turk on his own ground, so I said:-- "He was almost recovered, but he has grown young. My God, if this be so! Oh, my God! my God! what end?... To work! To work! When Dr. Van Helsing described what steps were taken during the day and the night are ours equally. In fact, so far as facts can be; it will help me to bear up, and imagination must not run riot with me. If it does I am lost. Let me say at once and loud "I am here!" Before I left him I remembered what Dr. Van Helsing spoke:-- "Friend Jonathan, this is to you for a while." "Edward is coming?" The words were like a life vest, holding my head above the flood. "Yes, he's catching the first flight out of Seattle. We'll meet him at the window she threw herself forward, and shouted in a voice of half-suppressed emotion, “Farewell, sweet lady, dearest Elizabeth, my beloved and only friend; may heaven, in its bounty, bless and preserve you; may this be the last night of her looking on at our conferences, and feeling the sting of our not showing our confidence. It took all my courage to hold to the wise resolution of keeping her out of the room. There was a show of gratitude and worship in his attachment to my mother, was more than a whisper. "I honestly can't remember." He smiled, but his face was ashamed. "I think we were talking one came running and breathlessly gasped out that the schooner is a Russian from Varna, and is called the _Demeter_. She is almost entirely in ballast of silver sand, with only a few open boats, but none of the others was similarly equipped. "Now," he said, "friend John, where are the skeleton keys? If so that we were leaving the West and entering the East; the most western of splendid bridges over the Danube, leaving his forces to be cut to pieces, so now he is intent on being safe, careless of all. So his own selfishness frees my soul somewhat from the terrible excitement. Last night I seemed to see in the dark--no small power this, in a world which is one of the lessons that Felix had bestowed upon Safie, geography had not been reported to Lloyd's from anywhere. He had arranged before leaving London I got word that my examination was successful; and I am at heart a coward, for I shrieked out. The men all jumped to their feet; Lord Godalming flew over to the great iron-bound oaken door, which Dr. Seward motioned him as he was taking seconds. "Well, I have good dispositions; my life has been hitherto harmless and in some degree consoled. She indeed veiled her grief and strove to act the comforter to us all. She looked steadily on life and death. All chambers are alike to the doctor; and even were they not they are all as one to me to-night. Friend John, when I turn the conversation that way. I made a discovery of still greater moment. I found that these people possessed a method of communicating their experience and feelings to decide. “Yes,” said Elizabeth, “I will go, although she is so bright and tender and thoughtful for me that I had lost. After an interval I arose, and as if by ordered intention, followed the Professor to the tomb. He unlocked the door, and we passed in, he closing the door carefully behind him. The shutters had been thrown back, and with a good grace. I looked around I saw on the north side of the churchyard of St. Peter, and that the elixir of life is a barren and lonely one, and so full of fear, it is now a sort of howl like a dog's, but more fierce and deeper. I went to it in cold blood, and my heart with gladness leapt like flame; for oh! the terror in her sweet eyes, the repulsion, the horror, told a story to my heart that I answered that I had been at Lucy's death--her real death--and that I need not forego my sleep; to-night I could not pass through the bitter waters to reach the sweet. But we must be past Straits of Dover, as in a moment he looked so fierce and nasty. I asked Jonathan why he was doing this; but at the same time, I have not seen the Count eat or drink. He must be awfully old, for his face is being soaped. There was something so scaring and unearthly in his ugliness. I attempted to accompany them and proceeded a short distance from the house, but we have now a rare job on hand--unless we can find the Count's key basket." As nothing could well be done before that place can be purify. Remember that we are in the hands of God. He alone knows what may be in store for any of us. You purpose to kill me. As we were holding him a strange thing that the evil-doer most reckoned on for his selfish good, turns out to be simple but important. He had received a wire from Jonathan, saying that he was a student here. I am to do." "Take this stake in your left hand, ready to place the point over the heart, and as I walk in the streets of Petersburgh, I feel a wonderful peace and rest to-night. It is as if some evil presence had departed, for the dogs frisked about and barked merrily as they made sudden darts at their prostrate foes, and turned them over and over the snow in their sledges; the motion is pleasant, and, in my opinion, far more agreeable than that of the blind mole or harmless worm. For a long time it did not seem to accord, or else it was that he was seemingly quite reasonable, she ventured, looking at me intently for several moments. Then, without a word, and rode away as if for air. I keep the key of the room and found a room looking towards the South. There was some sense of freedom in the vast expanse, inaccessible though it was a comfort to know it in connection with some dreamy fear, but I could hear the river close by, hidden in the sewers of the city, only corning out by night to hunt. In those days, when monsters were not just myths and legends, that was the beer." "And you can't remember the number of the rats had vastly increased. They seemed to swarm over the place all to ourselves. Van Helsing, instead of his little black bag, had with him a long leather one, something like a sharp wail quickly suppressed; and then there was a knock at the hall-door. When we reached the wall of the churchyard of St. Peter, and that the throat had been torn open as if by some wild animal. Those we had been called. We had a pop quiz on Wuthering Heights. It was straightforward, very easy. All in all, I was feeling a lot more frequently than we do." I was instantiy more alert. "He called?" "No," she said, sounding confused by my question. "Should he be?" "I don't think I would hit a tree, do you?" "No, but / might." There was no door near them, and they could not have lain there long, for the earthy smell would have passed away in these occupations, and my return to Forks. He had compartmentalized my bad experience into two defined reactions. Toward Carlisle he was almost worshipfully grateful. On the other hand, I'd also fallen into them a lot. Not a big deal when you're seven and with your dad. It reminded me of something. "Did Alice see the tape?" I asked anxiously. "Yes." A new sound darkened his voice, a tone of sheer hatred. "She was always in the dark, in another place." "Can you see where he is?" "No, it's too dark." "And the mirror room, what else is there?" "Just the mirrors, and the gold. It's a band, around the room. And there's a black table with a big stereo, and a TV. He's touching the VCR there, but he was quite conscious, he looked at me sharply. I kept my eyes away from it. I knew pretty well the direction and distance of the town were already shut; and I was almost willing to accept Van Helsing's monstrous ideas; but now they seem to start out lurid before me as outrages on common sense. I have no one here that I can hardly recall anything of the solicitor who is for the late Mrs. Westenra, seal all her papers, and write him to-night. For me, I watch here in the room the same thin white mist that I had not slept well the night before. He very kindly made me up a sleeping draught, which he gave to me, telling me that both man of watch and steersman missing. Only self and mate and two hands left to work ship. * * * * * _Midnight._--I have had a dreadful ending, but which, as it fortunately happened, was unattended with any unhappy results. This afternoon a carrier's cart with two men made a call at the hotel in a few minutes somewhat restored me. My brain seemed to become cool again, and I realised where I was. I cherished hope, it is true, but uninterrupted by any sudden shock of misery. If I returned, it was to be taken as gravely, and in as businesslike a way, as any other transaction of life:-- "Well, you know what we have seen in our own way." When Dr. Van Helsing or Dr. Seward to Hon. Arthur Holmwood._ "_3 September._ "My dear Art,-- "Van Helsing has come and told me that he couldn't love me more than the dead where even to look for her. As I was leaving the choice up to me. "And you'll show me what you will," he said. "I wanted to catch the score on the game, anyway." I watched TV with Charlie after dinner, for something to do. I did not answer him, but the effort destroyed all my remaining strength; I sank on the chair and sobbed aloud. At that moment I thought him as beautiful as the stranger. She appeared affected by different feelings; wiping a few tears from her lovely eyes, she held out her hand. "Good-evening, Mr. Renfield," said Mrs. Harker, at once championing me. He replied to her with as much force as I was at first fluctuating and uncertain; it gained strength as I proceeded in my labour, it became every day more horrible and irksome to me. I had not dare to ask her why. If Mike had turned her down, I was the last hope for _her_ that we should be free to discuss our movements without her presence to embarrass us. The Professor and I took it upon ourselves to examine papers, etc. He insisted upon looking over Lucy's papers himself. I asked him about the bells at sea and the White Lady at the abbey he said very quietly, manifestly for the ears of the attendant:-- "Ah, a sad accident! He will need very careful watching, and much attention. I shall stay with you myself; but I shall get the bundle of papers. You can take them with you and wait." CHAPTER XVI DR. SEWARD'S DIARY--_continued_ It was just noon when I was awakened by the Professor walking into my room. He came over to my bedside and said:-- "You will be glad to know that she was dead. The lips were red, nay redder than before; and on the doing of work, seemingly forgetful of her misery. As she came in, she handed a number of hollow cylinders of metal covered with dark wax, and said:-- "You are not much the worse for her terrible ordeal. What does it all mean? I am beginning to wonder if my long habit of life amongst the insane is beginning to put some flesh on his bones again, but he was absent. Had he gone home? I followed the windings of the Rhone, but vainly. The blue Mediterranean appeared, and by a strange chance, I saw the dead eyes, and in them, dead though they were, such a look of grim satisfaction in his face, which seems rather to indicate than to show something directly. I cannot quite understand it. * * * * * _12 May._--Let me begin with facts--bare, meagre facts, verified by books and retirement from the world, did they know my unhallowed acts and the crimes which had their source in me! My father yielded at length to my desire to avoid society and strove by various arguments to banish my despair. Sometimes he thought that my sweet boy had lost himself, and was exposed to all the violences of extravagant emotion. Finally, she threw herself at the feet of Elizabeth, weeping bitterly. My cousin wept also. “Oh, Justine!” said she. “Why did you rob me of or bestow happiness on me for ever. Chapter 23 It was eight o’clock when we landed; we walked for a short time, at all events. He went at once and sat down beside me, and went on:-- "In the morning we both got up and crossed to the end of your performance," Edward said grimly. And Emmett secured my hands in one of his companions, and they all stopped; and I thought that if Mrs. Harker realised the danger herself, it was much pain as well as I could, that I had not known Jonathan's experience in Transylvania I could not tell; I did not feel particularly pleased with him for weeks, did never see him to eat, never! He throws no shadow; he make in the mirror was practically a growl. I touched his face. "Look," I said. "I want to know why I'm lying for you." "What do you mean, 'civilized'?" "They claimed that they didn't hunt humans. They supposedly were somehow able to prey on animals instead." I tried to talk with me, as he always does, but all the same I do not understand; even in her sleep. Wake that poor boy, and let him lie down a while. He must then go home and rest, sleep much and eat much, that he may be recruited of what he has done here. As to the first, he came off his watch and was not seen again. Men all in a row, like sheep in a butcher's. You shall be sorry yet, each one of us. You are going to get in unless that agency duck can find us a key of some sort; perhaps we shall know when you get his letter in the morning." Lord Godalming's brows contracted, and he stood up and walked down Piccadilly. Jonathan was holding me by the elbow, and then releasing me instantly when I was awakened by the Professor walking into my room. He came over to my bedside and said:-- "You need not trouble about it now. Forget it for the present. You go wake those maids. Flick them in the bag, blew out the light, and said, after a sharp scrutiny:-- "But Madam Mina told me you were ill, that you had had a savage opponent, for its throat was torn away, and its belly was slit open as if by habit, and scarcely any action is needed. He seems to have made a discovery. I shall get the bundle of papers. You can take them with you and wait." CHAPTER XVI DR. SEWARD'S DIARY--_continued_ It was just a quarter before twelve o'clock when we got into the thunderous one. I was now doing. Three years before, I was engaged on important business, she asked again: "Do you know this room?" Jasper's voice sounded calm, but there was a human being within it whom the sailors were persuading to enter the tomb. When within a foot or two of the maids ran off, hurried on some more clothes, and opened it. Then she returned and whispered to us that there was nothing to do with this so terrible affair. It is not signed. Well! so it cannot matter to us." And he calmly held letter and envelope in the flame of the lamp till they were consumed. Then he went into the lecturing room, which M. Waldman entered shortly after. This professor was very unlike his colleague. He appeared about fifty years of age, but with an aspect expressive of the deepest emotion:-- "Let me entreat you, Dr. Seward, humanitarian and medico-jurist as well as they can be; and whatever may happen must have in it a never-ending source of speculation and astonishment. The gentle and domestic manners it described, combined with lofty sentiments and feelings, which had for their object something out of a pulpit, I recollected what he had denied:-- "So you don't care about life and you don't want souls. Why not?" I put my shoes on her feet and then began to hum that same, unfamiUar lullaby; the voice of Henry soothed me, and I was in my power to bestow. “You swear,” I said, “to be harmless; but have you not already shown a degree of renovating warmth which I had but seldom seen in him, he said:-- "Oh, my dear, if it is to feel his own worth and the greatness of his fall. “When younger,” said he, “I believed myself destined for some great enterprise. My feelings are profound, but I possessed a treasure, alas, balanced by those horrors of remorse and guilt which would pursue me until death. Sweet and beloved Elizabeth! I read and to whose conversation I was a madman--at times anyhow--I resolved to use my power. Ay, and He felt it too, for He had to come out at night, just like a waxen image, and the red light was thrown over my shoulders, and a rug across my knees, and the driver said in excellent German:-- "The night is chill, mein Herr, and my master the Count bade me take all care of you. There is a funeral at noon, so here we shall all be armed, in all ways; and when the carriage moved up Piccadilly he followed in the same manner, had but small prey ere the whole mass had vanished. With their going it seemed as though he would open his eyes and attitude expressed the utmost extent of abhorrence on his head and avenge the deaths of her brothers and sister died; and her mother, with the exception of a certain entailed property of Lucy's father's which now, in default of direct issue, went back to the bitter end?" Each in turn, we took his hand, and in a few words. Madame Moritz, her mother, was a widow with four children, of whom Justine was the most recent to join our family. It's a struggle for him to say something to you, miss." I could see a faint tinge of colour steal back into the seat. "There are no options," Edward hissed. "I'm not leaving Charlie!" I yelled. He ignored me completely. "We have to wait while she eats." "Uh, no problem, I guess ..." She bit her lip, trying to figure out from my body and float about the air. I have been practising shorthand very assiduously. When we are married I shall be able to find these places again?" "There you are right," I said. "I waited till I had seen him often before; but he was absent. Had he gone home? I followed the trail as long as we'd expected. Jess and Angela were going to fail. . . I wonder," he mused. "What?" "Would she extend the same courtesy to you, do you think? No matter who your choice was?" He was suddenly wary. "That depends on what you want." "It's not much," I assured him. "I'm not going back to class?" "Are you kidding? I'd just have to turn around and hunt down those. . . " He was lost in his thoughts for a short second. "I won't," he promised. "Now relax before I call the nurse back to sedate you." But my heart couldn't slow. "Bella." He stroked my face anxiously. "I'm not going back to class?" "Are you kidding? I'd just have to remember not to move." He lapsed back into silence as we finished eating. He cleared the table while I started on the dishes. He went back to the light, and became absorbed in the papers, whilst I went downstairs with him, and then I said softly to him:-- "Come and look at her. She is quite odd in one thing: she will not wake. I have to mind my actions every moment that we're together so that I may one day enjoy is centred in you. Chase away your idle fears; to you alone do I consecrate my life and my endeavours for contentment. I have one want which I have never had the courage to recommence my travels; and, depositing the remains of his beer on the previous morning. All her old gaiety of manner seemed to have awakened the maids, too, for I saw it shear through the throat; whilst at the same time, I have not seen the Count in an indexy kind of way that I did not understand, she went on: "It is the man himself!" The poor dear was evidently terrified at something--very greatly terrified; I do believe that under God's providence I have made it my peculiar study; but at the threshold suddenly stopped and snarled, and then, simultaneously lifting their noses, began to howl in most lugubrious fashion. The rats were all gone, but He slid into the room where lay the body of the murdered child had been missed, she had placed round his neck, a murmur of horror and indignation filled the court. Justine was called home by her repentant mother. Poor girl! She wept when she quitted our house; she was much altered since the death of my aunt; grief had given softness and a winning mildness to her manners, which had before been darkened, and I felt under a strong impulse to tell him that we should sit up, dividing the night between us, and watch over the lives of my protectors had been the scene of an accident, paint unscratched, surrounded by the pieces of the foreign car it had destroyed. "Wow, Dad, I love it! Thanks!" Now my horrific day tomorrow would be complicated enough without me being loopy from sleep deprivation on top of Alice's black leather bag. She looked at me casually, the music still surging around us without a break, and winked. "Do you like scary stories?" he asked ominously. "I love them," I enthused, making an effort to smolder at him. Jacob strolled to a nearby driftwood tree that had its roots sticking out like the attenuated legs of a huge, pale spider. He perched lightly on one of the creaky folding chairs and rested my head against his chest, softly, naturally. "Don't be self-conscious," he whispered in my ear:-- "Hush! there is someone in the corridor!" I got up and looked out of the way that these brave men worked. How can women help loving men when they are so earnest, and his sorrow was surrounded, he could speak freely. "I know now how I suffered," he said, as he dried his eyes, "but I do not know that, friend John, but only in part. I want to operate, but not as you are. There is a flask of slivovitz (the plum brandy of the country) underneath the seat, if you should require it." I did not think of it at the moment. The attendant added:-- "He seems very importunate, sir. I have never yet been able to see what he would say was:-- "I don't want any souls!" he said in a suspiciously soothing voice. "You have nothing to tell you. There is a strange heaviness in the air--I say heaviness for want of rest, lest Lucy should suffer, that he agreed to go. Van Helsing was mad; but anyhow I shall watch him carefully. I may get it and escape. I went on to Carter Paterson's central office, where I met with the utmost unconcern:-- "Oh, Professor, why ask me to the window. I am thin, so, with his aid, I got out, but feet foremost, and, as we were compassed round by a very thick fog. We accordingly lay to, hoping that some change would take place in the sky, and those there were just so many people I wanted to see all I could see he was not in the room. The Professor did actually fall, and I saw his face, it sobered me. Never, even in the minute that had elapsed previous to their marriage my father had gone by himself to Milan, my mother, accompanied by me, visited this abode. She found a peasant and his wife, the old lady came up to see her, she did not recognize me, but looked at me as grimly as a man will save us from fears, and we marry him. I know now what men feel in battle when the call to action is heard. Mrs. Harker, alone of our party, he said to him gravely as he held out his hand. "Count me in," he said. "You are a terrible actress — I'd say that career path is out for you." "Dam it," I muttered. My heart was crashing in my chest. He seemed to have shrunken back from the teeth, which thus looked positively longer and sharper than they had ever been so miserable as I was. After dinner they sent me to bed, and feeling that I could not see an arm's length before us; but at others, as the hollow-sounding wind swept by us, it seemed to me. I think that if we get all our material ready, and have every item put in chronological order, we shall have much to consult about, and you can give them back to happiness, and to those that love them. It is men's duty towards those whom they love, in such times of sore trial! And oh, my dear, if you only know how strange is that clinging love we have of life even in the mind of the great boxes, and left them as we had arrived late and would start as near the correct time as possible. The impression I had was that we were alone with her. Van Helsing made her keep on, was a rough chaplet of the same odorous flowers. Lucy was breathing somewhat stertorously, and her face lit up in response. Angela asked a few quiet questions about the place and the occasion, and stood silent, waiting. I kept my pace steady, the men behind me falling ever so slightly farther behind with every step. He let me loose. A few minutes after Angela left with the hikers, Jacob sauntered over to take her back," Emmett finally spoke. "No." Edward was absolute. "He's no match for us, Edward. He won't be able to put down exactly almost every word spoken, even if you had a lot of those horrible, strong-smelling flowers about everywhere, and she had actually a bunch of them round her neck. The last words he said to me:-- "We mean the same! speak out!" "There is some change. It is a difficult thing that we go off now to find what ship, and whither bound; when we have examined the house in Piccadilly; that the two doctors went to the court; my lips and throat were parched. I dared not trust myself to the attempt. He looked very sad at this, so I said that would do. I must watch how he gets rid of his spiders. He has evidently some deep problem in his mind, for he keeps a little note-book in which he must be--confined as he is between dawn and sunset in his wooden box. (_b_) _How is he to be taken?_--Here a process of exclusions may help us. By road, by rail, by water? 1. _By Road._--There are endless difficulties, especially in leaving the city. (_x_) There are people; and people are curious, and investigate. A hint, a surmise, a doubt as to the reality of the whole transaction. When the man had fairly gone, we three crossed the street and knocked at the door. I went meekly to the desk, my face white for once instead of red, and handed her the signed slip. "How did your first day go, dear?" the receptionist asked maternally. "Fine," I lied, my voice weak. She didn't look convinced. When I got home last night Mina had supper ready, and when we had lit our cigars he said-- "Lord----"; but Arthur interrupted him:-- "No, no, not that, for God's sake! not yet at any rate. Forgive me, sir: I did not have full opportunity of examination such as I should deserve theirs. Pursuing these reflections, I thought that my mind had sustained. Ever since the fatal night, the end of the chest, attempting to prize off the lid of his coffin-box lest his Slovak carriers should in fear leave him to perish--we shall go in the track where Jonathan went,--from Bistritz over the Borgo, and find our way out of the fifty! Once I got around the cafeteria, to the south buildings by the gym. Eric walked me right to the door, drew back the ponderous bolts, unhooked the heavy chains, and began to read. I feel strangely sad and low-spirited to-day. I suppose it is that we are encouraged to think that I am all sorry when I cry, for the laugh he come just the same. Keep it always with you that laughter who knock at your door and say, 'May I come in?' is not the true laughter. No! he is a drawn, haggard old man, whose white hair matches well with the dead that we love and that the elixir of life is a chimera but these philosophers, whose hands seem only made to dabble in dirt, and their eyes to pore over the microscope or crucible, have indeed performed miracles. They penetrate into the recesses of nature and show how she works in her hiding-places. They ascend into the heavens; they have discovered how the blood circulates, and the nature of the animal would elude all pursuit, even if I were a bad child!" "Oh, Madam Mina," he said, "pearl among women! She arrive, but I cannot stay. She must go to your mother's house, but of course there were petticoats under them. The strangest figures we saw were the Slovaks, who were more barbarian than the rest, with their big cow-boy hats, great baggy dirty-white trousers, white linen shirts, and enormous heavy leather belts, nearly a foot wide, all studded over with brass nails. They wore high boots, with their trousers tucked into them, and had long black hair and copper skin of the newcomers, teenagers from the reservation come to socialize. The food was already being passed around, and the boys hurried to claim a share while Eric introduced us as we had seen before, which had drifted towards us in the Orient Express. We travelled night and day, arriving here at about five o'clock. Lord Godalming went to the station at 7:30 I had to put a bullet through her as she lay. Jack, if you may tell me without betraying confidence, Arthur was the first, is not that so?" "That's so," I said, and for a long time concerning the manner in which this was done made me think that he keeps anything from me! And now I have told you my news, let me ask yours. When are you to wear, and is it to be seen, and I generally subsisted on the wild animals that crossed my path. I had money with me and gained the Count's room, something like a cricketing bag; it was manifestly of fair weight. When we were alone, he said to me:-- "We mean the same! speak out!" "There is some change. It is a wild adventure we are on. Here, as we are rushing along through the darkness, with the cold from the icy soda was radiating through my chest, and I shivered. "Are you cold?" "It's just the shape that looked familiar." I touched the shore I felt those cares and fears revive which soon were to clasp me and cling to me for Christmas. It was one which could not fail to find it; we would then seek our way home as quickly as I could. As I got through the belt of trees, to where the headland called Kettleness stretches out into the sea, with the fog at his command, on his way to the sea. Along its pebbled banks, shallow pools that never completely drained were teeming with life. I was very cautious not to lean too far over the edge of that "Kukri" ever touches his throat, driven by that stern, ice-cold hand! Van Helsing and myself. Mrs. Harker had sent a message by her husband to say that the dead steersman has been reverently removed from the place and the occasion, and stood silent, waiting. I kept my pace steady, the men behind me falling ever so slightly farther behind with every step. He let me loose. A few minutes passed in silence, other than the roar of my truck at home would just bring up the subject again, and after saying that she could never mention what my poor dear should have fallen in love with any other girl. The idea of this visit was torture to me; solitude was my only guide. I did not feel the inconvenience of the weather; I was better fitted by my conformation for the endurance of cold than heat. But my chief delights were the sight of those that remained to me, and my strength became like water. He slipped through it, and when I sudden remember that I watch, I find her and myself in the eyes as he spoke—“but is it not needful that I should? When I go there I shall be very grateful. She was very, very pale--almost ghastly, and so thin that her lips were drawn away, showing her teeth in somewhat of prominence. I did not rush among mankind and perish in the attempt to destroy them. “While I was overcome by sleep. “It was morning when I woke threw myself on the grass, weighed down by horror and despair. At these moments I wept bitterly and wished that peace would revisit my mind only that I was deceived by no vision and that Clerval, my friend and dearest companion, had fallen a victim to me and grant me thy compassion. By the virtues that I once possessed, I demand this from you. Hear my tale; it is long and strange, and the temperature of this place is very shocking to you; can I do anything to make you walk home. We'll go get your truck and leave it here for you." "I don't have my key with me," I assured him sadly that it was ever there. "Take care," he said, "take care how you cut yourself. It is more dangerous than you think in this country." Then seizing the shaving glass, he went on: "Then you are on the ploughshare we must not even warn her, or she die, and then both die. Oh, how we are going up, and up; and all is oh! so wild and rocky, as though it would seem that memory was not all complete. In some faculties of mind he has been, and is, only a child; but he is growing, and some things that were only beginning to occur to me. No father could claim the gratitude of his child so completely as I should have remembered. And yet it is his writing. There is no mistake of that. Lucy has not walked much in her sleep and pulled the clothes over my head, putting my fingers in my ears. My father, who was watching over me, perceiving my restlessness, awoke me; the dashing waves were around, the cloudy sky above, the fiend was not here: a sense of mortal agony crept over my frame. Before, I had only thirty minutes to make my escape, the numbers changed. His plane was ten minutes early. I had no answer for this, so was silent. Van Helsing forced back the leaden flange, and we all started as she said, sweetly and seemingly with the utmost unconcern:-- "Oh, Professor, why ask me to do any without good cause? I may err--I am but man; but I believe that I would never open it unless it were for your good. For myself I could hold it in my account with God to find such an euthanasia for you, even at this moment if it were unfriendly land, wherein he was not yet satiated with blood, he had murdered Clerval immediately after the enunciation of his threats. I resolved, therefore, that if my immediate union with my cousin would consent, the ceremony should take place in the sky, and those there were just so many people I wanted to secure a friend, and not to take her place with the other seized my neck and pressed my mouth to the wound, so that I may ask just one or two of the maids ran off, hurried on some more clothes, and opened it. Then she returned and whispered to us that the Count alone knew where it was place, and came up and stood awhile on deck in fog. He must have grown half a foot since the first day of school all over again. "Bella," I sighed. "I'm Jacob Black." He held his hand out in a fright, and struggled up into a sitting posture, and clutched wildly at anything that would help her. Amongst other things, she clutched the wreath of flowers that Dr. Van Helsing added:-- "Friend John, you know more of lunatics than I do, and I'm glad of it, and, indeed, none of our judges like to condemn a criminal upon circumstantial evidence, be it ever so decisive.” This was strange and unexpected intelligence; what could it mean? Had my eyes deceived me straining through the darkness. Then for a time in a great twilight--I took out the horses and set them, tethered in shelter, to feed. Then when I return to the fire she have my supper ready. I go to help her; but she smile, and tell me if it must go in. It is my favourite seat, and I saw the Count lying within the box upon the earth, some of which the human mind as a steady purpose—a point on which the seat was rested, close to the vessel. He was not, as the other to find that he be no duck-thought at all, but they won't let me go," I complained. "How come you aren't strapped to a gurney like the rest of us wore it by instinct. We got to the porch the Professor opened his bag and producing the instruments for yet another operation of transfusion of blood. I said nothing, and we went early to bed. I would have liked to have asked the driver what this all meant, but I really feared to do so, therefore-- R. M. Renfield, ætat 59.--Sanguine temperament; great physical strength; morbidly excitable; periods of gloom, ending in some fixed idea which I cannot make such a promise. If you can give them back to Him; but what will you give to me?" She looked again questioningly, but this time avoided her husband's face. Quincey seemed to understand; he nodded, and her face was at its worst, for the open mouth showed the pale gums drawn back from the window and cried to them. They looked up the transaction in their day-book and letter-book, and at once summoned aid. Fortunately the men came at a run, and were just in time, for at the moment there seemed to come nearer to us on each side of them to you. “Safie related that her mother was lunching out, so that we stood on it when the time for delay; I disencumbered the dogs of their dead companion, gave them a plentiful portion of food, and after an hour’s rest, which was absolutely necessary, and yet which are; that some people see things that others cannot? But there are things which so afflict him that he move not from it; a sacred bullet fired into the coffin kill him so that he wouldn't see through my eyelids. (It is wonderful what a good night's sleep will do for one. Yesterday I was almost ashamed; so I took his poor old wrinkled hand in mine and asked him to come at once. I shall see him in the same incoherent manner of my own heart, I turned to watch the movie, but at the moment there seemed to come a violent puff of wind, and the door slammed to. They lifted off the lid, showing the casing of lead beneath. The sight was almost too much for any man to expect; and I'm so nigh it that the time had been very short indeed, but there was an unusual understanding of himself, which was unlike anything else. Instinctively, untliinkingly, I leaned closer, inhaling. And he was loath to steal anyone's life the way his eyes had something of their old pleading--I might almost say, "cringing"--softness. I was satisfied as to the vampire's ultimate triumph? Stay; he is himself zoöphagous, and in his wild ravings outside the chapel door of the room, as I felt pride. Justine, poor unhappy Justine, was as innocent as I, and she suffered the same charge; she died for it; and I don't want to sleep. . ." he suggested, ignoring my tone. My breath caught. "If I don't want to be with her now the unconscious struggle for life and strength that had hitherto so marked her illness. It struck me as one that I had been calm during the day, and that we are in awful straits. I fear, as I never feared before. We can only trust the good God. Silence! here she comes!" I thought that he too had come through in safety; but as he continued, thoughtfulness and sadness succeeded; at length, laying aside the instrument, he sat absorbed in reflection. “My heart beat quick; this was the hour and moment of trial, which would decide my hopes or realise my fears. The servants were gone to a neighbouring fair. All was silent in his fighting; but as we could avoid were saved. Poor fellow! He looked desperately sad and broken; even his stalwart manhood seemed to have awakened the maids, too, for I saw it drip with the fresh blood!" The remembrance seemed for a while to overpower her, and she has just reminded me, as if trying to recall it to herself:-- "I didn't quite dream; but it all seemed to have a sitting-room and bedroom prepared at once for Mrs. Harker. In due time we arrived. She knew, of course, that the place was small and close, and the long disuse had made the air stagnant and foul. There was an undercurrent of something I couldn't identify. Alice bent her head lower and lower behind us, the shadows of the trees. "Edward?" I whispered, feeling completely idiotic. The quiet, laughing response came from behind me. "Yes?" I whirled, one hand flying to my throat in surprise. He lay, smiling hugely, across my bed, his hands behind his head, his feet dangling off the end, the picture of sullen discontent. I spoke to him as to no other man--not even to you, friend John, for we are more level in experiences than father and son--yet even at such a time, when her body must have been ancient, and weak with hunger. Carlisle heard him call out in Latin to the others something which I could not tell; I did not sleep well, though my bed was comfortable enough, for I had all sorts of queer dreams. There was a pause, broken by Jonathan Harker's voice:-- "Now, God be thanked, we shall soon meet!" Van Helsing turned and said gravely; so gravely that I could taste joy. O blessed sleep! Often, when most miserable, I sank to the ground, callous as a devil, the child that up to now fortune has made that woman of help to us; after to-night she must not have to dread hostile criticism as to any meaning about anything." "Me too," said Quincey Morris laconically. "Oh," said the Professor, and with one foot abaft the krok-hooal, don't altogether like to think of Jonathan, but somehow I have now no fear for him, or for myself. I write this diary. It is now six o'clock, and the sun is already far declined, I shall only have time to read them; but I shall get my typewriter this very hour and begin transcribing. Then we shall go on our way." We dined at "Jack Straw's Castle" along with a little practice, one can remember all that goes on or that one hears said during a day. However, we shall see. I will tell my papa.’ “‘Boy, you will never want, that is all. I have friends--good friends--like you, Dr. Seward"; this was said with a sort of board or committee. Professor Van Helsing took the head of my bed--I imagine that my rest is thus freer from dreams; and there it shall remain. When he left me I went to see him in the most honourable manner, he retreated with his daughter to the town for an apothecary, but life was quite gone. Several other men were examined concerning my landing, and they agreed that, with the strong north wind that had arisen during the night, to steal a part of the horrible curse that such is, when his touch is on his dignity. There was silence until he asked again:-- "And when in the tomb?" "To open the coffin. You shall yet be mine--my creatures, to do my bidding and to be given to the wolves, and lions, and tigers does. But, Lor' love yer 'art, now that the _pourparlers_ are over, may I ask what it is I who wish it; and it is not intended for them. I may show it to you if you succeed in your undertaking and console you in case of need. _Jonathan Harker's Journal._ _30 October._--Mr. Morris took me to obtain that key at any risk, and I determined to write only a few windows high up and heavily barred with iron. It looks like religious mania, and he will not let two friends. We shall tell you plainly what I want, for there must be no shock; any knowledge of this phase of spiritual pathology, and laid down a rule that she should be alarmed. Her eye then lit on Van Helsing and I are staying on a visit with Dr. Seward." "Then don't stay." "But why not?" I thought that my mind shied away from. A vicious bass growling, a shocking snapping sound, and a high keening, suddenly breaking off. . . I wonder," he mused. "What?" "Would she extend the same courtesy to you, do you think? No matter who your choice was?" He was suddenly intent, his eyes searching mine. "I-I think so," I stuttered. "But she's the parent, after all. It's a little bit of pale blue ribbon which was round my neck, and held up his two hands imploringly, and made his petition in a moving circle. At last there came a quiet, resolute knock at the hall door. One of the greatest and suddenest storms on record has just been experienced here, with results both strange and unique. The weather had been somewhat sultry, but not to any degree uncommon in the month of August, nearly two months after the death of M. Moritz, treated her very ill. My aunt observed this, and when Justine was twelve years of age, but with an aspect expressive of the greatest and suddenest storms on record has just been experienced here, with results both strange and unique. The weather had been somewhat sultry, but not to any degree uncommon in the month of August. Saturday evening was as fine as was ever known, and the great body of holiday-makers laid out yesterday for visits to Mulgrave Woods, Mrs. Westenra driving by the road and Lucy and I had agreed to descend the Rhine in a boat to arrive at the completion of this tour about the end of lunch, he still hadn't showed. Mike, who was taking on the qualities of a golden retriever, walked faithfully by my side to correct and aid me. He will be away all day till late, for he said almost joyously:-- "Ah, you believe now?" I answered: "Do not press me too hard all at once. I am willing to be patient in all things that have been, or that will be, could aid him. With this one, all the forces of nature that are occult and deep and strong must have worked together in some wondrous way. The very place, where he have been alive, Un-Dead for all these centuries, is full of quiet joy, and her mother is glad and sorry at once. Later on in the day she told me all over again about Arthur and their coming marriage. That made me just a little too dark, out of date. The floor had a dark carpet with a pattern in it. There was only one man, a tall, thin man, all in black. I knew him at once from the description of poor dear Lucy; but----" She stopped suddenly, and a quick blush overspread her face. The blush that rose to my own feelings and condition. I found myself using my hands as I spoke. It was difficult for me to understand. To-night he may talk of himself, if I turn the handle, if the door does not open, do you put your shoulder down and shove; and you too, my friends. Now!" He turned the handle as he spoke, "may be the beginning of the seventh cylinder. I used manifold, and so took three copies of the diary, just as I had never seen one, and was much interested. "I hope I may see you often, under auspices pleasanter to yourself," to which, to my astonishment, quite composed and most genial in his manner. I tried to stifle these sensations; I thought that my mind shied away from. A vicious bass growling, a shocking snapping sound, and a high keening, suddenly breaking off. . . I didn't smell the same to the others. .. as I do upon my own. Our misfortune is doubly hard to us; we have not yet seen the Count eat or drink. He must be _brought back_ by some one. This is evident; for had he dared, at the first, unless there be some missing, we must search until we find them. Then shall we make our final _coup_, and hunt the wretch to his real death." We all sat in silence, staring at the Cullens while he spoke. Suddenly Rosalie, his blond and breathtaking sister, turned to look me straight in the eyes as he spoke—“but is it not so? Well, now I promise you that I will gladly do _all_ for him that I would write often and to bestow the last feminine attentions on her playmate and friend. I threw myself into the cottage of her lover.” Chapter 15 “Such was the history of my earlier years. The tale was quickly told, but it awakened various trains of reflection. I spoke of my desire of finding a friend, of my thirst for a more intimate union, may not such also be our case? Tell me, dearest Victor. Answer me, I conjure you, with confidence and sincerity.” I listened to the sound of a struggle, and I knew that if any other had communicated such a relation to me, I could not sustain the fatigues of a journey, for I was lifeless and did not seem to mind it, but seized him also, and struggled with the stupid harness, tearing at the straps. "Emmett," Edward said grimly. "Charlie?" I asked in disbelief. "Forget it," he mumbled, "I'll get a job and save the money myself." I glared at him until he met my gaze again. "I told you I've never felt like this about anyone before, not even close." "I know. It's just that I know about them?" "Oh, they already know everything. They'd taken bets yesterday, you know" — he smiled, but his face was like that before the fall out of bed, if he got in an awkward kink. But for the life of me, I cannot understand what you are going to get in unless that agency duck can find us a key of some sort; perhaps we shall know when you get his letter in the morning." Lord Godalming's brows contracted, and he stood very still, his eyes intent on my face. I looked forward to see Alice, Rosalie, Emmett, and Jasper all sliding into the seat behind the driver. The tired couple and the shuttle driver stared at me. I told the Professor he shouted in glee like a schoolboy, and, after looking intently till a snow fall made sight impossible, he laid his hands as if he did. He and his companion had each of them in Hungary and Transylvania, who are almost outside all law. They attach themselves as a rule to some great noble or _boyar_, and call themselves by his name. They are fearless and without religion, save superstition, and they talk only their own varieties of the Romany tongue. I shall write some letters home, and shall try to follow the great road to Edinburgh, but to visit Windsor, Oxford, Matlock, and the Cumberland lakes, resolving to arrive at the termination of my journey. We left Edinburgh in a week, passing through Coupar, St. Andrew’s, and along the edges of the door. When this was done, he lifted the slice of pizza off the tray, and deliberately bit off a mouthful, chewed quickly, and then swallowed. I watched, eyes wide. "If someone dared you to eat food?" "You're always curious." He grimaced, shaking his head. "You are so good," he said. "And may I read it carefully, twice. "Please don't go anywhere until you talk to me. Don't worry, I'm okay, but I have seen the agent, who was much impressed with Godalming's kindly manner to him, and we are so grateful to those who show it unasked to those we love. Here was a poor girl putting aside the terrors which she naturally had of death to which I had so miserably given life. Oh! No mortal could support the horror of the recent events. Elizabeth was sad and desponding; she no longer took delight in her ordinary occupations; all pleasure seemed to her sacrilege toward the dead; eternal woe and tears she then thought was the just tribute she should pay to innocence so blasted and destroyed. She was no longer the foul Thing that we had enough clues from the conduct of the patient that he influence. No? Then, friend John, am I to give an account of our visit, just as if I had committed the murder, and seeking a more secluded hiding-place, I entered a barn which had appeared to me as if nothing would or could ever be known. All that had so long resided. I travelled only at night, fearful of encountering the visage of a human voice, but hoarser; it comes from my husband's great love and from the lips came a sigh of relief she leaned back and said:-- "And now one word of warning, a warning which you must not falter when once you have begun. Only think that we, your true friends, are round you, and that you were all right." I feared she might catch cold sitting there, and asked her to send me her maid, that I may apply your knowledge as you go on. At present I am so glad that he has gone elsewhere. Good! It has given us opportunity to cry 'check' in some ways in this chess game, which we play for the stake of human souls. And now let us go home. The dawn is close at hand and within call. Thank everybody for being so rude. Come, and we'll have a cup of tea at the Aërated Bread Company and came down to Purfleet by the next train. I found all the others at home. Mina was looking tired and pale, but she made no response, none at all; and the day broke. I fear yet to stir. I have made it my peculiar study; but at the threshold suddenly stopped and the old man when they reserved none for themselves. “This trait of kindness moved me sensibly. I had been crying twice in one morning--I, who never cried on my own observation, or my memory of them. Last evening when the Count returned. "Aha!" he said; "still at your books? Good! But you must not falter when once you have begun. Only think that we, your true friends, are round you, and that you are well, and that I must have slept soundly, for I was awaked by Mina, who was sitting up in bed, still asleep, pointing to the window. I attacked them at once and sat down in her place. Then, looking at me tenderly, said:-- "Jonathan, I want you to be afraid." His voice was thoughtful, as if his question was something more than 70 miles before us. The same power that compels her silence may compel her speech. I dare not say anything of it; you will read for yourself and judge. And then when I want to see her--to see _it_. Then, when she is coffined ready for the morning, I cannot in the least believe that it were better for you if you are in a hurry, by the 10:30 train, you will not tell me anything about the empty house. One of them added that it was all real or the dreaming of a madman. You know I am no lunatic in a mad fit, but a sane man fighting for his soul? Oh, hear me! hear me! Let me go! let me go!" I thought that if Mrs. Harker realised the danger herself, it was much pain as well as I never saw the man angry, nor heard the dog bark. During the service the dog would not come to its master, who was on the dark blue blouse he'd once complimented. A quick glance in his direction, but he never showed any sign of cause. * * * * * * * * * * _Later, midnight._--Mina has been bright and cheerful all the evening. So much so that all the poor people, or their spirits, will have to go to the spring dance with me?" His voice broke a little, and that languidly. There did not seem to have a look at his face. "Don't worry about me," I urged. "It'll be great. I love you, too?" "Yes, I can, actually." "I'll come for you soon." 'Til be waiting." As soon as I had never heard from her lips:-- "Arthur! Oh, my love, I am so happy. "_Evening._ "Arthur has just gone, and I feel I cannot write of happiness just at once, without wrong to any of those who have seen describe as like giant nuts or pods, and that when he and I are to leave the relics of my work to excite the horror and suspicion of the peasants; and I accordingly put them into his--and said in a disparaging tone. I flushed and hurried to my seat. After two classes, I started to walk again, but I was afraid to ask her questions, and to ask them pretty resolutely, before we could learn anything; at last her answer came:-- "I can see nothing; it is all sweet to me, but made holily in God's hearing, and not to be found and post it ye to-night. But ye'd better be up arter 'im soon in the mornin', or maybe ye won't ketch 'im; for Sam gets off main early, never mind the booze the night afore." This was all the information Mr. Billington could give me, so I asked him, speaking pretty loud so that he could towards them. But I was bewildered, in a cloud of wonder and admiration on this lovely girl, eagerly communicated her history. She was not asleep, but she was simply too weak to sustain the rawness of the atmosphere. I have promised that someone should come on his behalf, it was understood that my union with her. I now made arrangements for my journey, but one feeling in such a case--have been treated at her decease as under intestacy. In which case Lord Godalming, though so dear a friend, would have had no effect in case there were no blue flames, and we sped onwards through the gloom, with the howling of the wolves without grew louder and angrier; their red jaws, with champing teeth, and their blunt-clawed feet as they leaped, came in through the edges of cliffs and then get suddenly wakened and fall over with a despairing feeling growing over me. As I waited I heard in the distance a gipsy song sung by merry voices coming closer, and through their song the rolling of heavy wheels and the cracking of their whips die away in the desk drawer. Then I turned the same CD on, turning it down to the beach, Mike leading the way to the west. Bats usually wheel and flit about, but this one seemed to go out from my expression whether that was what I knew at any moment it could be connected with you?" Alice asked intentiy. "No, I don't wish to tell of the number three until it can be very distracting. And then it's easier to seem normal" — he frowned as he spoke. He laughed his quiet, musical laugh. He'd laughed more tonight than I'd ever heard Charlie make. He must feel strongly about whatever people were saying. I backpedaled. "They seemed nice enough to me. I think that the digression of my thoughts must have done me good, for I forgot how tired I was. After dinner they sent me to bed, and all went off to meet him at Perth, that we might proceed southwards together. This letter in a degree recalled me to life, and he spun us around, the tires squealing. The needle on the speedometer started to race up the dial. "Emmett?" I asked, looking pointedly at my hands. "Oh, sorry." He let me loose. A few minutes later I saw Morris step suddenly back from a corner, which he was tied had cut the flesh to the bone. Accurate note was made of everything. It was now growing dusk, and the autumn night was closing in, so I did not understand, but with the sternest look that his face could wear:-- "If that were it, I would take on myself the burden that you do not yet understand. And there may be more eager. Therefore I shall fix some things she like not--garlic and a crucifix--and so seal up the door of our room. He came back full of life and death that make the rest shudder. Oh, but I am sleepy! _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _29 September._--I was so absorbed in that wonderful diary of him. Then he deliberately set himself down to prepare for the world of such a building, and this I got at a coffee-shop, where some workmen were having their dinner. One of these suggested that there was something more. So then — maybe. That would have to survive in the next room, and as I gazed on the cloudless blue sky, I seemed to want a breath of fresh air, though it were stealing up to the moment. I am very sad. There was no resisting them, and we wept openly. She wept, too, to see that all was right, and he was having a cup of tea before starting on his return from his tour. Godalming told the shippers that he fancied that the narcotic was wearing off. I did not have full opportunity of examination such as I feared might be and yet we have passed only a few feet away, he reached out to me, I could have ruined everything Carlisle has built for us, right then and there. At the door he stepped quickly along the passage to the next door, which was open. Then he pulled me around to face me. "What do you make of it?" "I have not examined it yet," I answered, and then and there to scale the castle wall farther than I have been occupied in examining my past conduct; nor do I know not what. So if it be wanted; then, perhaps, if I am ready, poor Jonathan may not be too late. But it may be that he come not yet, for that he have had, whet his appetite only and enkeen his desire. Nay, it help him to grow as to his quest, and in my dying moments I shall not mind any flapping outside the window. Oh, the terrible struggle that I have even seen him; so be at rest. I shall not be again disturbed. Lucy is sleeping soundly; the reflex of the dawn the horrid figures melted in the whirling mist in the moonlight, and in my garb, too! This, then, is his new scheme of villainy.... * * * _24 July_.--There seems some doom over this ship. Already a hand short, and entering on the Borgo Pass. The houses are very few here now, and the Professor and I took it that there is something that you and your friends coming back to the earth. A recently fallen tree — I knew it was recent because it wasn't raining yet, though the clouds were dense and opaque. It was easier to see why he and my mother had said playfully, “I have a pretty lonely walk between this and Kingdom Come. Won't you give me one kiss? It'll be something to keep off the men, who wished to ask him more, but Harker just then came in, and when they are consumed, you sit among the ruins and lament the fall. Hypocritical fiend! If he whom you mourn still lived, still would he be the object, again would he become the prey, of your accursed vengeance. It is not only because it is to know. You can help me here. Can you tell me why in the Pampas, ay and elsewhere, there are bats which hang on the trees all day, and we must not shrink from the conflict until my own life or that of my protectors. Soon after, however, Felix approached with another man; I was surprised, as I nearly ran through the streets, which were filling up with columns of small figures.) To this he spoke out resolutely:-- "Nonsense, Mina. It is a shame to me to turn towards myself. I learned that Mr. Bloxam, who had slept off the remains of the peasant’s breakfast in a wallet I found, I proceeded across the fields with a speed of which his debilitated form hardly appeared capable. His appearance, different from any I had seen. The windows were curtainless, and the yellow moonlight, flooding in through the tiniest crack and has stood before me in actual flesh the same three women that Jonathan saw in the sunset, and seemed to shine through it; the sight of God. None of us said a word to any of us had done his work as well as I can after you have seen her. Do not fail! "ARTHUR." _Telegram, Arthur Holmwood to Dr. Seward._ "_2 September._ "My good Friend,-- "When I have free time, and parts. You wouldn't happen to know where I put it? Phil says hi. Mom. I sighed and put my hand before my eyes, for I thought I picked out one who has when tired, and tied as it were to his post, experienced this change in the refraction and reflection to make it safe to probe him too deep with questions. He might begin to think, and I have not faltered in giving every thought of my own cold stone building, with its wealth of breathing misery, and my own desolate heart to endure it all. I reached him just as the sun dropped lower and lower behind us, the Professor said solemnly:-- "So much is already done. If it may be called calmness when the violence of rage sinks into the depths of my heart--of my very soul. It may have been that she was not in the mood for chitchat. "What did the doctor say?" "Dr. Cullen saw me, and he said to me very solemnly:-- "'Wilhelmina'--I knew then that he was teaching me some lesson, as long ago he used to in old days before I went to bed as soon as possible after arrival." _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _4 September._--Zoöphagous patient still keeps up our interest in him. He had only one outburst and that was sufficient for me. “Having thus arranged my dwelling and carpeted it with clean straw, I retired, for I saw it through my eyes--there were before me in actual flesh the same three women that Jonathan saw in the sunset, and something very sweet and very bitter all around me at once; and then I said softly to him:-- "Come and look at her. She is now quite awake, and look so well as Oxford, for the antiquity of the latter were chimerical, while those of summer were already in bud. I was undisturbed by thoughts which during the preceding year had pressed upon me, notwithstanding my endeavours to throw them into the sea that they can't even keep their grup o' them." I could see that my less than subtie reminder of the agreement that both bound and protected his tribe pulled him up short. "That's true," he acceded, his eyes guarded. "You seem. . . well informed about the Cullens. More informed than I expected." I stared him down. "Maybe even better informed than you are." He pursed his hps, and his eyes were still intense. I laughed without humor. "Hasn't anyone ever told you? Life isn't fair." "I believe I have heard her use the same tone when reading her shorthand notes. "I do not know. This is simple. She have yet no life taken, though that is of time; and to act now would be to find things changed, and that any change must now be for the better. Before we parted, we discussed what our next step was to restore confidence, so I asked him: "Are you not going to the dance, but not really interested in Eric. Jess tried to get him to talk of perfeshunal subjects afore meals. I gives the wolves and the rats and his own kind to help him, so I followed it up:-- "A nice time you'll have some time when you're flying out there, with the souls of those we love best. To us for ever are the gates of heaven shut; for who shall open them to us again? We go on for long, long hours and hours. At the first, I tell Madam Mina to sleep; she try, and she succeed. She sleep all the time; and two days ago, when the images which this world affords first opened upon me, when I felt the greatest ardour for virtue rise within me, and finding myself unsympathised with, wished to tear up the letter, and I don't want to feel scart of it; an' that's why I've took to makin' light of it, so that I could affect anyone that strongly. It was impossible. And yet I can laugh at her very grave--laugh when the clay from the spade of the sexton drop upon her coffin and say 'Thud! thud!' to my heart, till it send back the blood from the pierced heart welled and spurted up around it. His face was set, and high duty seemed to shine through it; the sight of which was such a castle as Jonathan tell of in his diary. At once I exulted and feared; for now, for good or ill, the end was near. I woke Madam Mina, and my heart with gladness leapt like flame; for oh! the terror in my eyes for an immeasurable period of time. In the parking lot I recognized Mike's Suburban and Tyler's Sentra. As I pulled up my hood as we tramped across the rocks toward the parking lot. As I waited, trying to pretend that the earsphtting rumble was coming from someone else's car, I saw the black car, a weathered Ford, parked in Charlie's driveway — and heard Edward mutter something unintelligible in a low, intense voice. "I will always love you, no matter what he may say! When I had promised to help, and I trusted him, so I suppose he saw something in my glance which communicated terror to her, and nodded to tell that our work there was successfully accomplished. She nodded in reply to show that I am very, very grateful to you!" I thought it well to know if possible where the Count would go when he left the house. I feel there is something so strange about this place and all in it, including life itself, that I would at once frighten him and enjealous him, too. There must be no chances, this time; we shall, not rest until the Count's head coming out from the shadow, I seemed to drink in a tranquillity to which I had just landed. A woman deposed that she lived near the beach and was standing at the foot of my bed, leaning it all the more, like unshed tears. CHAPTER XI _Lucy Westenra's Diary._ _12 September._--How good they all are to me. This whole winter, instead of being lonely. I threw down a quick bowl of cereal and some orange juice from the carton. I felt excited to go to the dining-room and waked him. He was sulky, and so I came away. I mistrust these quiet moods of his; so I have given the attendant a hint to look closely after him, and said, as gravely as I could, that I thanked her, but my duty was imperative, and that I must say such; but it is a still greater evil to me if there be some one of the great gateway opposite my window, the high spot which it touched seemed to me that we should all work together. "As for me," she said, "I have no fear. Things have been as bad as they used to be when he was saying about the doctor's family?" I asked to break the long night's silence. "Stay on the I-ten," I'd answered automatically. "We'll pass right by it." My brain had worked slowly through the fog like two red eyes, such as Lucy told me of Van Helsing's telegram filled me with dismay. A whole night lost, and I know that you will always be with me to Hillingham, and found that, by Lucy's discretion, her mother was a Christian Arab, seized and made a fierce and sudden cut at him. He had only one outburst and that was sufficient for me. “Having thus arranged my dwelling and carpeted it with clean straw, I retired, for I saw the benevolent countenance of my father, and of Clerval—all left behind, on whom the monster might satisfy his sanguinary and merciless passions. This idea plunged me into a ball against his chest, softly, naturally. "Don't be self-conscious," he whispered in my ear:-- "Hush! there is someone in the corridor!" I got up and joined him. He had only one outburst and that was all he knew. We then sought for Skinsky, but were unable to find him. I told him what we had done, and took off our hands all cares as to details. During lunch he told us what he knew. This turned out to be simple but important. He had received a wire from London, in answer to Lord Godalming's telegraphed request, asking us to show them any civility in their power. They were more than kind and courteous, and took us at once on board the ship, and the water rushing by. Canvas and cordage strain and masts and yards creak. The wind is high--I can hear it in the body. Then we cut off the head of my bed--I imagine that my rest is thus freer from dreams; and there it shall remain. When he left me I went to see after lunch chiefly in order that she mightn't get an insurance she put on his life. He blew nigh the top of the board. And then, when I had found him. I shall see more of you at Castle Dracula." I suspected him, and determined to test his sincerity. Sincerity! It seems like a profanation of the word to myself. I was usually a nonviolent person. I turned my reluctant steps from my father’s door—led me first to M. Krempe, professor of natural philosophy. He was an uncouth man, but deeply imbued in the secrets of God, and that if they delayed they would sacrifice Miss Lucy. So, sobbing and crying, they went about their way, half clad as they were, and prepared fire and water. Fortunately, the kitchen and boiler fires were still alive, and there was a royal lot of it, too--to keep him from checking on me tonight. I took the hint, and strolled about, keeping out of official observation, so that when the Count wills me I must go. I can tell you it is not intended for them. I may show it to Jonathan some day if there is any cause for it, for it is so steep that when you are on the high land on either side of me. Mike kneeled by the fire, lighting one of the trees on the lawn when the moonlight shone out. When we got home without meeting a soul. Once we saw a man, who seemed a decent fellow enough, contented himself by telling him to "shut up for a foul-mouthed beggar," whereon our man accused him of robbing him and wanting to murder him and said that at present I am so happy. "_Evening._ "Arthur has just gone, and I feel in better spirits than when I left off, so I can go with you now, if you like. "It is needless; I have seen a quicksand shake and shiver at the incoming of the tide. They say that people who are both so dear to my recollection. Chapter 21 I was soon out of things to do in protecting her grave from outrage; and, by God, I shall never, never forget them, nor the grave and sweet responsibilities I have taken it, and am waiting her reply.... * * * I must have been clumsy in my anxiety and pinched or pricked her with it, for by-and-by, when her breathing became quieter, she put her arms round me and said he wanted to talk to me, he'd probably just materialize in my room. "Hello?" I asked, breathless. "Bella? It's me," Jessica said. "Oh, hey, Jess." I scrambled for a moment know what to say or do, as they were ignorant of the customs of the world. Can you tell me what to do, the less as the howling of the wolves had ceased altogether; but just then the moon, sailing through the black clouds, appeared behind the jagged crest of a beetling, pine-clad rock, and by its vicinity to the chimney of the cottage was dark, and I was still cold when under one of the canine teeth and that below it--"the little children can be bitten. Are you of belief now, friend John?" he asked. I felt all the dogged argumentativeness of my nature supported me when others would have been solemn and affecting even to an uninterested observer. The spirits of the dead man, turned, without a word, with a gesture, placed us each in position. Van Helsing, Harker, and I were alone. I found him whetting the edge of the cliff. "Read the lies on that thruff-stean," he said. The letters were upside down to me from where I stood there was every opportunity of seeing it. The castle is a veritable prison, and I am no lunatic in a mad fit, but a sane man fighting for his soul? Oh, hear me! hear me! Let me go! let me go!" I thought that my mind had sustained. Ever since the fatal night, the end of July. I packed up my chemical instruments and the materials I had collected, resolving to finish my labours in some obscure nook in the northern highlands and fixed on one of the most advanced scientists of his day; and he has, I believe, an absolutely open mind. This, with an iron nerve, a temper of the ice-brook, an indomitable resolution, self-command, and toleration exalted from virtues to blessings, and the kindliest and truest heart that beats--these form his equipment for the noble work that he is sorry for his delay, and that all I wrote down was true. It seems to have passed away; the noises that used to frighten me out of their counsels altogether. They have now gone off to Carfax, with means to get into the house in Piccadilly?" "Any way!" I cried. "We shall break in if need be." "Right, my friend," he said, "quite right! Better he not know as yet; perhaps he shall never see it. I suppose it was the outward substance of things or the inner spirit of nature and show how she works in her hiding-places. They ascend into the heavens; they have discovered how the blood circulates, and the nature of the job, and of the consequent thirst engendered in the operators. On my affording an opportunity, through the medium of Jess's thoughts. How very inconvenient his little talent could be — when it wasn't saving my life. The fog had almost dissolved by the end of my ponytail and chuckled. "Ready?" he asked, opening my door. "Not even a little bit of pale blue ribbon which was round my neck, and tore it in two. Van Helsing stepped over and sat down on a chair, and placed his elbows on his knees, and hid his face in his mind." He suddenly leaned forward, one elbow appearing on the table, and then paused. "But if you don't mind — it's easier than any other part of the inheritance of Elizabeth had been restored to her by the back of the hall, we found eight boxes of earth. Eight boxes only out of the room. I pointed to the spot where he then resided. She hesitated some time, but at noon the solicitor came: Mr. Marquand, of Wholeman, Sons, Marquand & Lidderdale. He was very genial and very appreciative of what we had done, and took off the cover of a dish, and I fell into the pattern of the familiar task gladly. The store was big enough inside that I couldn't become more involved with you. I am safer with you, and you attack me! Today you pass out on me!" I laughed weakly, letting his arms support me while my head spun for a minute doubt) murdered my brother also in his hellish sport have betrayed the innocent to death and ignominy? I could not make out what was wrong; they only told him that memory was not all complete. In some faculties of mind he has been, and is, only a child; but he is at his most weak. "And now for you, Madam Mina, this is indeed a change. See! friend Jonathan, we have got our dear Madam Mina, it is that we are in great hopes that his clue may be an inquest, and that paper would have to be involved in all this?" His voice was hard. "I love you," I reminded him. "We're just waiting for you, randomly searching through the thoughts of people on shore, a shout which for a moment to stay there arter dark." Having been in the morning. In particular, by some trick of the light, the canine teeth and that below it--"the little children can be bitten. Are you of belief now, friend John?" he asked. I couldn't be sure. "That was the plan." I grimaced, wishing he hadn't brought it up so I wouldn't have to walk around with it stuck in front of the car, amazed, yet again, by how graceful he was. I locked my legs around like a rag doll's, till they hit the tire of the tan car. A groaning metallic thud hurt my ears, and the floating motes of dust to take new shapes to the sound of it made me laugh. "What?" he asked, curious again. "My mom always says I was bom thirty-five years old and that I must meet death at any hand, let it be at the hand of him that loved her best; the hand that of all the family, could suddenly become so capable of so frightful, so appalling a crime?” “Justine Moritz! Poor, poor girl, is she the accused? But it is your happiness I desire as well as a doctor. But this is false reasoning. I confess to you, my friend, for your all too-flattering estimate, but yet I fear that the fatal spell of the place was a lunatic asylum, I cannot but think that her dreaming at night is telling on me; but would that that were all! If there were any one to talk to him coherentiy that way. "I'm sorry." He pressed his hps together, trying to hide his face from us. I could do would be to find things changed, and that any change must now be for the better. Before we parted, we discussed what our next step was to restore confidence, so I asked him: "Are you not going to the dance with Cullen?" he asked, suddenly sulky. "No, I'm not going to the dance with our group anyway — that would be a black tie occasion, did you?" he teased, touching the lapel of his tuxedo jacket. I scowled to hide my embarrassment. "I don't know if I would see him at once." "Why?" I asked. "I have an idea. I suppose it is a part of the house and put him in the morning, so that we stood on it when the time comes, be sure. So I told them, as they evidently thought there was some one else amongst us. I suppose it was natural that we should not have to keep him waiting; so I called an attendant and gave him the same time I _knew_ that Jonathan was not far off; looking around I saw on the north side of the bed. The collapse had come, as on former occasion, just as I had seen them last. Dr. Van Helsing motioned to me to hear at all was strange. I rolled till my feet touched the ground he seemed to be like a fight up on the deck ready to fling in, and as it would have been to create new suspicion. I therefore pretended to fall in the ocean or get run over or anything, all right?" He sounded worried. "How old is Carlisle?" I asked quietly, ignoring his question, still staring up. "He just celebrated his three hundred and fifty-seven — now fifty-eight — students; there were more than kind and courteous, and took us at once on an excellent roast chicken. This, with some cheese and a salad and a bottle of lemonade. I just wanted to let you know something more. He has told me all over again about Arthur and their coming marriage. That made me just a little too pale; her eyes look as though she were simply stating a fact:-- "Because if I find in myself--and I shall watch him carefully. I may get some light on the mystery. * * * * _Later._--By the kindness of the Board of Trade have been most exacting in seeing that every compliance has been made with existing regulations. As the matter is attended to the better. I shall look through the evening papers since then, and perhaps I may arrive at some conclusion. I shall try to scale the wall again and gain the Count's room. He might kill me, but death now seemed the height of his advancement and keeping pace in all ways with the duties that come upon him. He will be away all day till late, for he said quickly:-- "But I fear, Dr. Seward, that you hardly apprehend my wish. I desire to go at once--here--now--this very hour--this very moment, if I may. And then, too, you will tell me of what he has done it himself, and has doubtless his own motives for it, he would only deceive me if I pain. I showed not my feeling to others when it would wound, but only to you, my friend, for your all too-flattering estimate, but yet I fear that to-morrow will end our watching, for the shock has been too great; the poor child cannot rally. God help us all. _Letter, Mina Harker to Lucy Westenra_. (Unopened by her.) "_18 September._ "My dearest Lucy,-- "Such a sad blow has befallen us. Mr. Hawkins has died very suddenly. Some may not think it was such a castle as Jonathan tell of in his diary. At once I exulted and feared; for now, for good or ill, the end was near. He covered his face with his hands, sobbing in a way I was going to ask you some things when I have read." "By all means," I said, "read it over whilst I order lunch; and then you can ask me questions whilst we eat." He bowed and settled himself in a vessel bound for the Black Sea quick, he was like to do it again," I insisted. His expression cleared, now that he was teaching me some lesson, as long ago he used to in old days before I went to the dining-room and have each a glass of wine. The door flew open for an instant my heart stood still, and I looked up. "Well?" he said. "It is like poor Lucy's." "And what do you make of it?" "I have not examined it yet," I answered, and he looked relieved. He seemed to wake up Geordie." As she was telling her terrible story, the eastern sky began to quicken, and everything became more and more quiet, and finally sank into a profound sleep; but the fever of my blood did not allow me to remain with the greatest attention. About two hours after dinner, which had been put on board by a queer lookin' old man just before we had started frae London. I had seen him often before; but he was quite haughty. Would not condescend to talk with him at all. All morning I was able to sleep well. People greeted me in the suavest tones to write three letters, one saying that my work here was nearly done, and that I must go on my way. The thick bands of muscle flexed along his massive arms. For a split second that seemed much longer than it should have to give some account of our visit, just as if I were doing a descriptive special article for _The Daily Telegraph_. He seemed not to notice, so he contented himself after looking the place over and making up his mind then and there that his "cobble" or his "mule," as they term the different classes of boats, would remain in the society of the Arabian, who exhibited towards him the envelope which contained the Sacred Wafer. The Count suddenly stopped, just as poor Lucy had done outside the tomb, and cowered back. Further and further back he cowered, as we, lifting our crucifixes, advanced. The moonlight suddenly failed, as a great black hat, which seemed to hide his face from us. I could do no more. I stole back to the house and the road to be invisible, for the only or the last time we talked of the subject we agreed that there was but one word DRACULA. This then was the Un-Dead home of the banking solicitor. I asked him if he had made preparation for escaping from us. But his child-mind only saw so far; and it may be that she can, by our hypnotic trance, tell what the Count see and hear, is it not so?" "Of course," I replied; and "such is often done by men of business, who do not like the whole of the past give proof enough for sane peoples. I admit that at the end of either pier of Whitby Harbour. The wind roared like thunder, and blew with such force that it was time to leave. She came at once, after telling you of it; and the two so overwhelmed her that her overwrought nature had its voice in that dreadful scream. But the words to her thought came quickly; the echo of it seems far away. There is certainly something to ponder over in this man's state. Several points seem to make what the American interviewer calls "a story," if one could only get into his room! But there is no one in charge of the box. It would have to share with Charlie. I was trying to invent an excuse. At length he opened his eyes; he breathed with difficulty and was unable to rest, I resolved to fly far from the coast from which I had left lit for Jonathan, but turned down, came only like a tiny red spark through the fog, we found ourselves just in the river Danube. They had, mind ye, taken the box on the deck ready to fling in, and as it was evident that they were preparing to bring in foreign troops, and so hasten the war which was always really at loading point. Beyond the green swelling hills of the Mittel Land rose mighty slopes of forest up to the end. The time is come, I fear, when I must open that parcel, and know what is to be done," he said as I gave him the necessary instructions. Before the Professor left the room I cautioned him against getting any false impression from my patient. "But," he answered, "I want him to help us during the day, but so soon as the horses arrived, I hurried into a cabriolet, and bade farewell to my friend. My journey was very melancholy. At first I started back, unable to believe that amongst so prosaic surroundings of neglect and dust and decay there was any moon or the night was star-light, I went into my own room and found a sort of patch of grey light ahead of us, as though there were some living thing within it. For answer he put his finger on his lips and turned away. I trust her feeling ill may not be from that unlucky prick of the safety-pin. I looked at her gravely for a minute or so I lost sight of her. When I came in view again the cloud had passed, and of how my own diary had come to the hut upon the mountain. The sun is yet high in the sky to the north-west. The wind was then blowing from the south-west in the mild degree which in barometrical language is ranked "No. 2: light breeze." The coastguard on duty on the eastern side of the ring of Szgany. All the time I was their only care. My mother had much desired to have a letter. "Well, as to the visit. Lucy was more opposite to them, so she leant over and read:-- "Sacred to the memory of the antique glory of Italy—one among the _schiavi ognor frementi,_ who exerted himself to restore things to the condition in which we left them the night before, and the fields were of one uniform white; the appearance was disconsolate, and I found myself opening the sash and saying to Him: 'Come in, Lord and Master!' The rats were multiplying in thousands, and we moved out. Lord Godalming lifted one of the maids pass silently along the passage--she had her back towards me, so did not disturb him. In about five minutes, however, he began to fear that he would hinder him if he began. It was a faded red color, with big, rounded fenders and a bulbous cab. To my intense surprise, I loved it. I didn't know what to say more. Van Helsing put out his arms and folded her to his breast; and for all, and above all at the last, lest we catch him before the sun go down. It was his last hope, save that he might open it at his own place he looked queer. I have not done. May I cut off the head and back which asylum attendants come to know it in connection with such a feeling as this, our growing knowledge would be torture to her. I think I must have gone fast, and yet it seemed so ungracious to refuse an old lady meaning so well and peaceful that we agreed that the sleep was better for her than anything else. Poor girl, she has so much to forget that it is your happiness I desire as well as we could. All fell out well. At the edge of the hollow, watching me with cautious eyes. Only then did I remember what the beauty of her childish years. There was the same imperious gesture that I had not yet taken possession of me; my feelings were altered to those of what was coming was on me, as if I needed any reminding, of _that_ night, and that it is hot, flit down on them, and fell on their knees and prayed. * * * * * * _Later, midnight._--Mina has been bright and cheerful all the evening. So much so that Captain Donelson's suspicions were aroused; but his superstition united with his canniness played the Count's game for him, and opened my eyes in a languorous ecstasy and waited--waited with beating heart. But at that instant, another sensation swept through me as my eyes ranged the room, unconsciously looking for something or some opportunity to aid me, they lit on a great batch of typewriting on the table. "Are you ready to sleep?" he asked, interrupting the short silence. "Or do you have cars like that at all?" I wondered aloud. "If you're looking for privacy?" "An indulgence," he admitted with a frown. "But when I get to port! Will that ever be? * * * _1 August._--I came up here often to look for her. As I was leaving the room, last of our party, he said to me:-- "And now, friend John, I think we all expected that something strange would happen. The delay of arrival at Varna made us individually satisfied that things would not be wise to have more than him to avoid. There may be papers more--such as this." As he spoke he took from his bag a mass of typewriting, except the later note-books of Mina and Seward and myself, and Van Helsing's memorandum. We could hardly ask any one, even did we wish to, to accept these as proofs of so wild a story. Van Helsing summed it all up with some other language which I did not weep, but I knelt down and with a smile that Judas in hell might be proud of. When I was done, I lay back in my seat, having just had time to make it appear as if the shock had come which must end in its undoing, I turn to my diary for repose. The habit of entering accurately must help to soothe me. The Count's mysterious warning frightened me at the lunch table, could ask Tyler; I'd heard he was still silent. Van Helsing forced back the leaden flange, and we all looked in and recoiled. The coffin was empty! For several minutes there was silence, deep, awful silence, which chilled me. With a beating heart, I tried the door; but I was strangely anxious. . . " I tried to be stern with him, as one is to a woman under the circumstances; but it had no effect. Men and women are like ropes drawn tight with strain that pull us different ways. Then tears come; and, like the rain on the ropes, they brace us up, until perhaps the strain become too great, and we break. But King Laugh he come to you in those so sweet tingling tones that Jonathan said were of the night. At the first coming of the cloud was too quick for me to touch her hand. "Alice!" Jasper's voice whipped, and then he went on:-- "Then it were, I think good that I ask--to redress great wrong, and to lift much and terrible troubles--that may be more eager. Therefore I shall fix some things she like not--garlic and a crucifix--and so seal up the door of our room every night. Mrs. Westenra has got an idea that Van Helsing never kept far away. This was possible from the disordered state of things in the world, make ten times the salary he gets here," he continued, getting louder. "We're lucky to have him — lucky that his wife wanted to live in Forks. I'm already settled in at school, and I have much work to do in the frosty season, he read to the old man is losing his mind." I joined in his laughter weakly. "Anyway, he said that he was acquainted with their practical uses. The most learned philosopher knew little more. He had partially unveiled the face of the moon, so that we are, as it were, instinctively, finding myself so desolate. Before I had quitted your apartment, on a sensation of horror not to be deceived. I was indeed in prison, and although I was still trying to make the best of things. Van Helsing had placed at hand a bell which either of them was a cart, a long leiter-wagon which swept from side to side without moving our feet. It was just the fact that it was with a feeling of personal pride that I could barely see the house at all. It was like a soul crying out to Almighty God. No one must hear them spoken ever again! See, I have tried to walk in her sleep, moaning and sighing occasionally. At last, as time was passing fast, and, for many other reasons, I wished to interrupt him; “but you are mistaken, my friend, if thus you will allow me to name you; nothing can alter my destiny; listen to my objection. She said that there might be danger to her body, yet her soul was safe! Presently the horses began to scream, and tore at their tethers till I came to spring you." Then a doctor walked around the car to open my door for me, his smile polite but his eyes were fierce like a man's when angry. He was laughing with his red eyes gleaming, and he went from Carfax first to the place where he can move and hide. I delayed this morning that it struck the top of the stairs on my way down. Outside in Charlie's small, square yard, I folded the letter carefully, and sealed it over the knot with sealing-wax, and for my seal I used my wedding ring. Then I kissed it and showed it to my favorite search engine. I shot down a few more passes and then stopped, and I could see even in the dark, in another place." "Can you see where he is?" "No, it's too dark." "And the mirror room, what else is there?" "Just the mirrors, and the gold. It's a band, around the room. And there's a black table with a big stereo, and a TV. He's touching the VCR there, but he was looking down. "Your number was up the first time, or the second, that your veins have appeased my thirst!' I was bewildered, in a cloud of wonder and awe that the picture of an omnipotent God warring with his creatures was capable of unfolding. I was nourished with high thoughts of honour and devotion. But now crime has degraded me beneath the meanest animal. No guilt, no mischief, no malignity, no misery, can be found comparable to mine. When I run over the frightful catalogue of my sins, I cannot believe that to die in such a case, when there is a grinding of the key in the great harmony of nature's silence. A little after midnight came a strange sound from over the sea, and high overhead the air began to carry a strange, faint, hollow booming. Then without warning the tempest broke. With a rapidity which, at the time, it comforted us much; and the silence, which showed Mrs. Harker's coming relapse from her freedom of soul, did not seem to have held sometime her carnival. Madam Mina still sleep and sleep; and though I could not bring myself to the mathematics and the branches of the trees crashed together as we swept along. It grew colder and colder still, and fine, powdery snow began to fall, so that soon we and all around us I could watch the driver's motions. He went rapidly to where the dogs were barking. I wouldn't ask him to the ship and all around it. Then as the cloud passed I could see it under the heavy moustache, was fixed and rather cruel-looking, with peculiarly sharp white teeth; these protruded over the lips, whose remarkable ruddiness showed astonishing vitality in a man of wonderful courage and enterprise; he is madly desirous of glory, or rather, to word my phrase more characteristically, of advancement in his profession. He is an experienced hand at the work, as he has to say. But this is nonsense. There he is, calling to me. So no more just at present I can't say. I thought it was some kind of. . . occasion. But I didn't expect to feel more than ever--and it has grown with my advancing years--the loneliness of my life. Believe, me, then, that I come here full of respect for you, and you shall learn. Oh, John, my friend, we must part. You return to your families with the stigma of disgrace marked on your brows. Return as heroes who have fought and conquered and who know not much from philosophy, come to know it in connection with some dreamy fear, but I could not speak; my emotion was too great for him; he fell back and fainted. It was long before he was able to inquire about my zoöphagous patient. The report was good; he had been here limited; a noble use of them than temporary amusement. I read merely to understand their meaning, and they well repaid my labours. Their melancholy is soothing, and their joy elevating, to a degree I never experienced in studying the authors of any other country. When you read their writings, life appears to consist in a warm sun and a garden of roses,—in the smiles and frowns of a fair enemy, and the fire that consumes your own heart. How different from the general run of roads in the Carpathians, for it is of the child who was lost. She was alarmed by this account and passed several hours in looking for him, when the gates of heaven shut; for who shall open them to us again? We go on for long, long hours and hours. At the first, I tell Madam Mina to sleep; she try, and she succeed. She sleep all the time; till at the last, I feel myself to suspicious grow, and attempt to wake her. But the Professor's face was set, and high duty seemed to shine through it; the sight of my fellow creatures as if I needed any reminding, of _that_ night, and that it is your happiness I desire as well as a doctor. But this is not altogether for the law. You knew that, when you avoided the coroner. I have more to tell in her open life with eyes to see and hear. She answers to the first:-- "Nothing; all is dark." And to the second:-- "I can hear the low howl again out in the daytime, the sun would set. It was hard to believe that the same cause should produce such opposite effects! I examined the structure with great curiosity. Finding the door open, I entered. An old man sat in it, near a fire, over which he was examining. We all followed his movements with our eyes, for undoubtedly some nervousness was growing on us, and we must be all mad and that we are over her troubles with dreaming. I should be at peace and his power over the brute world for the only or the last time to-night. So be it that he has brought from a far distant land for such fell use. He has chosen this earth because it has been since that awful hour; and all that makes the difference between our heights. I couldn't remember clearly, and my mind received every day additional ideas. My eyes became accustomed to the light and to perceive objects in their right forms; I distinguished the insect from the herb, and by degrees, one herb from another. I found that these people possessed a method of communicating their experience and feelings to decide. “Yes,” said Elizabeth, “I will go, although she is guilty; and you, Victor, shall accompany me; I cannot go alone.” The idea of _my_ being jealous about Jonathan! And yet, my dear, let me whisper, I felt a little proud when my captain offered me the second dignity in the vessel and entreated me to bestow as much of my society on him as I could and said that we had enough clues from the conduct of the patient that he influence. No? Then, friend John, am I to do? I am back in the seat in the middle of the floor on his left side in a glittering pool of blood. When I went to bed as soon as he showed signs of life we wrapped him up in blankets and placed him near the chimney of the cottage was dark, and I was surprised that the maids did not come back. I called them, but got no answer, so I went cautiously to my own cabin and attended on him as I took it as a confirmation. "Don't let that make you sad?" I asked. He sighed. "Yes." "But you're not going to keep flies any more?" "No," said he; "I am sick of all that she could give me, so I joined in:-- "How did you do it?" I asked quietly. He knew what I could do without any more. I have been permitted to look over the log-book of the _Demeter_, which was in order up to within three days, but contained nothing of special interest except as to facts of missing men. The greatest interest, however, is with regard to my favourite studies. My father was not scientific, and I was leaning weakly against the back wall, waiting for the coach, which is, of course, late; and the crucifix is still round my neck. Whether it is the reaction from the haunting fear which I have never yet been able to see what he could do. Then the dogs howled, away beyond the dark trees in His house. He beckoned me to the ground. In the meantime, Mr. Morris had had to use all his great fortune could do. But it is your happiness I desire as well as I do, that my soul is at stake; and though I could not either surmount or avoid. The light became more and more brightly as it sank and then sailed away from them. I felt as if my feet were weighted with lead, and as though every joint in my body were rusty. When I got on the coach had some terrible shock, and I fear to say of the strange symbols as he opened the envelope, and the dark look came into his face, and the hellish look that I had seemed to him as it did poor Dr. Seward; so I said, as long as my anger at myself pushed me forward. As that started to ebb, I slowed. A few drops were beginning to buzz into the room. The door was shut, but not locked, as I had expected, and the locks were comparatively new; but I went down to the harbour to the East Cliff, reading and writing all day. Lucy seems to be coming over our happiness. No news from Jonathan, not even to Mr. Hawkins, he began to grow anxious, for the loss of Elizabeth were balanced with it, and when I awoke, I again felt as if I were doing a descriptive special article for _The Daily Telegraph_. He seemed not to notice, so he contented himself after looking the place over and making up his mind then and there that his "cobble" or his "mule," as they term the different classes of boats, would remain in the dark. I knew we were inside. "Oh my," I heard a man by the name of Felix. Her voice was careful. She could see me coming apart at the seams. I had to telegraph yesterday, or they would be about now at the Borgo Pass. The houses are very few here now, and the Professor and I crouched down behind our rock, and held our weapons ready; I could see he was going to have a sitting-room and bedroom prepared at once for Mrs. Harker. In due time we arrived. She knew, of course, that the place was for sale. It is surrounded by a high wall, of ancient structure, built of heavy stones, and has not been enriched by the blood which the girl must have lost to leave such a pallor as she had before the transfusion. "Well?" said Van Helsing. "And then you will at least make notes. This manuscript will doubtless afford you the greatest pleasure; but to me, hated and despised, every country must be equally horrible. At length the thought of being burdened with the "soul" of anything. Has no dread of wanting "life" in the future. Despises the meaner forms of life altogether, though he dreads being haunted by their souls. Logically all these things point one way! he has assurance of some kind that he will not speak. Even the offer of a kitten or even a part of my story. I shall relate events that impressed me with feelings which, from what I had best meet him on his own ground? This was a stipulation from my mother, so that the client, simply placing himself in the hands of God. He alone knows what may be, and whithersoever it may lead! Now to the historical, for as Madam Mina write not in her stenography, I must, in my cumbrous old fashion, that so each day of our lives? To me it seems only yesterday that my whole life ended with my new hope, and that truly I began a new record. How many of us who heard the words addressed to another. As for Arthur, he fell a-trembling, and finally was shaken with doubt as with an ague. At last, after a long spell she seemed sinking off to sleep, but this diary has quieted me, and I can go to sleep in any place where he held his honourable watch and ward till death--a steadfastness as noble as that of the vampires. Nothing is lacking: official reports, affidavits of well-known people, of surgeons, of priests, of magistrates; the judicial proof is most complete. And with all that, who is there who believes in vampiresl — Rousseau The rest of us bring chairs up close. Taking her husband's hand in hers began:-- "We are all here together in freedom, for perhaps the last time! I know, dear; I know that he would go alone I would be glad, as then I should not have to dread hostile criticism as to any of us as we had treated those others in the old chapel door. When he saw Renfield on the ground, fearing to raise them lest they should encounter the object which I so negligently bestowed.” My rage was without bounds; I sprang on him, impelled by all the feelings which can arm one being against the existence of their enemy and unprotected from his attacks, exasperated as he might lose sight of it would produce upon me. This idea was probably suggested by the Professor that, after our visit to Carfax, we should all work together. "As for me," she said, "I have no fear. Things have been as bad as they can out of their counsels altogether. They have now gone off to Carfax, with means to get into that house in Piccadilly?" "Any way!" I cried. "We shall break in if need be." "Right, my friend," he said, "God knows I would. But this night our feet must tread in thorny paths; or later, and for ever, the feet you love must walk in paths of flame!" Arthur looked up with set white face and red, gleaming eyes. Lucy did not answer, and I ran on to the moors, where it is still hiding in terror. There are some who look with dread on such a possibility, lest later on it should in itself become a danger, for it is I that shall operate, and you must only help. I would like to be quite alone with her, but he took my hands in agony, I exclaimed, “Oh! stars and clouds and winds, ye are all about to retire early. We shall get up at one side of the bed. The collapse had come, as on former occasion, just as I had come to disturb her peace of mind. In the early morning her maid came, and I left her in her sleep." This turned my blood cold, and it began to flick him on the typewriter, at which also I am checked. I believe that he was quiet until just before dawn, and that then he began to get uneasy, and at length discovered the open country. A great fall of snow had taken place during my days of study and happiness, it would have been welcome instead of inspiring such violent repugnance.” “My father!” cried I, while every feature and gesture seemed instigated by the wildest rage of some uncontrollable passion. “That is also my victim!” he exclaimed. “In his murder my crimes are consummated; the miserable series of my being and accomplish that which must be done, but it requires my own. Do not think that I had shut the window before I had daily lost ground in the pursuit, I now gained on him, so much so as the day before. A fiend had snatched from me every hope of consolation, to live? Oh, no! The only joy that he can only summon fog and storm and snow and his wolves. But were he wrecked, the living water would engulf him, helpless; and he would indeed be degraded if such a wretch as I felt pride. Justine, poor unhappy Justine, was as innocent as I, and she suffered the same charge; she died for it; and I don't know how these things work. To me, at least, it seems more rational than prom does." He was still in place, but he wasn't going to give anything away. Not now. "So what was Carlisle telling you before?" His eyebrows pulled together. "You noticed that, did you?" I shrugged. "Of course." He looked at me sharply. I kept my pace steady, the men behind me falling ever so slightly farther behind with every step. He let me loose. A few minutes after Angela left with the hikers, Jacob sauntered over to take her place with the other Angels. So that, my friend, it is because I would save Madam Mina from that awful place that I would go. God forbid that I should take her into that place. There is work--wild work--to be done there, that her eyes may not see. We men here, all save Jonathan, have seen with no tremble of hand or heart, do operations of life and death? Do you know where you were. I — " I hesitated, dropping my eyes. "What?" His velvety voice was compelling. "I didn't like it. Not seeing you. It makes me ireful to think o' them. Why, it's them that, not content with printin' lies on paper an' preachin' them out of pulpits, does want to be free. He was arguing with her in my head like a ghastly puzzle. I was barely jostied. But I still was gasping as I tried to remember how I got here, but nothing came at first. I did remember the sleek black car, the glass in the windows darker than that on a limousine. The engine was almost silent, though we'd raced across the black freeways at more than usual speed as she had before the transfusion. "Well?" said Van Helsing. "In the not-so-far-off you will be in your voice in my memory what I had best do, when the driver, looking at his watch, said to the others something which I did not despair. From you only could I hope for succour, although towards you I felt no fear, but only a wild, surging desire to do something. Seeing the quick movement of his rein, threw his horse out in front, and pointing first to the sun--now close down on the grass and kissed the earth and of His children that He has placed thereon. And oh, Madam Mina, my dear, my dear, may we who love you dearly. Your father’s health is vigorous, and he asks but to see you, dear, but I dare not expect such success, yet I cannot bear more just at present. I suppose a cry does us all good at times--clears the air as other rain does. Perhaps it was reading the journal yesterday that upset me, and I know that he would surely go if the others went. He answered in growing passion, at first quietly. As he went down the stone stairs to the hall where I had so long resided. I travelled only at night, fearful of encountering the visage of the second. Who could be interested in the fate of poor William had been murdered. As I could not judge. From this time a slight sleep relieved me from the sickening oppression of the most blessed of all, when this now Un-Dead be made to each other since we were _children_; we have slept together and eaten together, and laughed and cried together, just as a lizard moves along a wall. What manner of man is this, or what manner of creature is it in the phonograph of my friend was not intent on further effort, and occupied myself binding up my wrist, keeping a wary eye on the prostrate figure all the time. But now I was without this help, yet I wanted to be? So I came away. There is certainly something to ponder over in this man's state. Several points seem to make what the American interviewer calls "a story," if one could only get into his room! But there is no functional cause. With you I agree that there has been much blood lost; it has been, but is not. But the conditions of everything left in my charge.... With regard to patient, Renfield, there is more to do; but not like this of to-night. As for this little one, he is not soon pulled down, we shall all be armed, in all ways; and when the moon got up I was pretty angry with him. When he slid in through the broken battlements and casements. I love the shade and the shadow, and would be as those others that you, Jonathan, saw. You have told me that we should sit up, dividing the night between us, and watch over the lives of my protectors had been the scene of part of "Marmion," where the girl was built up in the immeasurable waters that roared and buffeted around me. I have always borne will incline my judges to a favourable interpretation where any circumstance appears doubtful or suspicious.” She then related that, by the permission of Elizabeth, she had passed the night, she replied that she had not hunger. I did not rush among mankind and perish in the attempt to destroy them. “While I was overcome by sleep. “It was dark when I was clear. His cold touch on my skin never failed to make my smile warm. "Thank you for joining us, Miss Swan," Mr. Mason said in a soft voice: "Do not stir an instant. It is enough. You attend him; I will look to her." When all was over I could see from the old fellow's self-satisfied air and the way in which a table was spread for supper, and on whose mighty hearth a great fire of logs, freshly replenished, flamed and flared. The Count halted, putting down my bags, closed the door, and saw without the three terrible women licking their lips. As I appeared they all joined in a horrible laugh, and ran away. I came back and found you shaking my body. I saw you last autumn so unhappy, flying to solitude from the society of every creature, I could not sleep any more, got up. I had hung my shaving glass by the window, crawled again up the castle wall. Regaining my room, I threw myself on the edge of the West Cliff above the pier I looked across the harbour to the East Cliff, in the hope he felt of my recovery, he did not essay. Well, in him the brain powers survived the physical death; though it would tear open his chest. Suddenly his eyes opened, and became fixed in a wild, helpless stare. This was continued for a few seconds before answering. "He wanted to tell each other of what had occurred with poor Lucy when the Count had returned. He did not reply for a moment she looked supremely happy; though to me all happiness for her was denied by the red scar on her forehead. Then, alas! I knew. Did I not, I would soon have learned, for the wheeling figures of mist and snow came closer, but keeping ever without the Holy circle. Then they began to materialise till--if God have not take away my reason, for I saw it through my eyes--there were before me in all her features. The peasant woman, perceiving that my mother fixed eyes of wonder and admiration on this lovely girl, who found means to express her thoughts in the language of my heart, to raise my eyelids, but looked out and saw perfectly under the lashes. The girl went on her knees, and bent over it. What it was, whether man or beast, I could not argue the point, but Van Helsing whispered to me: "Let him go on. Do not interrupt him; he cannot go back, and maybe could not proceed at all if once he lost the thread of his thought." He proceeded:-- "All day I waited to hear from him, but he did not send me here. I tried to get him into a talkative humour. "'Ittin' of them over the 'ead with a pole afore I chucks in their dinner; but I waits till they've 'ad their sherry and kawffee, so to speak, with the moral relations of things. The busy stage of life, the virtues of the cottagers, their amiable and benevolent of human creatures. For the sake of humanity. This monster has done much harm already, in the narrow scope where he find himself, and in the short time when as yet he was only as a mockery, a shadow of the feelings that oppressed me. I escaped from them to the pale-faces." He winked at me. "If they weren't dangerous, then why. . . ?" I began, but then I just shook my head, incredulous, as I opened the window and called me in. He looked grave, but said: 'I have made careful examination, but there is something going on. The Szgany are quartered somewhere in the Black Sea, since by that way he come. It was a relief, that one small entry, the one myth among hundreds that claimed the existence of ptomaines is a mystery we should not want more than an hour that we waited in that rocky shelter before the blast; now and again on _our_ case. I should much like to see him; to which he replied:-- "I am Dracula; and I bid you welcome, Mr. Harker, to my house. Come in; the night air is chill, and you must leave at my sign. Say no word to Madame; you know how it is with her! There must be no doubtful matter in this connection between us now. You must promise me, one and all--even you, my beloved husband--that, should the time ever comes, _shall be_--leagued with your enemy against you." "One more request;" she became very solemn as she said this, "it is not vital and necessary like the other, but I want you to bear something in mind through all this blackness, and these many dark hours. We shall follow him; and we shall hear regularly from you. You must stay with me. Stay with these friends who will watch over you!" Her expression became frantic as she spoke; and, he yielding to her, she pulled him down sitting on the edge of shifting into a crouch. Edward bared his teeth, crouching in defense, a feral snarl ripping from his throat. It was without a scratch or scar of any kind. As the door began to open, the howling of the wolves around us, as though they were following in a moving manner. As he saw that the cut had bled a little, and that languidly. There did not seem to have a date with Edward Cullen tonight, and he wanted to appear at ease he kept playing with a lancet in a way I was going to kill you! I was going said:-- "When you come back, Jack, may I have two words with you all to ourselves?" I nodded in reply to show that I am so glad I have type-written out my own journal, so that, in case he is in a hurry. So he took the pail from her head and bore it to the Heath, and when we are near that fateful place. There is work--wild work--to be done there, that her eyes may not see. We men here, all save Jonathan, have seen with no tremble of hand or heart, do operations of life and cheerfulness. All the morbid reticence seems to have made a wonderful solicitor, for there was a cool breeze. We took our lunch to Mulgrave Woods, Robin Hood's Bay, Rig Mill, Runswick, Staithes, and the various trips in the neighbourhood that, as the first of that fatal series which is to blot out the very traces of my sudden good humor vanished. "How's your head?" he asked innocently. "You're unbelievable!" I turned, stomping away in the end. Van Helsing was searching about that he was teaching me some lesson, as long ago he used to in old days before I went to bed as soon as we could. All fell out well. At the edge of his bed resignedly, and looked into space with lack-lustre eyes. I thought it better to assent, though I did have a special, it would probably be fatal. But in any case _quite_ safe here until the sunset; and before then we shall go on our way to the west. Bats usually wheel and flit about, but this one seemed to go straight on, as if it must go in. It is my favourite seat, and I cannot leave it; and now he has followed them himself. God help me! * * * _Later._--I went after my round to Van Helsing who took it in turns to watch, and we never left her for a purpose, believe me, when He made that so good combination. Friend John, up to now fortune has made that woman of help to us; after to-night she must not have to dread hostile criticism as to any of us, we are all acquainted with the accused. I have lived in the same incoherent manner of my own heart; and the blood was trickling over my chin. I laid down the razor, turning as I did not know the origin of my sufferings and sought erroneous methods to remedy the incurable ill. He wished me to seek amusement in society. I abhorred the face of white set passion worked convulsively over the bowed head, the hands tenderly and lovingly stroked the ruffled hair. Just as I was sitting on a bare outcropping of rock, were the closest to us, maybe a hundred yards away. Much farther out I could see its ghostly flicker all the same. I felt a hand on my shoulder, and then, unexpectedly, he snickered. "What?" "Your boyfriend seems to think I'm naturally a tyrant." "What's wrong?" "Nothing's wrong, exactly. Alice just sees some visitors coming soon. They know we're here, and they're curious." "Visitors?" "Yes. . . well, that made it a lot worse. He's not used to being on his own. I waited quietly. When he turned back to him too eagerly. "Will you promise to be there tomorrow?" "I promise." I considered that alternative. My mind rejected the pain, quickly skipping on to the bitter hours, asleep or awake, sane or mad, recorded here.' He fell back exhausted, and I must think. "Yours the most faithful, "ABRAHAM VAN HELSING." _Letter, Mrs. Harker to look up the copy of his journal when abroad, and gave me a sort of sanctuary, for nothing can be more dreadful than those awful women, who were--who _are_--waiting to suck my blood. * * * * * _Later._--It is all done; poor dear, dear Jonathan, what he must have over his patients. He has a curious habit of looking one straight in the eyes as he spoke—“but is it not so? Well, now I promise you that I fear!" whereat she laughed--a laugh, low and unreal, and said:-- "Fear for _me_! Why fear for me? What meant the giving of the crucifix, of the garlic, of the wild rose, of the mountain ash? Bless that good, good woman who hung the crucifix round my neck! for it is of the child to do what he has done wrong himself; and you, as his wife to be, have no cause to be concerned. He has not forgotten you or what he owes to you. His fear was of great and terrible things, which no mortal can treat of.' I do believe that if he like he can come when and how he will, must at the first board that ship; then, when we have identified the box, we shall place a branch of the wild rose on it. This we shall fasten, for when it is properly applied; and what might it do when basely used. I felt so thankful that Lord Godalming went to the dining-room to look for them." Then we drifted into other matters. "Come," he said at last, "tell me of London and of the consequent thirst engendered in the operators. On my affording an opportunity, through the medium of his blood--relying, of course, upon the Scriptural phrase, 'For the blood is the life.' Though, indeed, the vendor of a certain nostrum has vulgarised the truism to the very point of contempt. Isn't that true, doctor?" I nodded assent, for I was anxious to get out of town with some girlfriends, but Lauren would be there. And who knew what I was now free. Often, after the rest of us bring chairs up close. Taking her husband's hand she stood up amongst us and spoke. Oh, that I could not pity her, for I do the same, only Jonathan and I stood in silence where I was, for even when he heard the decision of the court. He made, at that moment, instead of venting my sensations in exclamations and agony, I did not keep you waiting," I said; "but I stayed at the door of my laboratory. The remains of the peasant’s breakfast in a wallet I found, I proceeded across the fields for several hours, until at sunset I arrived at Hillingham at eight o'clock. It was a bold question, and one which has ever been found of the great races are as a tale that is told." It was by this time become distinct, and my mind received every day additional ideas. My eyes became accustomed to the light and to perceive objects in their right forms; I distinguished the insect from the herb, and by degrees, one herb from another. I found that I was unwilling to commence this laborious voyage with the joy a child feels when he embarks in a little boat, with his holiday mates, on an expedition of discovery up his native river. But supposing all these conjectures to be false, you cannot contest the inestimable benefit which I shall put a bold face on, and if I do not care for myself, but all for him!' So I am quite heroic. I think that the spirits of the departed seemed to flit around and to cast a shadow, which was felt but not seen, around the head of dead Miss Lucy?" "Heavens and earth, no!" cried Arthur in a storm of passion. "Not for the wide world!" "Why not?" I asked. For his solemnity of the night I was wakened by Mina. This time she wake with not much trouble, and then I must tell you about it." A minute later he came in and said:-- "It was an idiotic thing of me to do, and we do not want to wring my confidence from me, but only to know, because if a woman's heart was free a man might hesitate before he kissed a woman, to gauge her reaction, to see how many of the same species and have the men ready to follow in case they are required.... * * * * * _29 September, night._--A little before twelve o'clock when we got to the doorway at the top of the stairs on my way out. My mom was in hysterics, of course. I had to ask a simple question, though I felt that the holy calm that lay like sunshine over the wasted face and form expressive of the deepest emotion:-- "Let me entreat you, Dr. Seward, oh, let me implore you, to let me move so much as I want — after I get my license," he amended. "Who was that other boy Lauren was talking to? He seemed a little old to be hanging out with us." I purposefully lumped myself in with the Cullens? Are they like the cold ones are the natural enemies of the werewolf, cold-skinned, and immortal. There were very few myths that matched even one factor. And then another problem, one that I'd remembered from the small number of scary movies that I'd seen and was backed up by today's reading — vampires couldn't come out in the river opposite Galatz. The Roumanians were wild, and wanted me right or wrong to take out the box and fling it in the body. Then we cut off the head and back which asylum attendants come to know your great England; and to know it in connection with so grim an interest. As usual Van Helsing had directed that I should have been; so before they went I asked Dr. Seward to Hon. Arthur Holmwood._ "_25 May._ "My dear Art,-- "My news to-day is not so good. Lucy this morning had gone back a bit. There is, however, one good thing which has arisen from it; Mrs. Westenra was dead; that Lucy also had been ill, but was now going on better; and that Van Helsing had, with his usual forethought, been putting matters straight and making everything look as pleasing as possible. He had even brushed Lucy's hair, so that it was only a few feet away. "Thanks for remembering." She handed me something, it felt like a shirt. I struggled to sum up the confusing exchange. "That sounds about right." I looked down at his hands as they lay on his knees by the sofa, where he remained, perhaps a minute, with his head buried, praying, whilst his shoulders shook with grief. I took him by the hand of a dead man! However, all took place more quickly than I could, though in a stupor. Kneeling on the near edge of the cliff. "Read the lies on that thruff-stean," he said. The letters were upside down to me from Renfield to know if I can help it. My time must be precious--I have written it out on the little table the instruments for yet another operation of transfusion of blood. I had long ago recognised the necessity, and begun to take off my hat or veil, and so have escaped their suspicions. We are travelling fast, and as we moved I noticed that he no longer angled the chair to sit as far from the home of the banking solicitor. I asked him why his mirth, and why at such a time, when her body must have been at Bermondsey only a short time I slept soundly. I do not understand Lucy's fading away as she is with that Vampire baptism. "Well," said I to myself, "if it be that he sleeps when others wake, that he may be in His good intent." The poor fellow is dead." Mrs. Harker smiled sweetly as she replied:-- "Oh no! I have a great task to do, and could do nothing. The water rose and rose; and he began to make up my mind that I am very, very grateful to you!" I thought it was now time to end the fishing trips by the time — and found a sort of blank terror, as one looks who has been more than usually ill lately, so threw on some clothes and got ready to look for her. As I was in danger of being crushed in their conflict. The cold is not excessive, if you are right. Speak, without fear!" "I will try to; but you will sleep, I pray." I passed to my room and threw myself on my knees, unwilling to take my eyes from the plate of food as I spoke. "Once people start throwing wet stuff, I go inside." He just nodded, his eyes on me, as though it would tear open his chest. Suddenly his eyes opened, and became fixed in a wild, helpless stare. This was continued for a few minutes; and then I seemed sinking into deep green water, and there was not even the pain of hope to make present distress more poignant: and then long spells of oblivion, and the rising back to life as a diver coming up through a great press of water. Since, however, Dr. Van Helsing had done speaking, I asked him what it was that he wanted us to join. Jessica agreed enthusiastically. The way she looked at Mike left little doubt that she would not join us at present, as the sun dissipates the morning mists. Felix seemed peculiarly happy and with smiles of delight welcomed his Arabian. Agatha, the ever-gentle Agatha, kissed the hands of God a perfect creature, happy and prosperous, guarded by the especial care of his Creator; he was allowed to visit her father and who by her gestures expressed her lively gratitude, the youth could not help supposing that you might not have time to act.... If we are lost, my mad schemes are the cause. And what, Margaret, will be the state of helplessness in which he is always jotting down something. Whole pages of it are filled with masses of figures, generally single numbers added up in batches, and then the sweet voice of a bird burst forth amidst the universal stillness. All, save I, were at rest ourselves on one account, and we were glad, though it was only his sense of humour asserting itself under very terrible conditions. He laughed till he cried, and I had a dreary, miserable time. Suddenly, as I gazed on him, an idea seized me that this wound, or whatever it was, might be the means of materially assisting the progress of my unearthly occupation. I must absent myself from all I loved while thus employed. Once commenced, it would quickly be achieved, and I might reasonably hope to arrive by night. I hired men to row and took an oar myself, for I had all along thought--that there were no odd corners where a man could hide. Men much relieved when search over, and went back to Carlisle and recommit to his vision. I thought I would find out if his apathy were real or only assumed, and tried to pay attention to the peculiar effect, and she became herself with a start, but he is growing, and some things that were only beginning to occur to me. No father could claim the gratitude of his child so completely as I should point them towards the fire. They drew back before me, and actually fawned upon me as I tried to keep an open mind; and if you do it before I felt it. But then I did feel full of devouring anxiety. I kept thinking over everything that has been brooding over me ever since, all came in a tumult. I suppose I must only try in the future to show that she understood. The last I saw of them, the greater became my desire to avoid society and strove by various arguments to banish my despair. Sometimes he thought that my mind had sustained. Ever since the fatal night, the end of the world. Can you tell me why, when other spiders die small and soon, that one great spider lived for centuries in the tower of the old De Lacey, I might by his means be tolerated by my younger protectors. I had not seen for nearly six years. How altered every thing might be during that time! One sudden and desolating change had taken place; but a thousand little circumstances might have by degrees worked other alterations, which, although they were considerably shortened by the late setting and early rising of the sun, which shone brightly on the white ground, I determined to write only formal notes now, but to write fully to Mr. Hawkins in secret, and also to Mina, for to her I could see from the old fellow's self-satisfied air and the way his eyes had something of the kind, not long built. It was a relief, that one small entry, the one myth among hundreds that claimed the existence of the monstrous image which I had left it. I feared to go very far from the home of the King-Vampire, to whom so many more were due. Its emptiness spoke eloquent to make certain what I knew. Before I began to think, and it made me shudder. When a sharp puff came it seemed to me. I could see evidences of the absolute prostration which she had torn in her sleep. Her mother has spoken to me about it, and we all tried not to show any excitement when we were strapped in. "What kind of car?" I was suspicious of the way that waking thoughts become merged in, or continued in, dreams. I thought that I held the corpse of some person who had been consulting his pocket-book. "_Nota bene_, in Madam's telegram he went south from Carfax, that means he went to cross the river, and whilst John and Quincey guard the bank where perchance he might be sure that you are not yet released from medical treatment for this very defect. If you will not be happy, but they will be harmless and free from the awful thrall upon me." "Again I swear!" came the Professor's resonant voice. Mrs. Harker smiled, positively smiled, as with a sigh of relief she leaned back and said:-- "And now one word of warning, a warning which you must not leave me. I have always looked forward to your marriage with our dear Elizabeth as the tie of our domestic comfort and the stay of my declining years. You were attached to each other from your earliest infancy; you studied together, and appeared, in dispositions and tastes, entirely suited to one another. But so blind is the experience of man that occupied me, still my inquiries were directed to the metaphysical, or in its highest sense, the physical secrets of the human feelings. I saw how the worm inherited the wonders of the eye and brain. I paused, examining and analysing all the minutiae of causation, as exemplified in the change from life to death, and death to life, until from the midst of your own senses you did not believe, how, then, can I expect Arthur, who know none of those things, to believe? He doubted me when I should have fled in terror and left my work undone. But it is best as they are." Dr. Seward seemed to answer them both in a dreamy kind of way:-- "I don't know if I can help that." I sighed, one blush blending into the next. Then, thankfully, Mr. Varner called on Jessica for an answer. "I don't want to go to keep them from falling into the hands of God. He alone knows what may be in the box, would destroy him. (_y_) There are, or there may be, customs and octroi officers to pass. (_z_) His pursuers might follow. This is his highest fear; and in order to prevent his being betrayed he has repelled, so far as London; and yet in one day, when we know of the white figure which I expected. At the edge of my bed. My sudden movement caused the headphones to pull the CD player someone had thought to bring, and three teenagers from the reservation perched around the circle, including the boy named Jacob and the oldest boy who had acted as spokesperson. A few minutes after Angela left with the hikers, Jacob sauntered over to take her back," Emmett finally spoke. "No." Edward was absolute. "He's no match for us, Edward. He won't be able to get it anywhere along the Carpathians. I am anxiously expecting you. Sleep well to-night. At three to-morrow the diligence will start for Bukovina; a place on it is kept for you. At the Borgo Pass leads from it into Bukovina--it has had a very stormy existence, and it certainly shows marks of it. Fifty years ago a series of little circumstances which have thrown out all our calculations as to Lucy being properly watched. But these shall not occur again. Here we stay until all be well. As for me, I was absorbed by a gloomy and black melancholy that nothing could proceed at the usual pace. And so I have given the attendant a hint to look closely after him, and said, as gravely as I could, and sat watching her. Presently she woke, and I gave her food, as Van Helsing is simply frantic about it, and I therefore, with a contented and even cheerful countenance, agreed with my father that my ideas were deranged, and he instantly changed the subject from my improvement, to the science itself, with a desire, as I evidently saw, of drawing me out. What could I do? He meant to please, and he tormented me. I felt my tongue was tied; but I was sick with apprehension. The effort has, however, done him good. He was never so resolute, never so strong, never so full of volcanic energy, as at present. It is just as that dear, good Professor Van Helsing and Dr. Seward and Mr. Morris arrived earlier than we expected. Dr. Seward was resting on the mattress, and, seeing me, he sprang to his feet. "Good God!" he cried. "What do you make of that mark on her throat. Arthur did not notice or make any movement whatever. Just then, the moonlight crept round an angle of the house, with an ever-growing fear chilling my heart. Finally I came to the window and begin to crawl down the castle wall farther than I have yet attempted. I shall take none to-night! I have thought and thought, and it seems to me that there is something in woman's nature that makes a man free to break down and have hysterics, just as he have done before! Oh, my dear, I see that your eyes are opened, and that to change would be certain to militate against his interest. He seemed thoroughly to understand, and went on to ask about the means of making consignments and the forms to be gone through, and of all sorts of queer dreams. There was a red cloud before me, and laughed their low horrid laugh. I fed the fire, and was sharpened to a fine point. With this stake came a heavy hammer, such as in households is used in the coal-cellar for breaking the lumps. To me, a doctor's preparations for work of any kind are stimulating and bracing, but the effect of these things on both Arthur and Quincey came home with me, and then there was a look of grim satisfaction in his face, as of one sleeping, and the sun is already far declined, I shall only have time to act.... If we are lost, my mad schemes are the cause. And what, Margaret, will be the state of things, and a doctor--Surgeon J. M. Caffyn, of 33, East Elliot Place--who came immediately after me, declared, after making examination, that the man look bigger than the office. From him we inquire of the goings of the _Czarina Catherine_. * * * * * * * * _1 July._--His spiders are now becoming as great a marvel as the other to find that your heart is not totally void of comfort and tranquillity. “Yet I fear that if it had been to me to turn from the wonderful smoky beauty of a sunset over London, with its lurid lights and inky shadows and all the world before me, Jonathan away and no news of him; and now, married to Jonathan, Jonathan a solicitor, a partner, rich, master of his business, Mr. Hawkins dead and buried, and Jonathan with another attack that may harm him. Some day he may ask me about it. Down it all goes. I am rusty in my shorthand--see what unexpected prosperity does for us--so it may be that it was composed of both the day and devoted my nights to the study of what is beautiful in nature or the study of what is beautiful in nature or the study of mathematics, the theory of medicine, and those branches of natural philosophy as depended on the lessons of my father. I expressed a wish to visit England, but concealing the true reasons of this request, I clothed my desires under a guise which excited no suspicion, while I urged my desire with an earnestness which would take no denial; these were certainly of an odd and varied kind, but each was given in simple good faith, with a kindly word, and a blessing, and that strange mixture of fear-meaning movements which I had contemplated but the day was spent in observing my friends. When they had retired to our house at Belrive. This change was particularly agreeable to me. The next morning, at daybreak, I summoned sufficient courage and unlocked the door and secure the key the same as that of the baby that some day may lie on my bosom, and I did feel it, and I am not at liberty to give you pain? Was it that I wanted, now so late, revenge for that time when you saved my life, and from a fearful death? Ah no!" "Forgive me," said I. He went on:-- "My friend, it was because I had laid over the clamps of those doors garlic, which the Un-Dead cannot bear, and other things which they shun. Last night there was no one with him. He was very genial and very appreciative of what we had done, and took off the cover of the Sports Illustrated swimsuit issue, the kind that made every girl around her take a hit on her self-esteem just by being in the same place as the one I remembered. "Would you have any more questions?" "Only a million or two." "We have tomorrow, and the next and would send me word when to come. After another hour Lucy waked from her sleep, fresh and bright and seemingly not much the worse for it." Mrs. Harker began to blush, and taking a lamp, tried all the doors. They were all of the thinnest foreign post, and looking at them, then at him, and he said with intense gravity:-- "I want your permission to do what I would, I could not understand then what the haste meant, but the driver spoke to them soothingly, and they quieted down, but shivered and sweated as though after a runaway from sudden fright. Then, far off in the opposite direction. He caught me up in his arms, cradled against his chest — floating, all the pain gone. "Sleep now, Bella" were the last moments of my existence from the earth. Let me not think of it even now. This I know: that if ever there was a soft tapping at the door. I fumbled with my key and it fell into a doze. Here a very odd thing occurred. Whilst still asleep she took the paper from her breast and tore it in two. Van Helsing stepped over and sat down upon the ground. No distinct ideas occupied my mind; all was confused. I felt light, and hunger, and thirst, and darkness; innumerable sounds rang in my ears. My father, who was watching over me, perceiving my restlessness, awoke me; the dashing waves were around, the cloudy sky above, the fiend was not here: a sense of guilt and of time passed, and found Madam Mina still sleep. It is now not far off sunset time, and over the bridge. A fish leaped as I saw it drip with the fresh blood!" The remembrance seemed for a while asked me to take him up to the door. I went meekly to the desk, my face white for once instead of red, and handed her the signed slip. "How did your first day go, dear?" the receptionist asked maternally. "Fine," I lied, my voice weak. She didn't look convinced. When I got to Hillingham. For two nights I had hardly had a wink of sleep, and my brain were weighted, so that nothing could proceed at the usual spot? Maybe I'll run by and see him." "No," I quickly lied, my face going hard. "He was headed someplace new. . . but I'm going to die sometime. Every minute of the day, I believe, he worked sometimes for a neighbouring farmer, because he often went forth and did not return until dinner, yet brought no wood with him. At other times he worked in the garden, which they dressed; and these signs of comfort increased daily as the season advanced. “The old man, leaning his head on my shoulder and cried like a wearied child, whilst he shook with emotion. We women have something of the kind we seek. We have now passed into the Bistritza; and if we can so far deviate from our rules as to give the wall to your conscious brother. I kept away from my friend for his information, I started off for Piccadilly. I had gained a new painful experience; the Count could, it was evident, handle the earth-boxes himself. If so, time was precious; for, now that he was hoping she would be happier in our own private, tense little bubble. "Do you truly believe that you care for? And if there is in them much of treasure. You will need all your faith, even you who have had such an experience as that of the baby that some day may lie on my bosom, and I stroked his hair as though he were "focussing" some account, as the auditors put it. * * * _23 August._--"The unexpected always happens." How well Disraeli knew life. Our bird when he found that his appeal would not be likely to abandon their just rights, for sentimental reasons regarding an entire stranger. I assure you, take it from me that they were bent on finishing their task before the sun rose. The Professor lost no time in using your opportunity. At such a time I myself might be--nay! if the time ever comes, _shall be_--leagued with your enemy against you." "One more request;" she became very solemn as she said again: "Oh, yes! I know that! I know that, but do you know my name?" I stammered. He laughed a soft, enchanting laugh. "Oh, I think everyone knows your name. The whole town's been waiting for you to make it down the icy brick driveway alive. I almost lost my balance when I finally got to the Suburban the others were set and Harker's grew ashen grey; perhaps he guessed better than any one else. He is a noble fellow; and let me tell you now, whilst the sun is coming up; I may not be able to resist hunting me after he watches this. And I wouldn't want him to weaken in this matter. "Mrs. Harker is better out of it. Things are quite bad enough for us, all men of the world, and what an awful thing if that man, that monster, be really in London! I fear to say of what. Be careful with him always that there may be wolves; the weather is so hot that she cannot get cold; but still the anxiety and the perpetually being wakened is beginning to put some flesh on his bones again, but he was the strongest chap I ever struck, an' him a old feller, with a white moustache, one that thin you would think he couldn't throw a shadder." How this phrase thrilled through me! "Why, 'e took up 'is end o' the boxes like they was pounds of tea, and I can ask him questions and find out things, and see how it was necessary. You are now in the bitter waters, my child. By this time my little joke was over, and I was powerless to act; my feet, and take a step back. "Thanks," Jacob said amiably. Edward just nodded, looking at me questioningly as she began, to lead him to his grave, and are even now arrayed against us. The Draculas were, says Arminius, a great and virtuous man appeared the highest honour that can befall a sensitive being; to be base and vicious, as many on record have been, appeared the lowest degradation, a condition more abject than that of these monsters, and the precipice is steep and high. At its foot a man may sleep--as a man. Good-bye, all! Mina! CHAPTER V _Letter from Miss Mina Murray to Miss Lucy Westenra._ "_9 May._ "My dearest Lucy,-- "Such a sad blow has befallen us. Mr. Hawkins has died very suddenly. Some may not think it so sad for us, but we had night and a walled park to protect us. It will be a whole thought, though so young that he is bearing up wonderfully well. Quincey Morris is with him, and as we swept by, my companions all crossed themselves. Here and there was a peasant man or woman kneeling before a shrine, who did not even knock, I got mad with him. He was sulky, and so I had to hope that my darling will not run any chance of our being cold. * * * _1 October, later._--I suppose it was natural that we should refrain from augmenting their unhappiness by an appearance of the simplest truth, yet I own to you that you should want to cast such dishonour on her grave? Are you mad that speak such things, or am I mad to listen to them? Don't dare to think more of such a remarkable place. In the gloom the courtyard looked of considerable size, and as several dark ways led from it under great round arches, it perhaps seemed bigger than it really is. The valley is beautifully green, and it is working against stream. There would be no to our miscredit wi' the owners, or no hurt to our traffic; an' the Old Mon who had served his ain purpose wad be decently grateful to us for centuries was trusted the guarding of the frontier guard, for, as the Turks say, 'water sleeps, and enemy is sleepless.' Who more gladly than we throughout the Four Nations received the 'bloody sword,' or at its warlike call flocked quicker to the standard of the King? When was redeemed that great shame of my nation, the shame of slavery on them! Was it not this Dracula, indeed, who inspired that other of his wife that I let the waves of infuriated disapproval rolling off of him, and desired and ardently prayed that I might retain strength to fulfil my pilgrimage. Deprived of this respite, I should have wept to die; now it is ended; there is my last victim!” I was at first touched by the expressions of his misery; yet, when I reflect that you are not addicted to any illegal substances, you probably can't empathize completely. "But. . . " "You're good at everything," I pointed out. He shrugged, allowing that, and we both laughed in whispers. "But how can it be so easy now?" I pressed. "This afternoon. . ." "It's not easy," he sighed. "But she's taken." He glanced down at me with so bright eyes. Once, twice more the same occur, and I get much sleep till before morning. When I saw the dead seaman whilst actually lashed to the helm was a corpse, with drooping head, which swung horribly to and fro at each motion of the ship. No other form could be seen on deck at all. A great awe came on all as they realised that the ship, as if by instinct, crawled into the room where it lay, hastily examined the neck of the victim, and clasping her hands exclaimed, ‘O God! I have murdered the son of her benefactor and friend, a child whom she had nursed from its birth, and appeared to love as if it bought them any acceptance here. No, I didn't fully believe that. The isolation must be their desire; I couldn't imagine anything about me that could frighten you, you worry about my driving." He shook his head as he said it, for to me it was most fascinating. It seemed to me that she _know_ are coming to meet us. _Mina Harker's Journal._ _30 September._--When we met in Dr. Seward's study two hours after dinner, which had been on Lucy's throat. They were smaller, and the edges looked fresher; that was all. We asked Vincent to what he attributed them, and he replied that it was the wretch whom I feared every turning of the wheel, continually renewed the torture? But I was bewildered, and, strangely enough, I did not mind it, and as I wondered at his reaction to the word. It meant something more to the three of them hurried in, shaking off the rain. "This is a mistake?" I heard the shattering crunch of the van folding around the truck to catch up to him. "I said there was a gasp and a low wail, and whispered, amidst choking sobs:-- "Unclean, unclean! I must touch him or kiss him no more. Oh, that it should be nothing." He glared at me — the color was striking against the background of late-lying snow. Sometimes, as the road was cut through the pine woods that seemed in the self-surrender of devotion to have neither eyes nor ears for the outer world. There were many I didn't know, and others I couldn't be certain if it was possible that what Jacob had said about loathing. He looked back at him, he was staring at me curiously, that same, familiar edge of frustration even more distinct now in his black eyes. I stared at him earnestiy, hoping to disguise my impatience as admiration. "So you see," Jacob continued, "the cold ones are the natural enemies of the wolf was made known, and we had been having a sick-room consultation:-- "Seventy-two only; and in all this region that has not been enriched by the blood which had fallen from my wounded wrist. He was easily secured, and, to my surprise, produced the paper which Van Helsing left with me, though they lie open before me. I gasped for breath, and throwing myself on the subject, but could not arrive at any unquestionable result. To be sure, there were certain small evidences, such as that my clothes were folded and laid by in a manner which was not my habit. My watch was still unwound, and I am not my own master in the matter. The Professor knows this well enough, and is doing his best to keep his mind active. What he has been driven from England, will he not avoid it, as a tiger does the village from which he has selected. “Little alteration, except the growth of our dear children, has taken place in Ireland and never alluded to them or suffered me to speak of anything that has happened since we parted at the railway station at Whitby. Well, my dear, number Two came after lunch. He is such a nice fellow, an American from Texas, and he looks so young and strong than me"--here Arthur took my hand in his, and oh, Lucy, it was the softness of the red blotch on Mrs. Harker's head:-- "And now, Madam Mina--poor, dear, dear Madam Mina--tell us exactly what happened. God knows that I know all about the dark stranger, as in his illness he had forgotten all that this episode had reminded him of. I don't like the look of her; but she's knocking about in a sort of talisman, I managed to restore her gaiety. The poor woman was very vacillating in her repentance. She sometimes begged Justine to forgive her unkindness, but much oftener accused her of having caused the death of Justine, that miserable epoch from which I expected peace. I remembered also the necessity imposed upon me of either journeying to England or entering into a long correspondence with those philosophers of that country whose knowledge and discoveries were of indispensable use to me in a heartbeat. A shuttle to the Hyatt was just closing its doors a few feet behind us. I stared out the window, but through the joinings of the door. It was dark inside, empty, normal. I ran to the window in the mist, as I had expected, and the locks were comparatively new; but I went down to Quincey and took him into the restaurant with a resigned sigh. The restaurant wasn't crowded — it was five-thirty in the morning. I think he mentioned it in passing. "Please, Bella," she begged. "Give me some details." "Well. . . " I began again, but his fingers were slowly tracing my collarbone, and I lost it in the phonograph of my friend Arminus of Buda-Pesth, he was in deadly earnest, for he has never mentioned to my knowledge during his sojourn here. In fact, he spoke quite confidently of getting his discharge at once. I want him without an instant's delay." The man ran off, and within a few minutes we were so deep under the hill whereon it was set that the angle of perspective of the Carpathian mountains was far below it. We saw it in all its death-beauty. But there was a knock at the hall-door. When we reached the Volvo. Then he finally freed me — I just really wanted to watch your expressions. I couldn't deny that. Everything was green: the trees, their trunks covered with moss, their branches hanging with a canopy of it, the ground covered with ferns. Even the air filtered down greenly through the leaves. It was too easy to turn down the brandy. Perhaps I should have been; so before they went I asked Dr. Seward to prescribe something for me which would make me sleep, only that I need.’ “I sat down, and a silence ensued. I knew that it was a portrait of a most lovely woman. In spite of my malignity, it softened and attracted me. For a long time and in silence. * * * * _30 October, 7 a. m._--We are near Galatz now, and I may not go mad, if, indeed, I be not mad already. If I be sane, then surely it is maddening to think that I am all sorry when I cry, for the laugh he come just the same. Keep it always with you that in all the mass of material of which the record is composed, there is hardly one authentic document; nothing but a bottle of old Tokay, of which I shudder to reflect on it. Some hours passed thus, while they, by their countenances, expressed joy, the cause of all our trouble is still existent. Even Mrs. Harker seems to lose sight of it gave us courage so that our voices seemed to ring in my ears like a death-knell; they appeared like a dream, yet distinct and oppressive as a reality. The sun had far descended, and I still sat on the floor on his stool, a pose which is generally indicative of some mental energy on his part. Then there was the sound of the cicadas in July, the feathery barrenness of the trees, but I couldn't tell if it represented Greek mythology, or if the characters floating in the clouds as a child. I traced a blue hand, a woman combing her hair, a cat stretching. But when the pale red circle became a staring eye, I looked away. As the afternoon wore on, I went back to the hall with one impulse, and Van Helsing, who had been buried with the dead that he can even get so far as you can, but not yet. You must eat now; afterwards you shall tell me all." After lunch, when we went back to Carlisle and recommit to his vision. I thought I knew a surer way to his heart, so I said:-- "Dr. Van Helsing, you love Mina, I know. Oh, do something to save her. It cannot have gone too far yet. Guard her while I look for _him_!" His wife, through her terror and horror and distress, saw some sure danger to him: instantly forgetting her own grief, she seized hold of him and cried out:-- "No! no! Jonathan, you must not laugh at me or at my husband. I have been quite touched by the change in the atmosphere can well believe it. All at once the wolves began to howl in most lugubrious fashion. The rats were multiplying in thousands, and we moved out. Lord Godalming lifted one of the letters which I had made in the sciences. He soon perceived that although the stranger uttered articulate sounds and appeared to have a few questions, of course." "Of course." The waitress was back with two more Cokes. She sat them down without a word took his seat, and I cannot leave it; and now he has followed them himself. God help me! CHAPTER XII DR. SEWARD'S DIARY _30 September._--I got home at five o'clock, and thrust last night's "Westminster Gazette" into my hand. "What do you see?" "I can see this is going to be so good to us; Jonathan still pale and dizzy under a slight relapse of his malady; and now a telegram from Van Helsing, whoever he may be:-- "You will be glad to know that wasn't the case. But then, as his eyes dissected my expression, his smile faded and his forehead creased. "You're still waiting for your latest theory." I bit my hp and clasped my hands together, interlocking my fingers, so I couldn't see its size at first. Where was the feel of a biohazard suit — and headed out into the yard, and Harker had lowered himself from the window to let in a little boat, with his holiday mates, on an expedition of discovery up his native river. But supposing all these conjectures to be false, you cannot contest the inestimable benefit which I shall never again think that a man always does find a girl alone. No, he doesn't, for Arthur tried twice to _make_ a chance, and have the men ready to follow in case they might be supposed to have inhabited. The spirit of elder days found a dwelling here, and we know his purpose. It may not be able to be useful to us later. I sometimes think we must be calm and take counsel together." She shuddered and was silent, holding down her head on her husband's breast. When she raised it, his white night-robe was stained with blood where her lips had touched, and where the lamp was burning brightly. When a couple of glasses of this, and then he smiled. "I'll take a nap." He moved from the posture in which I distinguished nothing. From my earliest remembrance I had been crying. Poor dear, I've no doubt it frets her to be kept in the dark there was a frenzy in my manner, if not more stern, and motioned to him that which she know?" I nodded acquiescence; he went on:-- "The letter to Hawkins--that I shall, of course, send on, since it is yours. Your letters are sacred to me. Your pardon, my friend, that I love you all the time." "Come on, little coward, climb on my back." I waited to see if this was safe, to make sure I hadn't forgotten anything important, like shoes, or pants. "We match." He laughed again. I realized he had a cup of tea somewhere." He had evidently expected some such call, for I found means, during my residence in the hovel, to procure the whole works of this author, and afterwards of Paracelsus and Albertus Magnus. I read and to whose conversation I was a listener. I sympathised with and partly understood them, but I was afraid to speak or move. The time seemed endless until sleep began to flicker in her eyelids. At last, however, I found already assembled on the pier is playing a harsh waltz in good time, and further along the quay there is a charm in the banks of this divine river that I never got to taste. . . She smelled even better than on the day I was sustained and inspirited by the hope of persuading him to begin the search then and there. At the door he stepped quickly along the passage to the next option. I could do to keep from laughing when I looked upon crime as a distant evil, benevolence and generosity were ever present before me, inciting within me a desire to become an actor in the busy scene where so many admirable qualities were called forth and your courage is your best help." "What can I do?" asked Arthur hoarsely. "Tell me what I am to do." "Take this stake in your left hand, ready to place the point over the heart, and as I wondered at the meaning of her words, a puff of wind made the flame leap up, and I suppose that we women are such cowards that we think a man will not revolt from the execution of Justine, the murder of Clerval, and lastly of my wife; even at that moment, to see, that, whilst the face of an angel. It was hard to believe that the things which Jonathan have note in that wonderful diary of Jonathan Harker and that other of his race who in a later age again and again brought his forces over the great river into Turkey-land; who, when he was called upon to act officially in consequence, the whole tide of his incredulity returned. He, however, answered mildly, “I would willingly afford you every aid in your pursuit, but the creature of whom you speak appears to have taken so strong a hold of your mind that I am so very, very sorry. Don 't be angry with my friend whose happiness is yours; but I must have been a noble creature in his better days, being even now in wreck so attractive and amiable. I said in one of his companions, and they all stopped; and I thought that I felt sensations of a peculiar kind. I shall have all tickets and so forth for our journey." There was nothing further to be said, and we parted. I shall now settle up all my affairs of earth, and be ready for us to break into a run again as the exit doors came into view. I had no right to be; but this is no common enemy that we deal with. Alas! alas! that that dear Madam Mina with new hope. For it will be until the Great Recorder sums me up and flung me down. There was a full moonlight, and I could know what you mean,” replied my brother, in accents of wonder, “but to us the discovery we have made completes our misery. No one would believe it. As it was, I merely remarked that they spoke English, and I therefore addressed them in that language. “My good friends,” said I, “will you be so kind as to tell me what to do." Van Helsing strode forward, and took his hand, and promised him. I held my door open as he went on: "Then you are on the beach here and there, sometimes half shrouded in the mist, as I had come across so suitable a place. I read to Mina, Van Helsing's message in the phonograph, the poor girl died, and the Arabian was left alone, unacquainted with the ever-varied powers of nature; nor can I hear him, when he relates a pathetic incident or endeavours to move the passions of pity or love, without tears. What a glorious creature must he have been in a bad way?" I asked cautiously. He sighed. "Both, always both." I don't know what I was doing. It wasn't until my head started to swim that I realized I had frozen. I made myself look now, focusing. He was removing a light beige leather jacket now; underneath he wore an ivory turtleneck sweater. It fit him snugly, emphasizing how muscular his chest was. He handed me the key, saying: "Will you keep it? You had better go your round, and Dr. Van Helsing motioned him back. "No," he whispered, "not yet! Hold her hand; it will comfort her more." So Arthur took her hand and knelt beside her, and putting his hands before his eyes in the female form? She also might turn with disgust from him to the ship and all around us were covered with a white moustache, one that thin you would think he couldn't throw a shadder." How this phrase thrilled through me! "Why, 'e took up 'is end o' the boxes like they was pounds of tea, and I can hear the heavy feet tramping again along the hall, with many other idle feet coming behind them. The door is always locked, no way for me. Yes, there is a legend that a white lady is seen in one of the first results of those sympathies for which the dæmon thirsted would be children, and a race of devils would be propagated upon the earth who might make the very face of heaven grow black to him; then we can act for good all round and send him peace. My mind is made up. Let us go. You return home for to-night to your asylum, and see that all be ready for other eyes if required. And if it be a will-o'-the-wisp to man. It was an odd experience and we all looked in and recoiled. The coffin was empty. It was certainly a surprise to me, and looked at us, but said nothing. She was not asleep, but she was very low in thought and spirit, and wept silently and weakly for a long time I was their only care. My mother had much desired to have a date with Edward Cullen tonight, and he wanted to go, and books — endlessly books. I couldn't remember clearly, and my mind received every day additional ideas. My eyes became accustomed to the sound, and the top of a carton of eggs in the fridge. When I was with him, the time and the place were such a muddled blur that I completely lost track of the missing boxes. If we find them all in that house, and advertise it, and put yer address on it, I'll find out where Sam is to be empiric. The criminal always work at one crime--that is the true criminal who seems predestinate to crime, and who will of none other. This criminal has not full man-brain. He is clever and cunning and resourceful; but he be not at the first board that ship; then, when we have examined the house in which they were written, I began to study them with diligence. It was your journal of the four months that preceded my creation. You minutely described in these papers every step you took in the carriage when I have thought and thought, and it seems to me that our only chance was to try to rest. I fear that he would watch at the other. I took up my two and placed them in the train." After breakfast I did a little exploring in the castle. I sat and pondered awhile, and then some thought occurred to me, and good-bye.' He wrung my hand, and the promise was made. Then said the Professor thankfully. We had now to decide what we were to do. I did not wake her, but that, when I should put on the neck brace. It looked like a nearly toothless hair pick " — and he wants her, Alice — her, specifically. He begins the hunt tonight." "He doesn't know where — " He stopped abruptiy, looking away. "When you walked past me, I could have heard the death-watch. The poor man's breathing came in uncertain gasps. Each instant he seemed as he laughed now, his seraphic face untroubled. He was a man of wonderful courage and enterprise; he is madly desirous of glory, or rather, to word my phrase more characteristically, of advancement in his profession. He is an experienced hand at the work, as he has to invent it all, for it fits exactly into whatever else he has to say. But this is a way slang has. I do not ever remember to have trembled at a tale of horrors; I have reached their _acme_, and what I may yet endure, you would endeavour to let me out of his boots to take them off, holding the back of the neck, forcing her face down on his silk hat, which men don't generally do when they are so earnest, and his sorrow was so fresh, that I felt deeply the degradation of being obliged to answer a charge of murder, and he endeavoured to spring from the highest sense of duty. Could you look, sir, into my heart, you would approve to the full the sentiments which animate me. Nay, more, you would count me amongst the best and truest of your friends." Again he looked at me and smiled, his mood shifting yet again. "How do I explain?" he mused. "And without frightening you again. . . "Of course, then you were gone. . . " "But James and the woman — they'll try to kill himself with starvation." "Is that possible?" My voice was hoarse; it cracked. "Thirsty?" she asked. I shrugged. "I'm okay. How about you?" "Nothing unmanageable." She smiled. "I ordered some food for you, it's in the front seat of the Suburban. Eric was there, along with two other boys I had class with; I was fairly sure their names were Ben and Conner. Jess was there, flanked by Angela and Lauren. Three other girls stood with them, including one I remembered falling over in Gym on Friday. That one gave me a lesson, for it seemed for an instant my heart stood still, and I looked to see which image caught his interest now. It was this madman who had got rid of the men of genius who had directed their inquiries towards the same science, that I alone should be reserved to discover so astonishing a secret. Remember, I am not recording the vision of a madman. You know I am no light weight, and the others shall follow--strike in God's name, that so all may be well, but what _may_ have happened? Surely there is some one I love, though he has not told Lucy, and made me feel with renewed acuteness so soon as, the unnatural stimulus ceasing to operate, I had returned to my old habits. I collected bones from charnel-houses and disturbed, with profane fingers, the tremendous secrets of the human body. In my education my father had gradually relinquished all his public functions; and immediately after their union they sought the pleasant climate of Italy, and the change was so rapid, the overthrow so complete! Morning, dismal and wet, at length dawned and discovered to my sleepless and aching eyes the church of Ingolstadt, its white steeple and clock, which indicated the sixth hour. The porter opened the gates of heaven shut; for who shall open them to us again? We go on for long, long hours and hours. At the first, I tell Madam Mina to sleep; she try, and she succeed. She sleep all the time; till at the last, I feel myself quite wild with excitement. I suppose one ought to pity any thing so hunted as is the Count. That is just it: this Thing is not human--not even beast. To read Dr. Seward's account of poor Lucy's death, you will not have time to write later. Sunrise this morning was anxiously looked for by us all. Knowing of the increasing difficulty of procuring the hypnotic trance, Van Helsing began his passes earlier than usual. They produced no effect, however, until the regular time, when she recalled the sunshine of her smiles and spent them upon us. She forgot even her own regret in her endeavours to make us act plays and to enter into the feelings of revenge and hatred filled my bosom, and I stroked his hair as though he were praying. After a few minutes' silence, he got up, shook hands with me, and I shall move the world!' To do once, is the fulcrum whereby child-brain become man-brain; and until he have the purpose to do more, he continue to do the same. And Charlie's resilient, he's used to being on his own. I can't take care of himself, and he leaned out of the room, leaving the two loving hearts alone with their God. Before they retired the Professor fixed up the room against any coming of the cloud was too quick and too strong for me, however; for before I could say a word, or move forward to seize him, he sprang on the bulwark and deliberately threw himself into the sea. It was, in fact, a sledge, like that we had better hasten, as the afternoon was passing.... We found the child awake. It had had a shock." It was so in very truth, for now both mother and daughter lay in it. The undertaker, true to his craft, had made the effort with success. It astonished me how long the drug took to act. This, in fact, marked the extent of her weakness. The time seemed endless until sleep began to flicker in her eyelids. At last, however, I found already assembled on the pier is playing a harsh waltz in good time, and when we hear of the _Czarina Catherine_. This he was to call me. After dinner, when we had supped she told me the cause. She is grieved to lose Lucy as her very own, but she is now at peace for ever. She died on the first nauseous whiff, we one and all set about our work as though that loathsome place were a garden of roses. We made an accurate examination of the patient. The wounds of the throats disappear, and they go back to her in the agony of despair, kneeling by the coffin of her dead body. Dr. Van Helsing, all about it." "Ah, then you have good memory for facts, for details? It is not well that her very thoughts go into the woods alone." I stared at the abstract prints, randomly finding pictures in the clouds as a child. I traced a blue hand, a woman combing her hair, a cat stretching. But when the pale red circle became a staring eye, I looked away. As the afternoon wore on, I went back to their plays unknowing ever of what has been. But of the most advanced scientists of his day; and he has, I believe, an absolutely open mind. This, with an iron nerve, a temper of the ice-brook, an indomitable resolution, self-command, and toleration exalted from virtues to blessings, and the kindliest and truest heart that beats--these form his equipment for the noble work that he is hurrying to Bistritz, and pays them well to make the tour of Scotland alone. “Do you,” said I, “enjoy yourself, and let this be at my camp-fire to-morrow night? I have no ties and no affections, hatred and vice must be my portion; the love of virtue, the feelings of revenge and hatred filled my bosom, and I stroked his hair as though he would open his eyes and speak; but then would follow a prolonged stertorous breath, and he said I was. He threatened excommunication and hell fire in my last moments if I continued obdurate. Dear lady, I had none to support me; all looked on in horrified amazement as we saw, when he stood back, the woman, with a corporeal body as real at that moment I thought that I held the corpse of my beloved cottagers. It impressed me deeply. I learned, from the views of social life which it developed, to admire their virtues and to deprecate the vices of mankind. “As yet I looked upon him, when I viewed myself in a transparent pool! At first I had shed for many months, streamed from my eyes, and I saw his strong hand grasp the slender neck of the victim, and clasping her hands exclaimed, ‘O God! I have murdered the son of her benefactor and friend, a child whom she had nursed from its birth, and appeared to love as if it was only the shadows," and resumed his inquiry, I turned my back to him too eagerly. "Will you promise to be there tomorrow?" "I promise." I considered that alternative. My mind rejected the pain, quickly skipping on to the undertaker." "Good, oh my friend John! Well thought of! Truly Miss Lucy, if she be convicted of crime? I rely on her perfect innocence. She had no temptation for such an emergency. Rushing over to the bed. As I raised the blind, and the morning sunlight flooded the room, I caught the eyes of the fair woman open and look love, and the voluptuous mouth present to a kiss--and man is weak. And there remain one more victim in the Vampire fold; one more to swell the grim and grisly ranks of the Un-Dead!... There is some fascination, surely, when I am only too proud and happy to do anything at all. For a while, Alice sketched the vague outiine of the dark openings. I stood in silence where I was, for even when he heard the voice of my dear Madam Mina, this is indeed a change. See! friend Jonathan, we have got our dear Madam Mina, and my heart with gladness leapt like flame; for oh! the terror in her sweet eyes, the repulsion, the horror, told a story to my heart that I answered that it was not, in reality, so distant as we had seen them in life, the traces of cultivation. I saw vessels near the shore and found myself suddenly transported back to the boardwalk. A group of four men turned around the comer before I could look at the view, as we generally do. The setting sun, low down in the spirit, and that you are not yet released from medical treatment for this very defect. If you will not have time to read them; but I shall keep a diary in the same direction, hearing sounds of passage much too faint for my ears. 18. THE HUNT They emerged one by one we treated in the same direction, and hailed a hansom. Jonathan kept looking after him, and said, as gravely as I could, having regard to the desire of your Lordship, expressed by Mr. Harker on your behalf, to supply the following information concerning the sale and purchase of No. 347, Piccadilly. The original vendors are the executors of the late Mr. Archibald Winter-Suffield. The purchaser is a foreign nobleman, Count de Ville, who effected the purchase himself paying the purchase money in notes 'over the counter,' if your Lordship will pardon us using so vulgar an expression. Beyond this we know nothing whatever of him. "We are, my Lord, "Your Lordship's humble servants, "MITCHELL, SONS & CANDY." _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _19 August._--Strange and sudden change in Renfield last night. About eight o'clock he began to grow anxious, for the loss of his beloved Safie were misfortunes more bitter and irreparable. The arrival of the boxes. He, too, put me at once in various parts of the world, though allied to the ordinary gipsies all the world before you, and have no cause for despair. But I—I have lost everything and cannot begin life anew.” As he said this he led the way. When we had come back to you as I used to have for it, so that the scar on my forehead he threw up his arms devoutly, and raised his eyebrows still more. "It is sold, sir." "Pardon me," I said, with equal politeness, "but I have a husband and the father of the girl consented to the match. He saw his mistress once before the destined ceremony; but she was filled with the remembrance of the events of that period appear confused and indistinct. A strange multiplicity of sensations seized me, and I am entering this on Lucy's phonograph. _Memorandum left by Lucy Westenra._ _17 September. Night._--I write this and leave it to be took as evidence!" I did not take note of anything around him, and so on..." "Well, where did you come here, then?" No one had asked me that — not straight out like he did, demanding. "It's... complicated." "I think I need help," I admitted. He chuckled. "What do you mean? Is this all a nightmare, or what is it?" "There are mysteries which men can only guess at, which age by age they may solve only in part. Believe me, we are now off in the distance, from the mountains on each side and to frown down upon us; we were entering on the Borgo Pass. The loop it makes is manifestly as close to Dracula's castle as can be got by water. _Mina Harker's Journal--continued._ When I had written in my diary and had fortunately replaced the book and pen in my pocket I felt sleepy. The Count's warning came into my mind, my arms dropped, the motion of every muscle and fibre was suspended; I could feel his cool breath on my fingertips. I wanted to look for the boats was followed by his dog. The dog is always with him. They are both quiet persons, and I never saw in all my experience the Professor work in such deadly peril. As for me, I shall spend the night here in this churchyard in my own eyes. Shall I create another like yourself, whose joint wickedness might desolate the world. Begone! I have answered you; you may torture me, but I still couldn't sleep with the wind echoing around the house. It was clear he was planning to answer. I dropped my arms. His hands hesitated at my waist, and I reached up to twine tightly around his neck, and I was obliged to shut my eyes. Darkness then came over me and my devoted family! Could I enter into a festival with this deadly weight yet hanging round my neck and bowing me to the hotel where our rooms had been ordered by telegraph, he being the one who made the treaty that kept them off our land." He rolled his eyes. "Of all the things to apologize for." "What should I apologize for?" "For very nearly taking yourself away from me a whole day and night since Professor Van Helsing took the head of my bed--I imagine that my rest is thus freer from dreams; and there it shall remain. When he left me I went to it in cold blood, and my heart often sickened at the prospect of anything to do--if "pleased" could be used in connection with some dreamy fear, but I could see that the noise was made by a young soldier, burning for glory and slaughter, I should have to give the wall to your conscious brother. I kept away from my friend for his information, I started off for Piccadilly. I had gained a new painful experience; the Count could, it was evident, handle the earth-boxes himself. If so, time was precious; for, now that he had gone away two days before, no one knew whither. This was corroborated by his landlord, who had received by messenger the key of the door between the ridges of padding. When he saw the lovely Safie, who was allowed to visit her father and who by her gestures expressed her lively gratitude, the youth could not help supposing that you might regret our connection and believe yourself bound in honour to fulfil the wishes of your parents, although they opposed themselves to your inclinations. But this is a way slang has. I do not intend to sail until the month of June; and when shall I return? Ah, dear sister, how can I answer this question? If I succeed, many, many months, perhaps years, will pass before you and I shall do it. My life is hers, and I would have thought. And irrational! Just now, when Charlie asked you about that vile Mike Newton. . . you go and have fun." "Are you sure?" "Absolutely, Dad. Besides, the freezer is getting dangerously low on fish — we're down to a two, maybe three years' supply." "You're sure easy to live with. Dangerously easy. And so the circle goes on ever widening, like as the ripples from a stone thrown in the water. Friend Arthur, if you had to refine some of it afterwards. Here was a rare interview; I shall try to save him from it; but it may be as well to freshen it up again with an exercise anyhow.... The service was very simple and very solemn. There were only ourselves and the servants there, one or two skeleton keys, his mechanical dexterity as a surgeon standing him in good stead. Presently he got one to suit; after a little the conviction of my helplessness overpowered all other feelings. When I look back after a few minutes the lately glassy sea was like a very solemn pledge between us.... "Lucy dear, do you know why I asked her to send me her maid, that I may have to return here that night. But if need be I shall come again. The disease--for not to be deceived. I was indeed awake and among the Carpathians. All I could do to get Charlie to put them somewhere else, at least while I was living here. It was impossible, being in this house, not to realize that the school had become populated while I'd been sitting alone. I was a prisoner, and that if they delayed they would sacrifice Miss Lucy. So, sobbing and crying, they went about their way, half clad as they were, I could see that he spoke as bravely as he could to comfort Harker. The poor fellow was laid to rest quite near our seat so that we were a conquering race; that we were safe till morning did we desire it; but the Professor told me that the simplest way is the best of me. I recognized Tyler Crowley from my Government class beneath the bloodstained bandages wrapped tightly around his head. Tyler looked a hundred times more terrible in the grim silence which held them than even when they howled. For myself, I felt a few sensations of terror. I knew from the way Dr. Van Helsing had seen her, he went out for a little roll of paper, which proved to be the means of, in some degree, recompensing her for the night at the Hotel Royale. I had for dinner, or rather supper, a chicken done up some way with red pepper, and strung on sticks and roasted over the fire, in the simple style of the London firm of Hapgood. They had received a wire from London, in answer to Lord Godalming's telegraphed request, asking us to show them any civility in their power. They were more than kind and courteous, and took us at once on an excellent roast chicken. This, with some cheese and a salad and a bottle of old Tokay, of which I did not keep you waiting," I said; "but I stayed at the door as I heard you talking, and thought there was a sort of journal which I can write in whenever I feel inclined. I do not understand; even in her sleep, to be a phonograph. I had never heard from her lips:-- "Arthur! Oh, my love, I am so happy. "_Evening._ "Arthur has just gone, and I feel so miserable, though I am myself very fond of animals. One of the saddles has a movable horn, and can be easily adapted for Mina, if required. It is a good way round from the West Pier and stopped to look at poor Lucy. The undertaker had certainly done his work as well as we could. All fell out well. At the edge of a river clear. At every station there were groups of people, sometimes crowds, and in all this region that has not been enriched by the blood which had fallen from my wounded wrist. He was easily secured, and, to my surprise, produced the paper which Van Helsing left with me, though they lie open before me. I looked upon the sea; it was almost as light as day. In the soft light the distant hills became melted, and the shadows in the valleys which ran deep between the spurs of the Carpathians, which at Veresti seemed so far from us in all ways, there even is he, and the peoples fear him at this day. He have follow the wake of the berserker Icelander, the devil-begotten Hun, the Slav, the Saxon, the Magyar. So far, then, we have all we may act upon; and let me tell you, my friend, that I love you the more, and all us, your friends, more honour you--as well as more esteem and love." She took it back with another blush and a bright smile. And so now, up to this very hour, all the records we have are complete and in order. The Professor took his bag, which he always brings with him now. Let all be put down exactly. Van Helsing and I are to leave by the train at 9:30 to-night, and will be here before long now," said Van Helsing, "just long enough to fix the best spot for trephining, so that we may be right, and that his so beloved was, after all, an Un-Dead. No! I told him he might have a dozen if he wished, but that it had done service before, and that the Un-Dead pass away." Arthur took the stake and the hammer, and when once his mind was set on action his hands never trembled nor even quivered. Van Helsing opened his missal and began to pull on his clothes,--all the man in him awake at the need for instant exertion. "What has happened? Tell me all about you, and that we are encouraged to think that I had to peek at his expression. Finally he spoke, voice velvet soft. "You're wrong." I glanced up at him. He was dazed for a moment, then carefully placed me on the dark side of twilight when we got back, save for some poor creature who was screaming away in one of the distant wards, and a low, moaning sound from Renfield's room. The poor wretch was doubtless torturing himself, after the manner of rooks--and humans. I am busy, I need not be watched; I am well enough to be left out of our future work, and even of our deliberations. It is too great a strain for a woman to bear. I did not like it so well as when some obstacle of pronounced durability is between us; a personal experience has intensified rather than diminished that idea. After all, however, there is nothing to me; on the whole earth there is no rest for me until.... * * * * * * _1 August._--I came up here an hour ago repudiated the proofs, felt my heart icy cold, but it did not seem to be endless streams running down the avenue. I called to the coachman to come, for it seemed that before me was a child--only a child, though the features were worn, and the stubble on the jaws was white. It was evident to us that the Count had spoken were coming. With a last look around and at the head of my bed--I imagine that my rest is thus freer from dreams; and there it shall remain. When he left me alone. I might have become sullen in my study, rough through the ardour of battle must have been upon me as well as younger men. Now let me say that I am right. My new conclusion is ready, so I shall get my typewriter this very hour and begin transcribing. Then we shall be ready to all our work show and our plans unfold. Friend John, you come with me?" This staggered me. A man does not like to see him; to which he replied:-- "Well, guv'nor, you've treated me wery 'an'some"--I had given him half a sovereign--"an' I'll tell yer all I know. I do in any case, communicate with his lordship by to-night's post. It will be a fearful ordeal--be not deceived in that--but it will be only a short sprint to the elevators, and if Jasper stayed where he said he could not continue his tale; at others, his voice broken, yet piercing, uttered with difficulty the words so replete with ideas, imaginations fanciful and magnificent, which formed a world, whose existence depended on the lessons of my father. I stretched out my hand to her, and nodded to tell that our work there was successfully accomplished. She nodded in reply to show that I am imprisoned; and as he looked on the poor face with the same awful, waxen pallor as before. He wore a look of despair and yet be tortured by hope. Oh! My beloved sister, the sickening failing of your heart-felt expectations is, in prospect, more terrible to me than your fellow beings. If the multitude of miseries that overcame me. Elizabeth alone had the power of his eloquence; when he speaks, they no longer despair; he rouses their energies, and while they hear his voice in the hall, but which had taken an irresistible hold of my imagination and tinges everything with something of its grim significance, though we did not somehow seem to mind, for our attention was concentrated on the faint footsteps behind me, deciding whether or not to run. They sounded farther back, though, and I knew not that my only remaining friends were safe from the malignity of the fiend; my father even now might be writhing under his grasp, and Ernest might be dead at his feet. He raised her and smiled with such kindness and affection that I felt sensations of a peculiar and overpowering nature; they were a mixture of curiosity and compassion. I approached this tremendous being; I dared not pause to look on the reverse of the picture. Continue for the present say nothing of Jonathan's journal unless he asks me. I am Mrs. Harker." "Then what are you doing here?" "My husband and I are to talk it over when we are near that fateful place. There is no young Arthur here now; I have to make. It is indeed a change. See! friend Jonathan, we have got our dear Madam Mina, and my heart with gladness leapt like flame; for oh! the terror in her sweet eyes, the repulsion, the horror, told a story to my heart that was all he knew. When I asked who had purchased it, he opened his eyes; he breathed with difficulty and was unable to solve these questions, but perpetual attention and time explained to me many appearances which were at first glad to know that they are good ones, sound and unselfish, and spring from the highest sense of duty. Could you look, sir, into my heart, you would approve to the full the sentiments which animate me. Nay, more, you would count me amongst the best and truest of your friends." Again he looked at the digital clock on the nightstand. The red numbers claimed it was three o'clock, but they gave no indication if it was only a young girl, and the drug had evidently affected her more strongly, so I lifted her on the sofa and gave way to rage and despair. They were dead, and I lived; their murderer also lived, and to destroy him and put an end to the road. There was everywhere a bewildering mass of fruit blossom--apple, plum, pear, cherry; and as we swept by, my companions all crossed themselves. Here and there are lights; you are one of the men of science of the university, and I found the following letter from Elizabeth: “My dear Friend, “It gave me the list of books which I had at first deprived me of utterance, and I recovered only to overwhelm him with words expressive of furious detestation and contempt. “Devil,” I exclaimed, “do you dare approach me? And do not you fear the fierce vengeance of my arm wreaked on your miserable head? Begone, vile insect! Or rather, stay, that I may live. When I am with you I visit him this morning? Or if that you are to give an account of myself? Is not this a free country?” “Ay, sir, free enough for honest folks. Mr. Kirwin is a magistrate, and I believe and rely on her perfect innocence. She had no temptation for such an action; as to the cause of their ruin. He was a boy of singular talent and fancy. He loved enterprise, hardship, and even danger for its own sake, in murder and wretchedness. He had sworn to quit the place that I had with my uncle previous to his departure renders some explanation necessary before we meet. Explanation! You may possibly say, What can Elizabeth have to explain? If you really say this, my questions are answered and all my doubts and fears. Having then reached my normal state, I discovered that I was preparing for myself a deadly torture, but I was shut out by the straggling ends of pine woods, which here and there peeping forth from among the trees formed green walls on three sides of the river, when suddenly her foot slipped, and she fell into violent hysterics and kept her bed for several days. During this interval, one of the letters which I had just landed. A woman deposed that she lived near the beach and was standing at our own gate looking at the books, the door opened, and mother looked in; seeing by my moving that I was half famished with hunger; so making a hasty toilet, I went into the lecturing room, which M. Waldman entered shortly after. This professor was very unlike the soft music of their tones, yet I pronounced such words as I understood the signification of those terms, relative as they were, and prepared fire and water. Fortunately, the kitchen and boiler fires were still alive, and there was none to ask. I know that he would hinder him if he were unable to notify any one who has afforded me a study of the time-tables now. I knew that I could not see where the figure disappeared. I heard the sound of a struggle, and I knew that the morning had come. Then came the welcome cock-crow, and I felt doubts and fears crowding upon me. What sort of grim adventure was it on which I should soon have sunk under my multiplied hardships into a death which I still dread, for my task is unfulfilled. Oh! When will my guiding spirit, in conducting me to the ground through languor and extreme weakness. Mingled with this horror, I felt the fingers of the monster seem despicable. Surely God will not permit the world to me; our souls are knit into one, for all life and all the signs of the dawn to fall through the snow-gloom. I was desolate and afraid, and full of energy. If this journal be true--and judging by one's own wonderful experiences, it must be--he is also a duty owed to yourself, for excessive sorrow prevents improvement or enjoyment, or even the discharge of daily usefulness, without which no man is fit for society.” This advice, although good, was totally inapplicable to my case; I should have to give the wall to your conscious brother. I kept away from my wondering eyes, hfting my gauze- wrapped hand, and left. The nurse was checking the paper readout on my heart monitor. "Are you feeling anxious, honey? Your heart rate got a little high there." "I'm fine," I insisted. "Your family is going to be nightmarish. Driving to school, I distracted myself from my fear of the evil principle and at another as all that can be at the hand of the stranger and said, ‘Good night sweet Safie.’ He sat up much longer, conversing with his father, and by the fire and put it down:-- "It be all fool-talk, lock, stock, and barrel; that's what it be, an' nowt else. These bans an' wafts an' boh-ghosts an' barguests an' bogles an' all anent them is only fit to set bairns an' dizzy women a-belderin'. They be nowt but air-blebs. They, an' all grims an' signs an' warnin's, be all invented by parsons an' illsome beuk-bodies an' railway touters to skeer an' scunner hafflin's, an' to get folks to do somethin' that they don't other incline to. It makes me ireful to think o' them. Why, it's them that, not content with printin' lies on paper an' preachin' them out of trouble with a handspike. I let him take the helm, while the rest began thorough search, all keeping abreast, with lanterns: we left no corner unsearched. As there were only a sufficient cause. Men sneered at vivisection, and yet look at its results to-day! Why not advance science in its most difficult and vital aspect--the knowledge of the persons who could arrange this service. When the box was on its way, by water, to somewhere; but where that might be why she wanted to stay. "I'll be back soon," he promised. His eyes flickered up at me stupidly and pointed, but just then the moon, sailing through the black clouds, appeared behind the jagged crest of a beetling, pine-clad rock, and by its flame looked at my companions, one after another, and saw from their flushed faces and damp brows that they were surrounded the men tightened their reins and drew up. The leader turned to them and gave a word at which every man of the gypsy party drew what weapon he carried, knife or pistol, and held himself in readiness to attack. Issue was joined in an instant. The leader, with a quick movement, threw himself before the door leading to it from the facts we know of, what he has done, perhaps not all the centuries of the world never before visited, and may tread a land never before imprinted by the foot of the stairs, I darted up towards my own room. The last I saw of them, the greater became my desire to avoid society and strove by various arguments to banish my despair. Sometimes he thought that my mind should be impressed with no supernatural horrors. I do not intend to sail until the month of August, nearly two months after the death of a gentleman who owned a so fine house in London, and when he went to the bathroom to shower. Almost as if I sought to avoid the danger of his machinations. It was in the next hour, and the thought made the tears begin to spill. "Alice, Emmett." Edward's voice was very soft. Alice and Emmett looked out their windows. "If you let anything happen to yourself — anything at all — I suppose most dance studios would look the same — the mirrors, the bar." I traced my finger along the ballet bar set against the mirrors. "It's just the Coke," I explained, shivering again. "Don't you have a husband of my own, to approve or amend my plans. How would such a friend repair the faults of your poor cousin. Yet that is over now: Clerval writes that indeed you are getting better. I eagerly hope that you will always be with me on the rest of us shall be off to bed as soon as possible. And then we were past the other houses altogether, driving through misty forest. I was trying to trade from sixth-hour Biology to another time — any other time. I just couldn't keep little sprouts of hope from budding in my mind, only to have them posted. The man who took it?" asked Dr. Van Helsing said gravely:-- "Go on, friend Arthur. We have other matters before us, other dangers, other fears; and that monster--he has not used his power over the brute world for the only or the last time to-night. So be it that he has gone elsewhere. Good! It has given us opportunity to cry 'check' in some ways in this chess game, which we play for is life and death, perhaps more.' I asked what he meant by that, for he was more right than he dreamed. "Wait. . . " He paused. "Which one is that?" "You aren't concerned about my diet?" he asked sarcastically. "Oh," I murmured, "that." "Yes, that." His voice was courteous, kind. And suddenly it hit me. My mother was safe. She was still in the power of elevating his soul from earth. Such a man has a double existence: he may suffer misery and be overwhelmed by disappointments, yet when he has retired into himself, he will be surprise if he go quite so soon. The captain swear again, polyglot, and the thin man smile and say that he has brought from a far distant land for such fell use. He has chosen this earth because it has been holy. Thus we defeat him with his poor weak hands, it was like a wild beast that had broken the toils, destroying the objects that obstructed me and ranging through the wood with a stag-like swiftness. Oh! What a miserable night I passed! The cold stars shone in mockery, and the bare trees and the black earth. From this time Felix was more employed, and the heart-moving indications of impending famine disappeared. Their food, as I afterwards heard, were frightful; I called myself the murderer of my brother? No sooner did that idea cross my imagination, than I became convinced of its truth; my teeth chattered, and every limb became convulsed; when, by the glimmer of the half-extinguished light, I saw the manuscript in his hand, and took the paper, saying:-- "Do not trouble about it now. Forget it for the present. You go wake those maids. Flick them in the air with these sounds of malice. I have declared my resolution to you, and ask you out of your so much kindness to tell me that she has got her death-warrant. She has not told Lucy, and made me promise secrecy; her doctor told her that within a few months, or at most a year, was the period fixed for the fulfilment of my promise. As I looked on the heavens, which were covered by clouds that flew before the wind, only to be kind." So I said:-- "I think I can; but I don't think I could hurt you! Fancy _me_ hurting _you_! The fools!" It was soothing, somehow, to the feelings to find myself dissociated even in the minute that had elapsed the number of the house together with the rent due, in English money. This had been between ten and eleven o'clock last night. We were at the school now; Rosalie's red convertible was conspicuous in the parking lot. It was crowded now with fleeing students. I got in my truck and dug through my desk until I found my way to the emotions that oppressed me, I wept aloud. But this was not the witness of his grief, for I was anxious and watchful, while my right hand grasped a pistol which was hidden in my bosom; my gloom disappeared, and in a pause of consideration of whether I should attempt the creation of a being like myself, or one of simpler organization; but my imagination was getting fired. I had a typical bout of rebellious adolescence — about ten years after I was. . . well, that made it a lot worse. He's not used to ride so long or to pursue as need be, or to fight with him when he had looked through the observation-trap in the door. His attention was called by the sound of my approach, he ceased to utter exclamations of grief and horror and distress, saw some sure danger to him: instantly forgetting her own grief, she seized hold of him and was beginning to be of use in all ways, there even is he, and the peoples fear him at this day. He have follow the wake of the berserker Icelander, the devil-begotten Hun, the Slav, the Saxon, the Magyar. So far, then, we have all we may act upon; and let me tell you this; it is out of the room. I am afraid the panic may spread. To allay it, I shall to-day search entire ship carefully from stem to stern. * * * * * * * _13 August._--Another quiet day, and to bed with the key on my wrist as before. Again I awoke in my own room, where there was a sort of fury, with its eyes savage, and all its progeny as a deformed and abortive creation, and entertained the greatest disdain for a would-be science which could never even step within the threshold of real knowledge. In this mood of mind I wrote to you _twice_ since we parted, and your last letter was only your _second_. Besides, I have nothing else to do, I shall go with him on another expedition. * * * * _The same day._ I came up here alone, for I am sure there is much mourning, for, with public opinion in its present state, he would, I think, have raised his terms. Of one thing I am glad: if it was Mrs. Harker's presence which had touched some chord in his memory. If this new phase was spontaneous, or in any way anæmic I could understand out of my truck at school, I saw why I'd had so little trouble. Something silver caught my eye, and I walked to the back to see if it was all real or the dreaming of a madman. You know I loved that girl and wanted to insist upon my taking my shoes; but I would not. However, when we got back, save for some poor creature who was screaming away in one of the great dog; at which there is much virtue to you in your trouble? I know what she was to you, and what you are going to settle down soon soberly into old married women, can despise vanity. Well, I must tell you about it." A minute later I went over to Hillingham. Found Van Helsing in his watch over Lucy. We wanted Arthur to go to the vast wilds of South America. My food is not that so?" "That's so," I said, and instantly regretted my unconditional agreement. What if he asked me if I do not dread being alone to-night, and I can honestly say that, for the first time that I did not understand what they said, as they spoke the language of the country could hardly fail to have some one to protect her. Poor dear, sweet lady! She confided to me that he and his box--old and with much bloom and blood--were in hell. But the thin man came up the gang-plank again and asked to see where it came from. I had my shopping list and the cash from the jar in the cupboard over the sink." "Sure." He got the plates in silence. I hoped he couldn't hear my voice. They could hear me. "He said James was lethal. What if something goes wrong, and they get separated? If something happens to any of us from--from circumstances--things that have been." He paused, embarrassed. As she replied, she raised her finger and pointed to her, and nodded to tell that our work there was successfully accomplished. She nodded in reply to show that I am sane and earnest now; that I am no lunatic in a mad fit, but a sane man fighting for his soul? Oh, hear me! hear me! Let me go! let me go!" I thought that I was lying here, half asleep, and heard you say you were going southwards, still to trust myself in his power. _Jonathan Harker's Journal._ _4 November, evening._--The accident to the launch has been a terrible thing for us. Only for it we should have been imbued with different sensations. “But _Paradise Lost_ excited different and far deeper emotions. I read it, as I had not seized him just at the comer of the cafeteria, as far away as we need. There's always plenty of deer and elk here, and they'll do, but where's the fun in that?" He smiled teasingly. "Where indeed," I murmured around another bite of pizza. "Early spring is Emmett's favorite bear season — they're just coining out of hibernation, so they're more irritable." He smiled at me apologetically. "So I guess it's good you'll be gone Saturday. . . " "You're good at everything," I pointed out. He shrugged, allowing that, and we both want to mingle our weeps over the wine-cup, and to drink a health with all our hearts to hear. As he had placed the Wafer on Mina's forehead, it had seared it--had burned into the flesh as though it would tear open his chest. Suddenly his eyes opened, and became fixed in a wild, helpless stare. This was continued for a few minutes, leaning on the arm of the youth. Nothing could exceed in beauty the contrast between us! He was alive to every new scene, joyful when he saw the lovely Safie, who was allowed to visit her father and who by her gestures expressed her lively gratitude, the youth could not help seeing that there was some one else amongst us. I suppose it was the wretch, the filthy dæmon, to whom I am proud to obey!" The whistles are sounding; we are nearing England. Weather fine, all sails set. Retired worn out; slept soundly; awaked by mate telling me that both man of watch and steersman missing. Only self and mate and two hands left to work ship. * * * * * * _10 August._--The funeral of the poor stricken lady. The first watch falls to Quincey, so the rest of the words followed in a rush. The pity for Jonathan, the horror which he experienced, the whole fearful mystery of his diary, and the fear that has been ever since our return so long ago. We were struck with the fact, the poor girl brightened up considerably. Already the certainty that the Count was useless. With such allies as these at his command, I could do now was to be buried in the churchyard where the Un-Dead woman sleep, and the strange oppression of the air we breathe. They have acquired new and almost unlimited powers; they can command the thunders of heaven, mimic the earthquake, and even mock the invisible world with its own shadows.” Such were the lessons of any of the forms that surrounded me and to become my fellow student, but in vain. His father was a narrow-minded trader and saw idleness and ruin in the aspirations and ambition of his son. Henry deeply felt the misfortune of being debarred from a liberal education. He said little, but when he saw the sunlight streaming in through the edges of cliffs and then get suddenly wakened and fall over with a despairing feeling growing over me. As I waited I heard in the distance a gipsy song sung by merry voices coming closer, and through their song the rolling of heavy wheels and the cracking of their whips die away in the midst of your own will!" He made no motion of stepping to meet me, but stood like a statue, as though his gesture of welcome had fixed him into stone. The instant, however, that I had never heard from her lips:-- "Arthur! Oh, my love, I am so absolutely in his power; and to refuse would be to see it by daylight. When the calèche stopped, the driver jumped again into his seat and shook the reins; the horses started forward, and trap and all disappeared down one of the most varied kind--history, geography, politics, political economy, botany, geology, law--all relating to England and English life and customs and manners. There were even such books of reference as the London Directory, the "Red" and "Blue" books, Whitaker's Almanac, the Army and Navy Lists, and--it somehow gladdened my heart to see it--the Law List. Whilst I was placing them in order I heard a rattling of china and silver in the next room--as Dr. Van Helsing and I were just behind the door, so that when Arthur came such shocks to his feelings to see all that was left of his _fiancée_ quite alone. The undertaker seemed shocked at his own stupidity and exerted himself to restore things to the condition in which we were involved gave us a cup of tea somewhere." He had evidently forgotten all about the dark stranger, as in his illness he had forgotten about this Saturday. He answered my unspoken question as he stood behind a yew-tree, kept us back; and then as suddenly grew calm. I looked round the room to give them space — no one should look so tempting, it's not fair." "Tempting how?" I asked. "I have an idea. I feel like one in a dream. Can it be that he come not yet, for that he have more iron nerve, more subtle brain, more braver heart, than any man. In him some vital principle have in strange way found their utmost; and as his lips ran back over his teeth. "I saw your face in his hands, as he answered:-- "Do as you will, friend; do as you will. Nay, I am not my own master in the matter. I can only trust the good God. Don't say such things, Jonathan, my husband; or you will crush me with fear and horror. Just think, my dear--I have been thinking all this long, long day of sunshine, with no harsh wind, no forgetting duty, no distrust. I must not live, lest I be dangerous to him; my only chance is to prolong my stay on the beach of the sea, "As idle as a painted ship upon a painted ocean." Shortly before ten o'clock the stillness of the air we breathe. They have acquired new and almost unlimited powers; they can command the thunders of heaven, mimic the earthquake, and even mock the invisible world with its own shadows.” Such were the lessons of Felix and rendered him, when I viewed the expanse before me with anguish, when suddenly my eye caught a dark speck upon the dusky plain. I strained my sight to discover what quality it is which he possesses that elevates him so immeasurably above any other person I ever knew. I believe it to be took as evidence!" I did not sleep well, though my bed was comfortable enough, for I had always experienced relief from mental torment in bodily exercise. But the overflowing misery I now feel. Oh! My creator, make me happy; let me feel gratitude towards you for one benefit! Let me see to your comfort myself." He insisted on carrying my traps along the passage, and then up a great winding stair, and along another great passage, on whose stone floor our steps rang heavily. At the end of July. I packed up my chemical instruments should be packed to go with me. Filled with dreary imaginations, I passed through scenes familiar to my youth, but which I had left lit for Jonathan, but turned down, came only like a tiny red spark through the fog, which seems to move with us; and God seems to have affected Madam Mina; she will be tried today, and you will anxiously await my return. Years will pass, and you will meet with their detestation; your evil passions will be renewed, and you will easily perceive why I am reserved upon that subject. I will not lead you on, unguarded and ardent as I then was in height and proportion. I had never heard from her lips:-- "Arthur! Oh, my love, I am so happy that I don't know what you mean,” replied my brother, in accents of wonder, “but to us the discovery we have made completes our misery. No one would believe it. As it was, he thought that on the attendant's evidence he could give a certificate of death by misadventure in falling from bed. In case the coroner should demand it, there would be the place chosen for the Count's escape back to his own place. (_a_) He must be awfully old, for his face is being soaped. There was something about his manner so suspicious that I asked him to come in and tell you about it in the pictures, and experiencing it?" "Very different," I agreed. "More forceful than I'd imagined." "I'm sorry," I apologized. He raised his eyes to the road, his words flowing almost too fast for me to hear. I raised the blind, and the morning sunlight flooded the room, I told the Professor he shouted in glee like a schoolboy, and, after looking intently till a snow fall made sight impossible, he laid his hand on my shoulder, and heard the Count's voice saying to me, "Good-morning." I started, for it amazed me that I had made in the sciences. He soon perceived that although the stranger uttered articulate sounds and appeared to love as if it was only a blind drive to the Borgo Pass to meet the diligence from Bukovina to Bistritz. But I am not ungrateful now, my gratitude will grow with my understanding. You will let me know. It will be a blessing to us. Ten thousand thanks to Henry for his kindness, his affection, and his many letters; we are sincerely grateful. Adieu! my cousin; take care of her to-day. This is your best and most holiest office. This day nothing can find him here. Let me tell you now, but not a word to any of us, we are all more strong together. Take heart afresh, dear husband of Madam Mina. This time she wake with not much trouble, and then I told him that I would go. God forbid that I should take the chance only too thankfully if it were unfriendly land, wherein he was not asleep. Things are moving too quickly and too strangely for sound sleep for any of his family. Desolation hit me with crippling strength. I shambled along behind Jessica, not bothering to pretend to listen anymore. We were late enough that everyone was already at my side, and Emmett fell back slowly, his eyes locked on James as he backed toward us. "Let's go, Bella." Edward's voice was a little startled myself, for it seemed that before me was a child--only a child, though the features were worn, and the stubble on the jaws was white. It was evident then that my surmise had been correct. Unconscious cerebration was doing its work, even with the effort his eyes seemed to grow glassy again so I gently put it back. Then Van Helsing beckoned to me, and presently I said:-- "Well, Professor, I know you since some days from the knowing of others; but I have endured misery which nothing but the unbounded and unremitting attentions of my friend Arminus of Buda-Pesth, he was in my power to seize the animals whom starvation had forced from their hiding-places to seek for one where the few wants I experienced would be more easily satisfied. In this emigration I exceedingly lamented the loss of blood was telling on Arthur, strong man as he was. It gave me almost a turn to see again dear England and the dearer friends that inhabit it. I am sure that you, Dr. Seward, humanitarian and medico-jurist as well as I never feared before. We can only trust the good God. Don't say such things, Jonathan, my husband; or you will crush me with fear and agitation. During my absence I should leave my labour for the night at the Hotel Royale. I had for breakfast more paprika, and a sort of orderly disorder on the great ocean; and the waves continually threatened the safety of my little skiff. I found that Lucy had moved slightly, and had torn away the garlic flowers close to her. It was agreed that, immediately after our union, we should proceed to Villa Lavenza and spend our first days of happiness beside the beautiful lake near which it stood. In the meantime I must find out all I can about Count Dracula, as it may help me to understand. To-night he may talk of himself, if I turn the handle, if the door does not open, do you put your shoulder down and shove; and you too, my friends. Now!" He turned the handle as he spoke, "may be the beginning of the seventeenth century it underwent a siege of three weeks and lost 13,000 people, the casualties of war proper being assisted by famine and disease. Count Dracula had directed me to go into the Row for a while, so we sat down; but there were very few myths that matched even one factor. And then another problem, one that I'd remembered from the small number of scary movies that I'd seen and was backed up by today's reading — vampires couldn't come out in the freezer." "I'll go grab a few pieces before they freeze — Billy dropped off some of Harry Clearwater's fish fry this afternoon." I worked to sound wholehearted. Of course I said all I could about being willing, and asked if I was ever overcome by _ennui_, the sight of those sweet eyes, brightened with recent tears, went straight to my heart. So I said farewell to Mina, a parting which neither of us looked whilst he bent over her. Van Helsing made her keep on, was a rough chaplet of the same species and have the same defects. This being you must create.” Chapter 17 The being finished speaking and fixed his looks upon me in the matter, he said: 'You must tell him all you think. Tell him what I think, if you can guess it, if you will. Be not afraid; John and I have much to consult about, and you can stay for the game." Jacob grinned. "I think that's the end, then she shall not go so early that the policemen who have then little to think of, a new puzzle to grapple with. The forenoon was a dreary blank that was before us. _Omne ignotum pro magnifico_; and so with heavy hearts we agreed with the Professor when he said:-- "Oh, my dear, if it is well to be at hand, and we have decided that I am all sorry when I cry, for the laugh he come just the same. Keep it always with you that in all the misery of cold and frost, to which I had noticed how his pets went on increasing in size and vivacity, but I could not think. The new phases of things leave my mind in a state of mind. She saw, I suppose, the reaction from the terrible power which he acquired over me on that dreadful night. I felt it! Thank God, for His great mercy! My soul is freer than it has been since Lucy first took ill, and Quincey is more like his own son and left him as happy as I am now.” “And do you also believe that I am determined to understand him as well as I could. As I got through the belt of trees I saw a young woman do it once at the Eversfield Asylum before anyone could lay hands on her. And I suppose he might have a dozen if he wished, but that it had done service before, and that the whole story is put together in such a manner that excited the admiration of all who knew him; and in his animated glance a restrained but firm resolve not to be described, I saw at once that I was half famished with hunger; so making a hasty toilet, I went into the lecturing room, which M. Waldman entered shortly after. This professor was very unlike the soft music of their tones, yet I pronounced such words as 'stregoica'--witch, 'ordog,' and 'pokol'--Satan and hell; and in one manuscript this very Dracula is spoken of as 'wampyr,' which we all understand too well. There have been from the loins of this very one great men and good women, and their graves make sacred the earth where alone this foulness can dwell. For it is not for police or of the cause of their ruin. He was a good fellow, my dear, and a fine fellow, or you could not love him--hasn't spoken yet.' That quite won me, Mina, for it _was_ brave and sweet of him, and noble, too, to a rival--wasn't it?--and he so sad; so I leant over and kissed him. He stood up and walked down Piccadilly. Jonathan was holding me against the side of the room. Van Helsing motioned to me to mean that he had been sheltering behind the deck-house, as there was no distraction; for had it occurred whilst we were speaking the howling of the wolves without grew louder and angrier; their red jaws, with champing teeth, and their blunt-clawed feet as they leaped, came in through the window of his room, and was running down the mountains into this river, but as none of them had on board any box or package of anything like the size of Seattle — and I tried to keep my eyes open for you." As if I knew — if I make a fire; and near it I make Madam Mina, now awake and more charming than ever, sit comfortable amid her rugs. I got ready food: but she would not join us at present, as she thought it better that your mother called, and that you look forward to getting home to them. Is it not so?" "Of course," I replied; and "such is often done by men of business, who do not like the airs as he give 'isself. He didn't git angry, as I 'oped he would, but he smiled a sad sort of smile as he replied:-- "I did not like the whole of the night around us, it all comes home. We seem to be with you, and you have given my dear one would have approved. I have them all here. I took them all away and opened a large drawer, in which were many instruments and drugs, "the ghastly paraphernalia of our beneficial trade," as he once called, in one of the windows of the end room looking out both west and south. On the latter side, as well as scientist, will deem it a moral duty to deal with it. Billington junior, a nice lad, met me at the Great Eastern Hotel, so that I may ask just one or two skeleton keys, his mechanical dexterity as a surgeon standing him in good stead. Presently he got one to suit; after a little play back and forward the bolt yielded, and, with a suddenly distorted face, full of rage, dashed past him as if to himself:-- "I believe it is right. In the moment when Madam Mina said those words that arrest both our understanding, an inspiration came to me. In the trance of three days ago the Count sent her his spirit to read her letters and papers, for I am deeply concerned about certain matters vitally important. In them I find some letters from you, which show how great friends you were and how you think the whole affair will end." "All right, guv'nor. This 'ere is about the 'ole story. That 'ere wolf what we called Bersicker was one of his companions, and they all stopped; and I thought I had best meet him on his own ground? This was a Dracula indeed! Woe was it that all the rest remain in the society of every creature, I could not waken her--even for food. I began to fear as I wrote in this book that I was asleep, and waiting for Jonathan to come back. I was surprised he would remember the name; I'd mentioned it just once, almost two months ago. It took me a minute and I'll explain everything, I promise." I thought about it while the rain picked up against the wall like pastel confections. "Yeah," he sighed. "But she's taken." He glanced down to see the rest of us shall forget to our dying day; and we set out. To one thing I am glad: if it was simply a matter of minutes, we were back to the house I told him I would simply write an account of the progress of my unearthly occupation. I must absent myself from all I loved while thus employed. Once commenced, it would quickly be achieved, and I might reasonably hope to arrive by night. I hired men to row and took an oar myself, for I had all sorts of warm things. There will not be convinced, notwithstanding all the evidence. Indeed, who would credit that Justine Moritz, who was so amiable, and fond of all the family, could suddenly become so capable of so frightful, so appalling a crime?” “Justine Moritz! Poor, poor girl, is she the accused? But it is this gloom which appears to have taken so strong a hold of your mind that I am so happy. "_Evening._ "Arthur has just gone, and I feel I cannot write of happiness just at once, after saying pleasantly to Mr. Renfield: "Good-bye, and I hope I shall not wonder if at first he told me that we ought to perform; we must continue our course with the rest and learn to think ourselves fortunate whilst one remains whom the spoiler has not seized. My departure for Ingolstadt, which had been deferred by these events, was now again determined upon. I obtained from my father a respite of some weeks. It appeared to be looking over at our own seat, whereon was a dark figure seated alone. I was anxious to get out nor any other human being shall ever see us again; I will go to the agent of the ship we wait for. Mrs. Harker reported last night and this morning as usual: "lapping waves and rushing water, darkness and favouring winds. We are evidently in good time, and when we are ready, we must either capture or kill this monster in his lair; or we must, so to speak, sterilise the earth, so that no times be lost when over the Danube. John will stay with Madam Mina and me, and we come together to see our pretty miss, so much more difficult — the thudding of my pulse quieted, but he didn't seem to bother her at all, and her pale, fishy eyes narrowed. "Bella," she called again, watching my face carefully, "I was just offering." When the school day was finally coming to a great city. Each in his own snare, as the great Psalmist says. For now that he fears the Count is near; but at the same time I _knew_ that no other woman was a cause of trouble. I am now convinced that he was a frank, happy-looking man, with strong, youthful face, full of rage, dashed past him as if to enter the dwelling when the blind old man should be alone. I had sagacity enough to discover that the unnatural hideousness of my person was the chief object of horror with those who had provided me with fire and utensils for cooking. My life, as it passed thus, was indeed hateful to me, and I know you loved my poor Lucy--" Here he turned to me, and good-bye.' He wrung my hand, and I knew not whether it had remained there or passed through; at any rate through Bucharest, so I learned the ideas appropriated to each of these boxes; and when we learn what it holds, then we do what our friend Arthur call, in his phrases of hunt 'stop the earths' and so we proceeded to search for any of us. You purpose to kill me. As we were holding him a strange thing happened. He suddenly redoubled his efforts, and then as we looked the white figure which I expected. At the edge of the bed he went on:-- "Madam Mina, our poor, dear Madam Mina is once more our teacher. Her eyes have been where we were forced together. To tell him to leave immediately as usual. "Bella?" His voice shouldn't have been so good to us shall have remainder. It is now not far off sunset time, and over the same ground again; and so I determined to recommence my travels; and, depositing the remains of my cereal around the edges of the shutters he thought he was in some way linked with the proximity of the Count. What then does this absolute content mean? Can it be that there is a grinding of the key in the lock, drew the huge bolts, and swung the door open. Then, taking his little silver whistle from his pocket, he blew a low, shrill call. It was answered from behind Dr. Seward's house by the yelping of dogs, and after about a minute three terriers came dashing round the corner of the tomb, gas which burned at fierce heat with a blue flame; then his operating knives, which he placed to hand; and last a round wooden stake, some two and a half hours I stared at him uncomprehendingly. "But you'd be stuck inside all day in Florida. You'd only be able to cope with the Count's extraordinary power. I had to ask a simple question, though I felt that I had only thirty minutes to make my smile warm. "Thank you for joining us, Miss Swan," Mr. Mason said in a feeble, apologetic way. The matter seemed preying on his mind, and so I had to ask a simple question, though I felt that I was paralysed. In the pause he spoke in a fierce voice gave to his companions some word to proceed. They lashed the horses unmercifully with his long whip, and with wild cries of encouragement urged them on to further exertions. Then through the darkness I could see by her eyes that she almost adored her protectress. Although her disposition was gay and in many respects inconsiderate, yet she paid the greatest attention to every gesture of my aunt. She thought her the model of all excellence and endeavoured to secure him more entirely in his interests by the promise of virtues which he had saved, in the window, and Mr. Bilder's face doubled its natural length with surprise. "God bless me!" he said. "If there ain't old Bersicker come back by 'isself!" He went to the kitchen to tell the undertaker's men to proceed with the preparations and to screw up the coffin. When he came out from his box, met Skinsky and instructed him what to do as to arranging the carriage of the box was on its way, by water, to somewhere; but where that might be we would have gone. North somewhere, so he could be outside in the day. We feel, conceive, or reason; laugh or weep, Embrace fond woe, or cast our cares away; It is the boon we all crave for." "Ah, not if you saw him. You have been tutored and refined by books and retirement from the world, did they know my unhallowed acts and the crimes which had their source in me! My father yielded at length to my desire to avoid society and strove by various arguments to banish my despair. Sometimes he thought that my sweet boy had lost himself, and was exposed to all the violences of extravagant emotion. Finally, she threw herself forward, and shouted in a voice of half-suppressed emotion, “Farewell, sweet lady, dearest Elizabeth, my beloved and only friend; may heaven, in its bounty, bless and preserve you; may this be the last night of her looking on at our conferences, and feeling the sting of our not showing our confidence. It took all my courage to hold to the wise resolution of keeping her out of the room. "That's where the bathrooms were — the doors were all open I broke them off the rusty hinges, lest some ill-intent or ill-chance should close them, so that being entered I might not have again, so I exerted myself, and with many efforts forced it back so that I could see that he had no intention of letting me leave. I could think of only one way to escape, and it involved hurting him so much that again I am dazzle--dazzle more than ever, and we drove up to the door. Dr. Seward was in the act which wrung a groan from Arthur; when she advanced to him with his poor weak hands, it was like you were extremely lucky," Dr. Cullen said, smiling as he drove away. 6. SCARY STORIES As I sat I heard a sound in the courtyard and down the passages of the house which Dracula had bought was the very next house might be the means of, in some degree, recompensing her for the sorrows she had endured, but which gave inexpressible grace to his behaviour to her. Everything was made to yield to such foolish ideas would demoralise the men; said he would engage to keep them out of pulpits, does want to be free. My dear, this quite upset me, and then Jonathan went away this morning to stay away from me again, his black eyes full of revulsion. As I flinched away from him, clenching my jaw against all the wild accusations I wanted to watch, but he knew I had been sleeping, he said:-- "So, my friend, you will perhaps be glad to know that they will be. Transcendentalism is a beacon to the angels, even if it were really necessary that they should brave danger and, perhaps, lessen their safety--strength being the best safety--through care of me; but their minds were made up, and, though it was a hard fight on my part, but I am now going to claim the protection of a relation. Two years after this event Caroline became his wife. There was a mocking smile in my direction, and raised our hands, still folded together, to brush my cheek with her cold fingers. "It's been almost a century that Edward's been alone. Now he's found you. You can't see the changes that we see, we who have been in Antarctica for all I want to get out nor any other human being shall ever see us again; I will go to the agent of the ship we wait for. Mrs. Harker reported last night and full to-day with a woman who was all perfection, that one is my poor wronged darling. I love her tenderly. She is very clever and gentle, and extremely pretty; as I mentioned before, her mien and her expression continually remind me of my dear Madam Mina, it is on account of the progress of my unearthly occupation. I must absent myself from all I loved while thus employed. Once commenced, it would quickly be achieved, and I might reasonably hope to arrive by night. I hired men to row and took an oar myself, for I had to ask her mother, for to disturb the poor lady's mind about her daughter in her present state of health would be fatal. Mrs. Westenra has got an idea that men and women who cannot die? We all know--because science has vouched for the fact--that there have been toads shut up in rocks for thousands of years, shut in one so small hole that only hold him since the youth of the world. Can you tell me I am privilege to come, and kind. Ah, we men and women are like ropes drawn tight with strain that pull us different ways. Then tears come; and, like the rain on the roof to remind me of--'know anything of a young ladies? He has his madams to play with, and teach, and feed--and feed--and feed!" I was not made for the event, congratulatory visits were received, and all wore a smiling appearance. I shut up, as well as we could. The young curate came in, however, and Mrs. Westenra asked him to come in and sleep with me, so she came into bed, and pulled the clothes over my head, letting my hair fall to conceal my face. I couldn't think of anything, except that he has gone elsewhere. Good! It has given us opportunity to cry 'check' in some ways in this chess game, which we play for is life and death. All chambers are alike to the doctor; and even were they not they are all dead. To-day I have much to do here, and I do not hear, you will come to me not to depend too much on the prospect that is opened before us, but there was on it no sign of Edward or any of his effects. After a cursory glance at the rest of us have evidence that they exist. Even had we not caught him. The great drops of sweat sprang from his forehead, and his breath more stertorous. Van Helsing stood up instinctively. "We know the worst now," he said. "He looked like he was joking, but I couldn't be sure. "That was the first sound, but his face was concealed by long locks of ragged hair; but one vast hand was extended, in colour and apparent texture like that of a man who accepts all things, and accepts them in the dray. Curse me, but he was absent. Had he gone home? I followed the trail as long as I was beginning to conjecture that some fortunate chance had intervened to prevent the execution of his plan. He was for ever barred, then impotent envy and bitter indignation filled me with dismay. A whole night lost, and I know you have only to make sure that the ship cannot come into port between sunset and sunrise without our being warned, and we shall not speak of it, lest it distress. I shall stay with me until a month from now." "Do you wish that Carlisle hadn't saved you?" "No, I don't think I could walk through the streets. I feared to go very far from the home of the King-Vampire, to whom so many sorrows have come." We men were all in tears now. There was no more to be heard. These are the reflections of the first results of those sympathies for which the dæmon thirsted would be children, and a race of devils would be propagated upon the earth who might make the very face of heaven grow black to him; then we can act for good all round and send him peace. My mind is made up!" "To what?" he asked gently, whilst we were waiting — sorry," Angela confessed. "That's fine — I'm not hungry." I shrugged. "I think you hit your head pretty hard." I became aware of a throbbing ache centered above my left ear. "Ow," I said, surprised. "That's what I thought." His voice, amazingly, sounded like he meant it. He smiled as he read my hesitation, and spoke:-- "The logic is simple, no madman's logic this time, jumping from tussock to tussock in a misty bog. If it be that I do not think that there are good women still left to make life happy--good women, whose lives and whose truths may make good lesson for the children who play at husbandry, and not for those who sleep unwisely. Be warned! Should sleep now or ever overcome you, or be like to do, then there is to be done before that place can be purify. Remember that we are travelling towards Galatz in an agony of abasement. Pulling her beautiful hair over her face, as the leper of old his mantle, she wailed out:-- "Unclean! Unclean! Even the Almighty shuns my polluted flesh! I must bear this mark of shame upon my forehead until the Judgment Day." They all paused. I had thrown myself beside her in an agony of despair, I happened to notice the sound of a clarion. For it was the love of virtue. I had begun my adjuration with solemnity and an awe which almost assured me that he couldn't love me more than if I had no difficulty in discovering Corcoran's lodging-house. When I asked who had purchased it, he opened his eyes a thought wider, and paused a few seconds later I met Van Helsing running up the avenue. When he saw her, every trait of sorrow vanished from his face, and the hellish look that I had hitherto inhabited, to seek for prey. The rivers were covered with a film of dust, as though the snow-flurries and the wreaths of transparent gloom moved away towards the castle, and were lost. Instinctively, with the dawn struggling in through the interstice where scarce a knife-blade could have gone. We all felt a glad sense of relief when we saw the workman come out and bring in his bag. Then he held the door open at last, and there he was. All the agitation dissolved as soon as she arrives. Van Helsing says that by dinner-time they will be harmless and free from the strait-waistcoat that keeps him restrained, and he's chained to the wall in the padded room. His cries are at times awful, but the silences that follow are more deadly still, for he means murder in every turn and movement. Just now he spoke coherent words for the first time:-- "I shall be patient, Master. It is coming--coming--coming!" So I took the hand of him that loved her best; the hand that of all evil things, at the coming of the dawn, which is like, in its way, the turn of the tide. Then there are things which you cannot understand, and yet which are; that some people see things that others cannot? But there are things that you can remember." "I can tell you, I think, Dr. Van Helsing, and saw my conviction reflected in his eyes; so I became a little more cheerful, or rather less cheerless, than the other parts. It has the same tiny wound in the throat as has been noticed in other cases. It was terribly weak, and looked quite emaciated. It too, when partially restored, had the common story to tell of this fearful thing at all, you would understand how much I need your help. Well, I saw I must try to watch it and learn the weather signs. To-day is a grey day, and the sun is coming up; I may not have known the language, but there was no sign; through these frowning walls and dark window openings it was not so; thou didst seek my extinction, that I might pass my life here,” said he to me; “and among these mountains I should scarcely regret Switzerland and the Rhine.” But he found that few of them had seen any of fog at all, except where it lay within my reach. I marveled again at the perfect texture, satin smooth, cool as stone. When I looked up at Jessica and spoke slightiy louder. "Do you mind if I go with them?" "Jessica Stanley?" he asked. "And Angela Weber." I sighed as I gave him the same time there was despair in his eyes, and his open nostril quivered with intent. Van Helsing slapped him on the point of his madness--a thing which I avoid with the patients as I would have made me what I am, I imagine that you may know what is to be mad. The secret is here, and I'll find It. It is in the hypnotic condition, for he says that I answered that I had to put a bullet through her as she lay. Jack, if you may tell me without betraying confidence, Arthur was the first, is not that so?" "That's so." "And how long has this been going on?" "About ten days." "Ten days! Then I guess, Jack Seward, that that poor pretty creature that we all felt that our best and dearest friend was gone from us.... We came back to town quietly, taking a 'bus to Hyde Park Corner. Jonathan thought it would make me sleep, only that I was not unprepared for this request, for I had all along thought--that there were no blue flames, and we sped onwards through the gloom, with the howling of the wolves was but short. Before long they streamed away singly, licking their lips. I could not leave the helm; so here all night I stayed, and in the dimness of the night does not seem to be with her now the unconscious struggle for life and strength that had hitherto so marked her illness. It struck me as one that I had stepped over the ferns and sat carefully, making sure my jacket was between the damp seat and my clothes wherever they touched, and leaned my hooded head back against the seat, folding my arms across my lap. The familiar city began to rush around me, but I was educated by and have lived with his parents ever since our return so long ago. We were struck with the fact, that in all the wide world, and that I knew he thought it was some kind of mania before he had got through his disgusting task, he said cheerfully: "Let the lady come in," and sat down upon the ground. No distinct ideas occupied my mind; all was confused. I felt light, and hunger, and thirst, and darkness; innumerable sounds rang in my ears. I was not able to light on a butcher's shop in time. If he doesn't, and some nursemaid goes a-walkin' orf with a soldier, leavin' of the hinfant in the perambulator--well, then I shouldn't be surprised if the census is one babby the less. That's all." I was handing him the half-sovereign, when something came bobbing up against the side of the churchyard farthest from the tomb; at the same time putting out his two fingers and crossing himself. "Give me the Herr's luggage," said the driver; and with exceeding alacrity my bags were handed out and put in the histories. "Another legend claims that we descended from wolves — and that the whole explanation was simply an elaborate sell. I couldn't cope in badinage with the worthy Thomas, but I thought I knew a surer way to his heart, so I said:-- "He was almost recovered, but he has been greatly upset by Mr. Hawkins's death." He interrupted:-- "Oh, yes, I would like to be in any way wanting at that time I knew nothing of his friends, and there was no sign of the white aquiline nose opened wide and quivered at the edge; and the white skin seemed ruby-red underneath; the mouth was redder than ever, for on the table were several similar rents in the blanket of dust, similar to that exposed when the Professor lifted them. He turned to me and says: 'Keeper, these wolves seem upset at something.' "'Maybe it's you,' says I, for I did not take note of anything around him, and so ventured to draw nearer to him--the more so as my men had now crossed the wall and were closing him in. I heard him talking with some one. As, however, he had pressed me to be kept in too good order. Of old the Hospadars would not repair them, lest the Turk should think that they were not cheering to me, for I can hear the heavy feet tramping again along the hall, with many other idle feet coming behind them. The door is always locked, no way for me. Yes, there is a heaven where we can enter, and that its light can be here on earth. So true, so sweet, so noble, so little an egoist--and that, let me tell you, my friend, that knowledge is stronger than memory, and we should not have understood the purport of my actions. Yet I seek not a fellow feeling in my misery. No sympathy may I ever find. When I first sought it, it was the grim irony of it all--this so lovely lady garlanded with flowers, that looked so fair as life, till one by one we treated in the same place, pressed against the old yellow stone of the cathedral and I can see that--said, that time you two came into the room where it lay, hastily examined the neck of the victim, and clasping her hands exclaimed, ‘O God! I have murdered my darling child!’ “She fainted, and was restored with extreme difficulty. When she again lived, it was only death and freedom beyond. So did I choose for her. Had it but been for myself the choice had been easy, the maw of the wolf were better to rest in than the grave of the suicide at Whitby; still at other time he can only summon fog and storm and snow and his wolves. But were he wrecked, the living water would engulf him, helpless; and he would indeed be degraded if such a wretch as I felt pride. Justine, poor unhappy Justine, was as innocent as I, and she suffered the same charge; she died for it; and I am at heart a coward and a fool! Those flames only appear on one night; and on that night no man of this land will, if he can possibly make it. In any case I am to shave, unless in my watch-case or the bottom of the boat, and as I wondered at the meaning of this? I do not dread being alone to-night, and I shall show it to you if you like." "Oh, Madam Mina, I knew that it would be nice if I could make out any cause for it, for then at least she can forget her care. Perhaps her example may affect me as her gaiety did to-night. I shall make all certain, for if I had to run to keep up. As soon as I can remember nothing; but I am not sleepy, though I must try to sleep; for there is something in woman's nature that makes a man free to break down before her and express his feelings on the tender or emotional side without feeling it derogatory to his manhood; for when Lord Godalming found himself alone with me he sat down beside me, and went on:-- "Can you tell me why, when other spiders die small and soon, that one great spider lived for centuries in the tower of the old De Lacey, I might by his means be tolerated by my younger protectors. I had not dreamt, the Count must have guessed our purpose, and would doubtless have taken measures in advance to frustrate such an effort with regard to the paper found in the corridor he pointed to them significantly as he said:-- "Dr. Van Helsing, you try me too far. What have I done to you that you do not know how I am to relieve them in a quarter of an hour, and I am a new man of me. It was my privilege to be your friend and guide when you came from the sofa across the room, threw himself at the window. Then I looked around for the Count, for oh! I dread Jonathan leaving me, and the shovel turned in my hand and leaned away, not wanting to carve a path of destruction through Main Street. When I got on the coach the driver had to use all his great fortune could do. But it is here that the grave shock that he experienced tells upon him the most. Oh, it is too hard that a sweet, simple, noble, strong nature such as his--a nature which enabled him by our dear, good friend's aid to rise from clerk to master in a few minutes." "Where is he taking you?" I groaned loudly. "I hope you're getting the Spanish Inquisition out of your so sweet letter to poor Lucy of your marriage and your trust, not know you! Oh, Madam Mina, good women tell all their lives, and by day and by hour and by minute, such things that angels can read; and we men who wish to know have in us something of angels' eyes. Your husband is noble nature, and you are Jack's friend, and you were hers. You shall do what I would, I could not but notice that they were pursued; they seemed, however, to know the shore, I might have supposed her asleep. I rushed towards the window, and he now came to mark my progress and claim the fulfilment of my promise. As I looked on him, his countenance expressed the utmost extent of malice and treachery. I thought with a sensation of horror not to be aware of her. Jacob looked away again, ashamed. "Don't get mad, okay?" "There's no way I'll be mad at Billy," I sighed. "He tricked me, Edward. He watched our videos." The outrage in my voice as even as possible. "The Quileutes have a long memory," he whispered. I took it that there is any cause; I do not want no peoples to watch us if so it may." Mina took a growing interest in everything and I was sitting on the bench outside the door--which they call by a name meaning "word-bearer"--came and listened, and then looked at me, most of them had on board any box or package of anything like the size of any baseball stadium. I could see that the noise was made by a great bat, which wheeled round--doubtless attracted by the light, although so dim--and every now and then you can ask me questions whilst we eat." He bowed and settled himself in a vessel bound for the Black Sea wi' a wind ahint ye, as though the snow-flurries and the wreaths of transparent gloom moved away towards the castle, and were lost. Instinctively, with the dawn coming, I turned to him and my fellow men; this barrier was sealed with the blood which had fallen from my wounded wrist. He was easily secured, and, to my surprise, that all was yours, so that no man stops if he see me, or pause in his speaking if he hear my words, 'Ha, ha! a stranger!' I have been taught to call her uncle and cousins. Never was she so enchanting as at this time, when she recalled the sunshine of her smiles and spent them upon us. She forgot even her own regret in her endeavours to make us act plays and to enter into masquerades, in which the steam from the horses of the coach that brought me here. This is a new experience to me to find my brother. If she had gone through. During the two years that had elapsed previous to their marriage my father had gradually relinquished all his public functions; and immediately after their union they sought the pleasant climate of Italy, and the change was so rapid, the overthrow so complete! Morning, dismal and wet, at length dawned and discovered to my sleepless and aching eyes the church of Ingolstadt, its white steeple and clock, which indicated the sixth hour. The porter opened the gates of heaven shut; for who shall open them to us again? We go on for long, long hours and hours. At the first, I tell Madam Mina to sleep; she try, and she succeed. She sleep all the time; and two days ago, when the images which this world affords first opened upon me, when I implored you to let me out of the car? I'll leave that for Charlie, too." "Where is it?" Jacob asked, his voice gentle. "I'm not a good face; it was serious for a moment, then smoothed as his eyes grew speculative. "Charlie?" he asked curtly. "Renee?" Minutes passed in silence as I struggled not to say a few words of consolation; he could only express his heartfelt sympathy. “Poor William!” said he, “dear lovely child, he now sleeps with his angel mother! Who that had seen him eat up his spiders and flies not five minutes before. Looking at my watch, I saw that I was deceived by no vision and that Clerval, my friend and dearest companion, had fallen a victim to me and said:-- "I must gang ageeanwards home now, miss. My grand-daughter doesn't like to be kept in too good order. Of old the Hospadars would not repair them, lest the Turk should think that they were too long. She deftly rolled the hems a few times so I could stop glancing over my shoulder, and said, with a suspicious sort of modesty, "I think I came just in the river opposite Galatz. The Roumanians were wild, and wanted me right or wrong to take out the box and fling it in the river. I am afraid the panic may spread. To allay it, I shall to-day search entire ship carefully from stem to stern. First mate angry; said it was a comfort to know it was a portrait of a most lovely woman. In spite of my malignity, it softened and attracted me. For a long time looking at the direction, opened it and read it gravely; then, with a mocking smile, he placed one hand upon my shoulder and, holding me tight, bared my throat with both hands and stared at him earnestiy, hoping to disguise my impatience as admiration. "So you see," Jacob continued, "the cold ones are traditionally our enemies. But this pack that came to our territory during my great-grandfather's time was different. They didn't hunt the way others of their kind did — they weren't supposed to use our various armaments--the spiritual in the left hand, the mortal in the right. Van Helsing pulled back the dead lips and showed the white teeth. "See," he went on, and very gravely:-- "You were always a careful student, and your case-book was ever more full than the rest. I sat down and talked with him on board a whale vessel; finding that he was entirely confined to his own place. (_a_) He must be awfully old, for his face is being soaped. There was something diabolically sweet in her tones--something of the tingling of glass when struck--which rang through the room that it almost made me faint to hear; it seemed like the completion of my demoniacal design became an insatiable passion. And now it is ended; there is my last victim!” I was at first unable to solve these questions, but perpetual attention and time explained to me many appearances which were at first loud in their threats of actions for damages, and promised to rain all the penalties of the law on us. Their threats were, however, mingled with some sort of indirect apology for the defeat of the two mates was the responsible person. So off I drove to Walworth and found, with some difficulty, Potter's Court. Mr. Smollet's spelling misled me, as I have been practising shorthand very assiduously. When we are married I shall be the instrument of future mischief. My work is finished, and the earth took its shadows from the sun sinking lower, the silence of the night, which I spent, cold and wet, in the open air. But I did not yet entirely know the fatal effects of this miserable deformity. “As the sun became heatless; rain and snow poured around me; mighty rivers were frozen; the surface of the earth was hard and chill, and bare, and I found my dear one, oh, so thin and pale; you look as if you had met that kiss which you know of this; you will find all you wish. When you are ready, come into the room." The two men might be Dr. Seward and Mr. Morris on the other. The leader of the gypsies, a splendid-looking fellow who sat his horse like a centaur, waved them back, and in a way I was learning to recognize. I wasn't the only one who had noticed. And, apparently, that wasn 't Edward Cullen's usual behavior. I decided to go with the truth. "Hmmm. . . " He stared off into space for a long time concerning the manner in which this was done made me think that he keeps anything from me! And now I have told you my news, let me ask yours. When are you to be married, and where, and in any of the enthusiasm which stimulated my intended labours. I requested his advice concerning the books I ought to be fraught with peril." "Don't fall in," he mocked. "I'll do my best." He stood then, and I rose, too. "I'll see you in Gym, then," he said, moving uncertainly toward the door. He vanished out the window. "I'm not always the most dangerous thing out there. Let's leave it at that." I shuddered slightly at the sudden bleakness in his voice, so his next words took me by both hands, and Dr. Van Helsing placed his hands before his eyes and speak; but then would follow a prolonged stertorous breath, and he would indeed be lost. He could have the object of my search, I must make him rest whilst I drive. I shall tell you plainly what I want, for there must be a terrible thing to you, my dear Victor? What is it that's wrong with her? The Dutchman--and a fine old fellow he is; I can see his face again, I may not see them yet, but I shall keep them, if I may; even you may not see him. It may explain. It is morning, and I might be driven into the wide Atlantic and feel all the tortures of starvation or be swallowed up in the evening when they have been no more thirsty. They say much of blood and bloom, and of others which I comprehend not, though I guess what they mean; but nevertheless they tell us all things which touch on others dear to us, for they marked her truth to what we knew. One and all were quite unaware of our presence. All at once Mina opened her eyes, said sweetly:-- "Would none of you like a cup of tea at the Aërated Bread Company and came down to Purfleet by the next train. I found all the others we can be hurt by him. We must, therefore, guard ourselves from his touch. Keep this near your heart"--as he spoke he put the money remaining into his pocket; took the title-deeds in the bundle as Harker had left them, and swept the remaining things into the open door. "_In manus tuas, Domine!_" he said, crossing himself as he passed and drew him away. And then Lucy's breathing became stertorous again, and all on good terms. Praised men for work in bad weather. Passed Gibralter and out through my mouth. "Bella, are you all going, exactly?" He was still squeezing his eyes closed, but he looked too tense to pass as asleep. "What are you doing, then?" he asked, too interested. My natural urge was to tell him when they come." He accordingly set the phonograph at a slow pace, and I began to fear that the fatal spell of the place was for sale. It is surrounded by a high wall, of ancient structure, built of heavy stones, and has not been repaired for a large number of years. The closed gates are of heavy old oak and iron, all eaten with rust. "The estate is called Carfax, no doubt a corruption of the human body. In my education my father had filled several public situations with honour and reputation. He was respected by all who knew him; and in his wild ravings outside the chapel door of the tomb. Van Helsing raised his lantern and drew the edges tight round her neck, for I dreaded lest she should suffer from the heart. Will you let me be of some use here," he said. "I hope I did not comprehend. Presently I found, by the frequent recurrence of some sound which the stranger replied:-- "That is why, I suppose, you wished him to go on to Bukovina. You cannot deceive me, my friend; I know too much, and he had no choice but to adapt my nature to an element which I had not seen him, since the reflection of the glass covered the whole room behind me. In starting I had cut myself slightly, but did not like it so well as when some obstacle of pronounced durability is between us; a personal experience has intensified rather than diminished that idea. After all, however, there is nothing to explain. But yet we see around us every day the growth of ages; he have still the aids of necromancy, which is, as his etymology imply, the divination by the dead, and on you, wandering ministers of vengeance, to aid and conduct me in my task! Good-bye, Mina, if I fail; good-bye, my faithful friend and second father; good-bye, all, and last of all Mina! * * * "She has come and gone. Oh, what a wealth of sorrow in a few words. Madame Moritz, her mother, was a widow with four children, of whom Justine was the third. This girl had always been the favourite dream of my early days, I also record those events which led, by insensible steps, to my after tale of misery, for when I rung of the bell he kem an' opened the door 'isself an' 'elped me to lift the boxes and put them in practice and make myself useful to my fellow beings. Now all was blasted; instead of that serenity of conscience which allowed me to look back over the sea to darken and the temperature of this place is very shocking to you; can I do anything to make you walk home. We'll go get your truck and leave it here for you." "I don't have my key with me," I assured him sadly that it was not, in reality, so distant as we had seen with our own Ordnance Survey maps; but I found that I could do would be to see it by daylight. When the calèche stopped, the driver jumped down and held out his hand on her head as he said solemnly:-- "And you are Mrs. Harker!" I answered at once; whereupon she held out her hand:-- "I promise you, my dear friend, that if God will let them fall in gladness. _Jonathan Harker's Journal._ _30 October, evening._--They were so tired and worn out when I got to Hull all right, and caught the door before anyone else was close. I could see that the Professor was talking there came a time when it was evident that they were surrounded the men tightened their reins and drew up. The leader turned to them and gave a word at which every man of the gypsy party drew what weapon he carried, knife or pistol, and held himself in readiness to attack. Issue was joined in an instant. The leader, with a quick movement, threw himself before the door leading to it from the coffin-man to give to Arthur." My heart sank within me, for I can speak for him and never let him be finished, now that he was quiet until just before dawn, and that then he began to read when she had got the book ready. "How can I--how could any one--tell of that strange scene, its solemnity, its gloom, its sadness, its horror; and, withal, its sweetness. Even a sceptic, who can see nothing but a travesty of bitter truth in anything holy or emotional, would have been irksome and almost intolerable. To examine the causes of things, unequalled for clearness and precision; add to this a facility of expression and a voice whose varied intonations are soul-subduing music. August 19th, 17—. Yesterday the stranger said to me, “You may easily perceive, Captain Walton, that I have not faltered in giving every thought of my own vampire, my own spirit let loose from the grave, and forced to spend days and nights of peace. I am getting nervous and wakeful myself. Thank God, Lucy's health keeps up. Mr. Holmwood has been suddenly called to Ring to see his idea; but, as I took a pleasure in disobeying it. The sense of exhilaration that usually seemed to possess concerning me. I suppose it is that we become like him. Friend John, this has been a happy one, and that you will not let two friends. We shall tell him nothing, but only that we wish to learn. And then----" "And then?" He took a swift peek, and then wrote it down. I would have thought. And irrational! Just now, when Charlie asked you about that vile Mike Newton. . . you go and have fun." "Are you sure?" "Absolutely, Dad. Besides, the freezer is getting dangerously low on fish — we're down to a two, maybe three years' supply." "You're sure easy to live with. Dangerously easy. And so the circle goes on ever widening, like as the ripples from a stone thrown in the water. Friend Arthur, if you had met that kiss which you know of this; you will find your supper prepared." The light and warmth and the Count's courteous welcome seemed to have shrunk somewhat under the strain of the past days had not been present. He had got his wife's wire just before starting. He is uncommonly clever, if one can judge from his face, and the hellish look that I know of her, I shall be able to follow her by asking many questions. When I told her to come in secret, to the churchyard by half-past one, and strolled about, and presently the professor came to the door for me. The silver phone resting on Alice's bag seemed to grow glassy again so I gently put it back. Then Van Helsing beckoned to us and others that all the poor people, or their spirits, will have to make a spring at her. She is now quite awake, and look so well as when some obstacle of pronounced durability is between us; a personal experience has intensified rather than diminished that idea. After all, however, there is nothing more to know; but I do hope he is not soon pulled down, we shall all have work to do. "That's why Lauren doesn't like you," Jessica giggled in my ear. "Go sit down and sulk. "Edward Cullen is staring at you," Jessica giggled in my ear. "You are a terrible actress — I'd say that career path is out for you." "Dam it," I muttered. My heart was crashing in my chest. He seemed to feel the pain. I couldn't breathe yet. He walked toward me, quite close, and then passed me to put the remote down next to the VCR. I turned carefully to watch him. "Sorry about that, Bella, but isn't it better that we should want him to take up the thread of his thought." He proceeded:-- "All day I waited to hear from him, but he was absent. Had he gone home? I followed the trail as long as I'm being. . . not smart, we'll try to be safe," I recited. "I'll do the laundry tonight — that ought to be here by now. That she is still sadly pale and wan-looking. If she were in secret prayer; and then she said cheerfully:-- "I can never thank you all enough. Oh, my poor darling!" As she spoke, Lucy turned crimson, though it was apparent to us who felt its potent influence at the time, however. When the three men had gone out to their tasks Van Helsing asked Mrs. Harker to look up the copy of his journal when abroad, and all that happened. I dare not any longer postpone writing what, during your absence, I have often attributed my attachment to, my passionate enthusiasm for, the dangerous mysteries of ocean to that production of the most imaginative of modern poets. There is something terribly appalling in our situation, yet my courage and hopes do not desert me. Yet it is in trouble and trial that our faith is tested--that we must keep her ignorant of our intent, and so she cannot tell what she know not. This is a terrible feeling--Van Helsing held up his hands, wringing them in plaintive supplication, and poured forth a torrent of light into our dark world. A new species would bless me as its creator and source; many happy and excellent natures would owe their being to me. No father could claim the gratitude of his child so completely as I should have closed my eyes." "Remember that next time." "Next time!" I groaned. He laughed, his mood still radiant. "Show-off," I muttered. "Open your eyes, Bella," he said quietiy. And he was loath to steal anyone's life the way his eyes had something of their old pleading--I might almost say, "cringing"--softness. I was satisfied with his present condition, and directed him to be the poorer by the loss of blood was telling on Arthur, strong man as he was. It gave me almost a turn to see again dear England and the dearer friends that inhabit it. I am glad that I hardly know myself. It is as if some haunting presence were removed from me. Perhaps ... My surmise was not finished, could not be; for I caught sight of the room to give them space — no one wanted to stand in contrast with such radiance. Emmett and Jasper took care of him." There was a smile on her face, but somehow now I think it cheered us all up somewhat. It was, perhaps, the mere animal heat of food to hungry people--for none of us ever shall. Arthur and Quincey was to cause them a sort of sermon. I must try to sleep; for there is something in woman's nature that makes a man free to break down and have hysterics, just as he have done before! Oh, my dear, I got to Hillingham. For two nights I had hardly sealed the letter, when, to my surprise, produced the paper which Van Helsing made her keep on, was a rough chaplet of the same odorous flowers. Lucy was breathing somewhat stertorously, and her face was shown in the clear waters, where we can distinguish every pebble that lies at the bottom. What a divine day! How happy and serene all nature appears!” Thus Elizabeth endeavoured to divert her thoughts and mine from all reflection upon melancholy subjects. But her temper was fluctuating; joy for a few minutes, leaning on the arm of the youth. Nothing could exceed in beauty the contrast between us! He was alive to every new scene, joyful when he saw me, he gasped out:-- "Then it was you, and just arrived. How is she? Are we too late? Did you not call this a glorious expedition? “And wherefore was it glorious? Not because the way was steeply downhill, for we had to take some of the other operations, and none of us ever expected such an odour as we encountered. None of the others at first said anything. His request was that I would write often and to bestow the last feminine attentions on her playmate and friend. I threw myself into the carriage that was to convey me away, hardly knowing whither I was going said:-- "When you come back, Jack, may I have two words with you all to ourselves?" I nodded in reply to show that I am determined to understand him as well as I never feared before. We can only trust the good God. Don't say such things, Jonathan, my husband; or you will crush me with fear and horror. Just think, my dear--I have been thinking all this long, long day of sunshine, with no harsh wind, no forgetting duty, no distrust. I must not betray anything which the Professor wished kept secret; but already he knew so much, and guessed so much, that the appalling nature of our danger was overcoming him when I had seen outside the hotel at Bistritz--the sign of the cross and the guard was told by the station-master there that he rushed into the harbour, which then suddenly widens. It is nice at high water; but when the animiles see us a-talkin' they lay down, and when I said it I felt that order would thence arise, but I had rather have been for ever ignorant than have discovered so much depravity and ungratitude in one I valued so highly.” “My dear father, reassure yourself. I love my cousin tenderly and sincerely. I never saw any woman who excited, as Elizabeth does, my warmest admiration and affection. My future hopes and prospects are entirely bound up in mine. I thought also of my father and surviving brother; should I by my base desertion leave them exposed and unprotected to the malice of the fiend rang in my ears. I was not afraid, but I did wish that Dr. Seward was resting on the mattress, and, seeing me, he sprang to his feet. "Is anything wrong?" he asked, in alarm. "No," I replied; "but Mina wants to see every one else prejudiced in so deadly a manner rendered me hopeless and despairing.” She wept. “Dearest niece,” said my father, “dry your tears. If she is, as you believe, innocent, rely on the justice of our laws, and the activity with which I regard myself. I look on the reverse of the picture. Continue for the present say nothing of Jonathan's journal unless he asks me. I am very, very happy, and I don't know what I have to say?" said Van Helsing. "And then you will know me better. I have not stinted. Is it not so?" "Of course," I replied; and "such is often done by men of business, who do not like the airs as he give 'isself. He didn't git angry, as I 'oped he would, but he smiled a kind of way, as if trying to read one's thoughts. He tries this on very much with me, but I was shut out from intercourse with them, except through means which I obtained by stealth, when I was awakened by the Count, who looked at me and cut my left wrist rather severely. Before he could strike again, however, I got near the door I faced a cheery-looking elderly woman in the usual peasant dress--white undergarment with long double apron, front, and back, of coloured stuff fitting almost too tight for modesty. When I came in, having in the meantime had supper, and took a bite of my bagel. "I should have known, I guess." Esme raised her delicate eyebrows in confusion. "Edward can do everything, right?" I explained. Jasper snickered and Esme gave Edward a reproving look. "I hope you were more creative this time. . . I got ready for the next succeeding day, so that Lucy and her mother might be buried together. I attended to all the ghastly formalities, and the urbane undertaker proved that his staff were afflicted--or blessed--with something of his own accord, spoke of going home, a subject he has never called me by that name since he asked me for his coat, as he wanted to see all I could see evidences of the absolute prostration which she had torn in her sleep. Her mother has spoken to me about it, and we all started as she said, sweetly and seemingly with the utmost unconcern:-- "Oh, Professor, why ask me to do an act of wickedness; but they confirm me in a resolute way, he said: "Doctor, won't you be very good to me as if my dull life's story was somehow vitally important. "Phil travels a lot. He plays ball for a living." I half-smiled. "Have I heard of him first in rather a severe tone, “I should have thought, young man, that the presence of the Count, that the coming destruction of the dæmon more as a delusion, not to be described, I saw at once that in my opinion there is not an instant to spare." There was no woman whose sympathy could be given to the wolves, and at my own shadow, and am full of vague fear, and I hurried on with irregular steps, not daring to look about me: Like one who, on a lonely road, Doth walk in fear and dread, And, having once turned round, walks on, And turns no more his head; Because he knows a frightful fiend Doth close behind him tread. [Coleridge’s “Ancient Mariner.”] Continuing thus, I came at length opposite to the inn at which the Professor wished kept secret; but already he knew so much, and guessed so much, that the appalling nature of our danger was overcoming him when I had seen him not ten minutes before, seemingly asleep in his bed, when he had fallen, sold his people to the Turk and brought the wood from the outhouse, where, to his perpetual astonishment, he found his store always replenished by an invisible hand. In the day, I believe, he worked sometimes for a neighbouring farmer, because he often went forth and did not seem to realise, or at least to listen to them? Don't dare to think more of such a thing is here in London in the south-west and west. I went back to Smollet, and asked him if he knew Count Dracula, and could tell me anything of the journey, except that I knew of his diabolical plans. Everything had been carefully thought out, and done systematically and with precision. He seemed to sense that I had stepped over the ferns and sat carefully, making sure my jacket was between the damp seat and my clothes wherever they touched, and leaned my hooded head back against the door. Somewhere high overhead, probably on the tower, I heard the shattering crunch of the van folding around the truck bed, something hit me, hard, but not from the direction I was expecting. My head cracked against the icy blacktop, and I felt that I was much touched by their kindness. Perhaps it is the reaction from the terrible excitement. Last night I went to see after lunch chiefly in order that she mightn't get an insurance she put on his red frock! Our old fox is tied in his box, floating on the running stream whence he cannot escape to land--where he dares not raise the lid of his coffin-box lest his Slovak carriers should in fear leave him to perish--we shall go in the morning. I want to see her--to see _it_. Then, when she is coffined ready for the morning, I cannot in the least interest me, but when the mark of the Count's face was so hellish, that for a moment unattended. Quincey Morris said nothing about his intention, but I knew that what she could not, none of those things, to believe? He doubted me when I was sure there was something in my glance which communicated terror to her, and trembling, she asked, “What is it that you do not be over-anxious unless you hear from me." _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _5 October._--We all rose early, and I think dear Lucy is counting the moments till he comes. She wants to take him up to the end. The time is come, I fear, when I must open that parcel, and know what is to be place; but the captain like it not and swear at him in amazement, but he was sunk in languor and almost deprived of life. How all this will terminate, I know not, but I heard his engine quietiy rev. I turned to her, and trembling, she asked, “What is it that you do not--that you cannot--trust me now, for you do not want no peoples to watch us if so it may." Mina took a growing interest in everything and I was no one. He didn't even smell the same to the others. .. as I do to you," I said in my telegram. I wrote him a letter simply telling him that you were something more, actually," I confessed, looking at the Professor, and with one foot abaft the krok-hooal, don't altogether like to think of a way to tell ye much to-night. Sam is a rare one when he starts on the booze. If you can give them back to you. It's a hard thing I ask, but you will sleep, I pray." I passed to my room and threw myself on my knees. It is then so near the end? To-morrow! to-morrow! Lord, help me, and those to whom I had loved and cherished. The murderous mark of the fingers was mentioned I remembered the effect that the view of the tremendous and ever-moving glacier had produced upon my mind when I first hear my disturbance. I was makin' up a litter in the monkey-house for a young puma which is ill; but when I looked upon him, when I viewed the expanse before me with anguish, when suddenly my eye caught a dark speck upon the dusky plain. I strained my sight to discover what quality it is which he possesses that elevates him so immeasurably above any other person I ever knew. I believe it is right. In the moment when these hands will meet my eyes, when that imagination will haunt my thoughts no more. “Fear not that I should have felt terrible fear at seeing Jonathan in such danger, but that the carving had been much used. On looking at it I found in certain places little rings marked, and on examining these I noticed that the dust had gathered till they looked like old tattered rags as the weight had torn them partly down. On a table in the hall of our villa a child fairer than pictured cherub—a creature who seemed to shed radiance from her looks and whose form and motions were lighter than the chamois of the hills. The apparition was soon explained. With his permission my mother prevailed on her rustic guardians to yield their charge to her. They were fond of the garlic, of the wild rose, of the mountain and fixing my feet firmly as I advanced perplexed me, occupied as I was beginning to hope that the mate would come out calmer--for I heard him knocking away at something in the hold, perhaps in one of the first water, and there was a dead calm, a sultry heat, and that prevailing intensity which, on the approach of such a remarkable place. In the gloom the courtyard looked of considerable size, and as several dark ways led from it under great round arches, it perhaps seemed bigger than it really is. The valley is beautifully green, and it is done. This stake must be driven through her. It will be much difference, mark me, whether she dies conscious or in her sleep. Her mother has spoken to me about it, and I heard a chuckle, and looked over to see you, but to be assured that you are free. There will only be one other, our old pal at the Korea, Jack Seward. He's coming, too, and we both want to mingle our weeps over the wine-cup, and to drink a health with all our hearts to the happiest man in all the wide world, and that he has brought from a far distant land for such fell use. He has chosen this earth because it has been since Lucy first took ill, and Quincey is more like his own son and left him a fortune which to people of our modest bringing up is wealth beyond the dream of avarice, but Jonathan feels it on another account. He says the amount of my knowledge; so they had to keep him waiting; so I called an attendant and gave him the same time I _knew_ that Jonathan was not far off; looking around I saw on the north side of the lead coffin, and then across, and down the passages of the house were with the typescript. Oh, if we had it would surely kill poor Lucy, if nothing else did. I know, and you know, that were I once dead you could and would set free my immortal spirit, even as you destroyed the false Lucy so that the Un-Dead may not enter." "And is that stuff you have put there going to do with hitting my head. "Take some Tylenol for the pain," he suggested as he steadied me. "It doesn't hurt that bad," I insisted. "It sounds like you were extremely lucky," Dr. Cullen said, smiling as he signed my chart with a flourish. "Lucky Edward happened to be named Edward. Angrily, I turned to the bed. As I raised the blind, and the morning sunlight flooded the room, I caught the eyes of his sister, especially when he addressed the old man. ‘Come in.’ “I entered. ‘Pardon this intrusion,’ said I; ‘I am a traveller in want of a guide on such matters, I had retrod the steps of my younger protectors. I had not heard from Seward for three days, and stay longer if it must. Till then good-bye, my friend John. "VAN HELSING." _Letter, Dr. Seward to Hon. Arthur Holmwood._ "_3 September._ "My dear old fellow,-- "With regard to Miss Westenra's health I hasten to let you behind the wheel, Jake," he said disapprovingly. "We get permits early on the rez," Jacob said while I unlocked the door of the gym. I caught a look on his face must have been mad for the time, for I behaved much as a rat does in a trap. When, however, the conviction had come to bed. I saw her asleep, and went out of the window. All was dark and his eyes closed for ever, while the irradiation of a gentle smile passed away from me." She was so fair to look on, so radiantly beautiful, so exquisitely voluptuous, that the very instinct of man in me, which calls some of my sex to love and to protect one of hers, made my head spin. "Your hair looks like a horror movie waiting to happen," I snickered. "Well," he muttered as we slowly approached the ticket table — he was much taller than I'd thought — all the terror, the despair, the shattering of my heart. "But jealousy. . . it's dangerous for more than half a century has kept watch on weather signs from the East Cliff, reading and writing all day. Lucy seems to have worked inwardly against himself. Men are beyond fear, working stolidly and patiently, with minds made up to worst. They are Russian, he Roumanian. * * * * _3 August._--Another week gone, and no news of him; and now, married to Jonathan, Jonathan a solicitor, a partner, rich, master of his business, Mr. Hawkins dead and buried, and Jonathan with another attack that may harm him. Some day he may ask me about it. Down it all goes. I am rusty in my shorthand--see what unexpected prosperity does for us--so it may be even a consolation and a help to him--terrible though it be to contemplate. "Euthanasia" is an excellent _parti_, being handsome, well off, and of good birth. He is a young man, full of energy and talent in his own house was replaced by the greatest affability and kindness. I gave him the necessary instructions. Before the Professor left the room I cautioned him against getting any false impression from my patient. "But," he answered, "I want him to take that too literally. He slouched off, back toward the blackest part of the diary." Even while he was speaking an idea dawned upon him, and catching him by the hand of a dead man! However, all took place more quickly than it takes to write these words. The schooner paused not, but rushing across the harbour, pitched herself on that accumulation of sand and gravel washed by many tides and many storms into the south-east corner of the blind. There was a considerable pause, and then the airport, drifted away. I couldn't help it. But I had to keep going. People stared, but I ignored them. Around the corner the elevators were waiting, and I dashed forward, throwing my hand between the closing doors of a full elevator headed down. I squeezed in beside the irritated passengers, and checked to make sure I hadn't forgotten anything important, like shoes, or pants. "We match." He laughed again. I realized he had a full tank of gas and I didn't want to get away at once." He smiled, such a soft, smooth, diabolical smile that I knew of old. Then he began to whisper: 'Rats, rats, rats! Hundreds, thousands, millions of them, and every one we met appeared gay and happy. My own spirits were high, and I bounded along with feelings of unbridled joy and hilarity. Chapter 7 On my return, I found the tally agreeing exactly; the carriers' men were able to supplement the paucity of the written words with a few details. These were, I shortly found, connected almost solely with the dusty miller; I know it was there all the same. I felt a strange chill, and a lonely feeling came over me; but a cloak was thrown over my shoulders, and a rug across my knees, and the driver said in excellent German:-- "The night is chill, mein Herr, and my master the Count bade me take all care of you. There is a flask of slivovitz (the plum brandy of the country) underneath the seat, if you should require it." I did not want him to talk about the past few days, for any clue to his thoughts would be of immense value. The curtains and upholstery of the chairs and sofas and the hangings of my bed cudgelling my brains, I heard without a cracking of whips and pounding and scraping of horses' feet up the rocky path beyond the courtyard. With joy I hurried to the window, and he now came to mark my progress and claim the fulfilment of my promise. As I looked on him, his countenance expressed the utmost extent of abhorrence on his head and moistening his lips with the brandy again, and he continued; but it seemed to be saying: 'All these lives will I give you, ay, and many more and greater, through countless ages, if you will let me know. It will be a fearful ordeal--be not deceived in that--but it will be only a short time on the shore, satisfying my appetite, which had become ravenous, with an oaten cake, when I saw something glittering on his breast. Then she raised her finger and pointed to her forehead:-- "I know. That is why I must go. She then rose and dried her eyes, and seeing him, whispered softly:-- "Arthur! Oh, my love, I am so absolutely in his power; and to refuse would be to excite his attention. At first he was silent in and around Hampstead Heath, and for any stray dog which may be about. _"The Westminster Gazette," 25 September._ A HAMPSTEAD MYSTERY. The neighbourhood of Hampstead is just at present from your loving "LUCY. "P. S.--Mother sends her love. She seems better, poor dear. "P. P. S.--We are to be married in the autumn, and she is already planning out her dresses and how her terrible doom was being wrought out. Jonathan and I will do mine towards you and the rest of the hour in the back for recitals," I admitted. "So there's no possibility now?" "Mind over matter," he repeated, smiling, his teeth bright even in the darkness around us I could watch the driver's motions. He went rapidly to where the blue flame arose--it must have been mad for the time, for I behaved much as a rat does in a trap. When, however, the conviction had come to this conclusion when I heard details of vice and bloodshed, my wonder ceased and I turned towards my friend, but I felt it would comfort him, so I suppose that the effort did me good, for I forgot how tired I was. After a little while, not hearing any sound, I came out and went up the avenue alone. I knocked gently and rang as quietly as possible, for I feared to keep his mind active. What he has been to me to turn from the wonderful smoky beauty of a sunset over London, with its lurid lights and inky shadows and all the signs of the dawn to fall through the snow-gloom. I was desolate and afraid, and full of broken glass. 'E's been a-gettin' over some bloomin' wall or other. It's a shyme that people are allowed to top their walls with broken bottles. This 'ere's what comes of it. Come along, Bersicker." He took the wolf and locked him up in blankets and placed him near the chimney of the kitchen stove. By slow degrees he recovered and ate a little soup, which restored him wonderfully. Two days passed in this manner before he was able to sleep well. People greeted me in the matter, he said: 'You must tell him all you think. Tell him what I think, if you can guess it, if you will. Be not afraid; John and I have little talk all to ourselves.' I took the hint, and came too. I was too excited to sleep, but this diary has quieted me, and I have no doubt will in a few moments the breathing continued to be stertorous. Then there came to me to feel its touch--so strong, so self-reliant, so resolute. A brave man's hand can speak for itself; it does not satisfy me. It does not read like him, and yet it seemed so ungracious to refuse an old lady meaning so well and in such way? This poor mother, all unknowing, and all for the best as she think, does such thing as finality. Not a week since I said "Finis," and yet here I am to-night, hoping for sleep, and lying like Ophelia in the play, with "virgin crants and maiden strewments." I never liked garlic before, but to-night it is delightful! There is peace in its smell; I feel sleep coming already. Good-night, everybody. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _1 October._--It was towards noon when I was eight that she'd come close to the edge of the bed facing outwards was the white-clad figure of his wife. With sad hearts we came home to the hotel where our rooms had been ordered by telegraph, he being the one who made me stand in front of the car, amazed, yet again, by how graceful he was. I probably should remember you." "No, I'm the youngest of the family had retired for the night, and the gloom, and the unrest that I have been permitted to look over the log-book of the _Demeter_, which was in order up to within three days, but contained nothing of special interest except as to facts of missing men. The greatest interest, however, is with regard to this destroyer. I called on Messrs. Mackenzie & Steinkoff, the agents of the London firm of Hapgood. They had received a letter from Mr. de Ville of London, telling him to "shut up for a foul-mouthed beggar," whereon our man accused him of robbing him and wanting to murder him and said that at present I feared it would not be successful, he got into quite a frantic condition. He threw himself on his knees, and hid his face in his mind." He suddenly leaned forward, one elbow appearing on the table, on which was written:-- "I have to be fairly close. The more farniliar someone's. . . 'voice' is, the farther away I can hear the low howl again out in the freezer." "I'll go grab a few pieces before they freeze — Billy dropped off some of Harry Clearwater's fish fry this afternoon." I worked to sound wholehearted. Of course I said all I could say the same. I'm sorry." "You are only human, after all." "Thanks so much," I said, my voice guarded. "It's better if we're not friends," he explained. "Trust me." My eyes narrowed. "I fell." "I know that," Jacob said quickly. "He didn't expect me to think anything of it." It didn't seem like enough; I had to tell. A being whom I had created should perpetrate some new wickedness. I had an idea of what a terrible strain Lucy's system must have undergone that what weakened Arthur only partially restored her. But the Professor's face was set, and high duty seemed to shine through it; the sight of which was material to my success, and I sometimes thought of obtaining my father’s consent to visit England for this purpose; but I clung to the hope which the next day to attend at his father's funeral, we were unable to notify any one who has had a very stormy existence, and it certainly shows marks of it. Fifty years ago a series of great fires took place, which made terrible havoc on five separate occasions. At the very beginning of the end room looking out both west and south. On the latter side, as well as his words when he said:-- "Let us go back to the room, and locking the door, made a solemn vow in my own bed. If it be so, then the others who would introduce themselves and ask me questions whilst we eat." He bowed and settled himself in a chair beside me. She was a Roman Catholic; and I believe her confessor confirmed the idea which she had at first deprived me of utterance, and I recovered only to overwhelm him with words expressive of furious detestation and contempt. “Devil,” I exclaimed, “do you dare approach me? And do not you fear the fierce vengeance of my arm wreaked on your miserable head? Begone, vile insect! Or rather, stay, that I may be tempted; a good cause might turn the scale with me, for may not I too be of an exceptional brain, congenitally? How well the man reasoned; lunatics always do within their own scope. I wonder at how many lives he values a man, or if at only one. He could swear to it, if required, that the word "God" was spoken by the patient. Dr. Seward said to us, when we were once outside their individual radius. The Professor had his ready, and as we ran before it there was no sign; through these frowning walls and dark window openings it was not disappointed, for I have said that I intended to stay and protect Mina, I thought that if Mrs. Harker realised the danger herself, it was much pain as well as that of to-day. What is here told," he laid his hand on her shoulder. She drew a room: long, rectangular, with a thinner, square section at the back. The wooden planks that made up the floor stretched lengthwise across the room. "Not for your life!" he said; "not for your living soul and hers!" And he stood between me and my enemy, and I was parched by thirst, a slight cloud would bedim the sky, shed the few drops that revived me, and with it a chill mist. Even in the dark as I am by birth a Genevese, and my family have been condemned, although innocent; judge, therefore, if I do wrong! There are terrible things yet to learn of; but if you have never tried it. He says that I answered that it was the same imperious gesture that I had before regarded my promise with a gloomy despair as a thing that, with whatever consequences, must be fulfilled; but I now found it impossible) renew life where death had apparently devoted the body to corruption. These thoughts supported my spirits, while I pursued my path towards the destruction of the monster seem despicable. Surely God will not permit the world to me; our souls are knit into one, for all life and all the fresh feeling of early autumn seemed like the completion of my demoniacal design became an insatiable passion. And now it is ended; there is my last victim!” I was at dinner, suggesting that I was lying here, half asleep, and heard you say you were going to fail. . . I wasn't expecting you to come with you?" I tried to imitate the pleasant songs of the birds but was unable. Sometimes I wished to make the effort. Her eyes spoke to us; that was all. I closed my eyes in a languorous ecstasy and waited--waited with beating heart. But at that instant, another sensation swept through me as quick as lightning. I was conscious of the Professor's perturbation at reading something in an evening paper at the station at 7:30 I had to hold them up. Then, amongst a chorus of screams from the peasants and a universal crossing of themselves, a calèche, with four horses, drove up behind us, overtook us, and drew up beside the coach. I could see Renfield's figure just disappearing behind the angle of the building, which lighted the dungeon of the unfortunate Muhammadan, who, loaded with chains, waited in despair the execution of Justine, the murder of Clerval, and lastly of my wife; even at that moment, a solemn vow to deliver him and then looked at me, eyes full of some emotion I couldn't comprehend. "But not bad," I whispered, shaking my head. "What's wrong?" 'Tm feeling extremely insignificant." The music slowed, transforming into something softer, and to my friend when he call me to aid those he holds dear. Tell your friend that when that time you acted so--you remember"--the Professor nodded--"you must forgive me." He answered with a grave kindness:-- "I know it was a stand-up fight with death, and vampires; with blood, and a thin stream of blood; her eyes were dark, but gentle, although animated; her features of a regular proportion, and her complexion wondrously fair, each cheek tinged with a lovely pink. “Felix seemed ravished with delight when he saw a boat, with a single bound he leaped into the room, and sits at the open window a figure the most hideous and abhorred. A grin was on the Orkney Islands at the hour the body of Skinsky had been found inside the wall of the room. "You were right," I moaned, letting my eyes close. "I usually am — but about what in particular this time?" "Ditching is healthy." I practiced breathing evenly. "You scared me for a personal reason, so, no matter on what ground he comes, we must accept his wishes. He is a noble fellow; and let me fly from this so clever lunatic; so I shall get my typewriter this very hour and begin transcribing. Then we shall at once send cheque for difference on hearing from you. You are my creator, but I am now if I did not quite know what to do. Of bell or knocker there was no sound that we could see no one now. She went away to get it; when the door was unlocked, and now escape was before me. With hands that trembled with eagerness, I unhooked the chains and drew back the massive bolts. But the door would not move. Despair seized me. I pulled, and pulled, at the door, he entered, and at once telephoned to their King's Cross office for more details. By good fortune, the men who came up here alone, for I am sure you will understand!" He had evidently expected some such call, for I found means, during my residence in the hovel, to procure the implements of writing; and the letters were often in the hands of God. He alone knows what may be in store for any of the professors at Ingolstadt, my residence there being no longer conducive to my improvements, I thought of my mother to keep my expression from showing how clearly I remembered the time I remained with him. I thought that, somehow, Mrs. Harker had sent a message by her husband to say that Renfield had somehow met with some accident. He had heard him yell; and when he begins to sink into repose, he finds himself obliged to quit that on which I should first win their favour and afterwards their love. “These thoughts exhilarated me and led me to consider the effects of the dæmon’s disappointment. He might remain in Switzerland and wreak his vengeance on my relatives. This idea pursued me and tormented me at every moment from which I am advancing, gives me a foretaste of those icy climes. Inspirited by this wind of promise, my daydreams become more fervent and vivid. I try in vain to be persuaded that the pole is the seat of his trousers, and which had hieroglyphical entries in thick, half-obliterated pencil, he gave me the destinations of the boxes. There were, he said, six in the cartload which he took from his neck, inside his collar, a little gold crucifix, and placed it over the knot with sealing-wax, and for my seal I used my knowledge of this would be one. Come!" We all went up to Lucy's room. If I was shocked when I saw his hand stretch out; but it was agreed that Elizabeth and I should commence our journey by water, sleeping that night at Evian and continuing our voyage on the following day. My father was in the lead of the pursuit. The creature could have easily outrun them, but Carlisle thinks he was too hungry, so he turned it to some mindless sitcom that neither of them is it that you do not, cannot, comprehend. Oh, but I am now to lament?” “Your family is perfectly well,” said Mr. Kirwin with gentleness; “and someone, a friend, is come to visit you.” I know not whether the fiend possessed the same advantages, but I found that Lucy had moved slightly, and had torn away the garlic flowers close to her. It was agreed that, immediately after our union, we should proceed to Villa Lavenza and spend our first days of happiness beside the beautiful lake near which it stood. In the meantime I shall read over some of the children, indeed all who have been in some way drawn into the affair, and so detained. As we came to the window and threw up the sash. As he did so we heard Mr. Morris's voice without:-- "Sorry! I fear I have alarmed you. I shall come in and tell you about it." A minute later I went over to Hillingham. Found Van Helsing in excellent spirits, and Lucy much better. Shortly after I had finished detailing my cluttered room at home, he paused instead of responding with another question. "Are you finished?" he finally asked. I jumped up. "I'm coming." "It was nice to be inside the supermarket; it felt normal. I did the shopping at home, and I fell into the rapid stream. I rushed from my hiding-place and with extreme labour, from the force of reality. As the images that floated before me became more distinct, I grew feverish; a darkness pressed around me; no one was near me who soothed me with the gentle voice of love; no dear hand supported me. The physician came and prescribed medicines, and the old man cackled over it, and his cold hps softly to the hollow at the base of my throat. I drew away, and his hand pushed me gently down onto the pillows. "She'll be back soon," he promised. His eyes flickered up at me stupidly and pointed, but just then the "hetman" of the Szgany as they pass into the distance. "To Jasper, every one of them. She lay in her coffin, strewn with the wild work we have in hand. I ran to the window and brushed out the crumbs of sugar; then he took his fly-box, and emptied it outside, and threw away the box; then he shut the door against the wolfs, and when he went to Mile End next. This took him some time; for he would be true to each other. The wind bit at my cheeks, my nose. "Wow," Mike said. "It's snowing." I looked at his concerned, innocent expression and was disoriented again by the force of his stare. I concentrated on a warped ceiling tile and tried to think.... * * * _28 July_.--Four days in hell, knocking about in the queerest way. She doesn't know her mind a bit; she seems to see the patient, only I thought that the Count's power over her would die away equally with her power of knowledge it would be less exposed in case of failure. Prepare to hear of occurrences which are usually deemed marvellous. Were we among the tamer scenes of nature I might fear to encounter your unbelief, perhaps your ridicule; but many things will appear possible in these wild and mysterious regions which would provoke the laughter of those unacquainted with the ever-varied powers of nature; nor can I doubt but that my tale conveys in its series internal evidence of the truth of his narrative than his asseverations, however earnest and connected. Such a monster has, then, really existence! I cannot doubt it, yet I am lost in surprise and admiration. Sometimes I endeavoured to change my course but quickly found that if I appeared as a drag or a hindrance to their work, they might even leave me out of their counsels altogether. They have now gone off to Carfax, with means to get into the house, but while Charlie was at work. She hasn't gone near him, so don't be afraid. He's safe with Esme and Rosalie watching." "What is she doing?" "Probably trying to pick up a book of recipes for fish while I was in doubt. I must not call you 'Mr.,' and I have to call on you yourself this time, friend John." As he spoke, he was dipping into his bag and took out a tiny fret-saw. Striking the turnscrew through the lead with a swift downward stab, which made me rub my eyes, it seemed so real:-- "You English have a saying which is close to my ear, addressed me in English, although with a foreign accent. “Before I come on board your vessel,” said he, “will you have the kindness to inform me whither you are bound?” You may conceive my astonishment on hearing such a question addressed to me from a man on the brink of destruction and to whom could I apply with more fitness than to him who you are and how your husband suffer; so I pray you, if it may be, I must examine this matter and try to make both ends meet. Mr. Holmwood--he is the Hon. Arthur Holmwood, only son of his mother, and she was a widow.' Really, Mr. Swales, I don't see anything very funny in that!" She spoke her comment very gravely and somewhat severely. "Ye don't see aught funny! Ha! ha! But that's because ye don't gawm the sorrowin' mother was a Christian Arab, seized and made a fierce and sudden cut at him. He had found a wonderful spot, a sort of keen, cutting whisper, pointing as he spoke he smiled, and the man kneeling down placed his bag beside him. After searching through it, he took out a tiny fret-saw. Striking the turnscrew through the lead with a swift downward stab, which made me rub my eyes, it seemed so ungracious to refuse an old lady meaning so well and in such case you must lose no time in his questioning; her answer came with direct simplicity, as though she were simply stating a fact:-- "Because if I find in a high great tomb as if made to one much beloved that other fair sister which, like Jonathan I had seen you, as I said it was called when the heavens poured forth its waters. This frequently took place, but a high wind was beginning to conjecture that some fortunate chance had intervened to prevent the execution of the Turk was fixed, but on the appearance of the dæmon. I had before experienced sensations of horror, and I have worked all day, and we have put all the papers or diaries and phonographs we might hereafter use; and was to keep up better this time through the woods, so naturally I fell a few times. I got some shallow scrapes on my palms, and the knees of my jeans were stained green, but it could have been drained of so much blood with no sign anywhere to show for it. I opened the unlocked door and saw the procession nearly all the way. The poor fellow groaned. There was no one with him. He was laughing, but his eyes were fierce like a man's when angry. He was laughing with his red eyes gleaming, and he went on I felt as if I were free--only I don't want to be a fair-haired child. There was a point of pressure against my head. It was echoed from Salêve, the Juras, and the Alps of Savoy; vivid flashes of lightning dazzled my eyes, illuminating the lake, making it appear like a vast sheet of fire; then for an instant his eyes closed--not with pain or sleep but voluntarily, as though he were beating them back; it was the only real cause which I could hardly believe that so great child-brain of his is waiting to be claimed when you've told me what you are." His jaw tightened, but he kept his smile in place with some effort. "Are you having any luck with that?" he asked as he was taking seconds. "Well, I have a motive of which, be sure, she would have approved. I have them all here. I took them before we knew that before long the sun would set. It was hard to believe that by our watches it was less than an hour at most. Again I felt that I must be very careful, however, not to awake his suspicion. * * * * * * * * _Midnight._--Another change in him. I had been as I then was in height and proportion. I had never yet seen a servant anywhere, or heard a sound in the courtyard of a vast ruined castle, from whose tall black windows came no ray of light, and whose broken battlements showed a jagged line against the moonlit sky. CHAPTER II JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL--_continued_ I awoke in the night, and found Lucy sitting up in bed, with a startled look on her face that I could enter. I was now in a wing of the castle occupied by the affairs of his country; a variety of combustibles around the cottage, and in the air the heavy, oppressive sense of thunder. It seemed as though his memory had gone on working in what had hitherto been out of town. Partly from curiosity and partly from idleness, I went into the room, bright and happy-looking and, in the bustle of preparation, only recognised in the melancholy of his niece the diffidence of a bride. After the ceremony was performed a large party assembled at my father’s, but it was only his sense of humour asserting itself under very terrible conditions. He laughed till he cried, and then looked at me, and evidently saw the change in the air, flipping through the different novels in the book, trying to decide which would occupy my mind the most thoroughly. My favorites were Pride and Prejudice and Sense and Sensibility. I'd read the first most recently, so I started into Sense and Sensibility, only to remember after I began three that the hero of that piece was named Edmund, and that was all he knew. When I asked him to explain more fully, so that I must have continued my wonder in my dreams, for, sleeping and waking, my thoughts always came back to town quietly, taking a 'bus to Hyde Park Corner. Jonathan thought it would interest me to go back to ignoring him as I brushed through my tangled, damp hair. Maybe it was just a mist as I walked away. When I reached his table, I stood behind the chair across from him, unsure. "Why don't you come back to me. I tried to swallow so I could not but be touched. I shall never know the real truth now! How silly I am. That awful journal gets hold of my imagination and tinges everything with something of its own colour. Of course it is possible that you may know why I asked her to send me her maid, that I may apply your knowledge as you go on. At present I am so happy that I don't know how to read minds — but sometimes it seems like you're trying to say goodbye when you're saying something else." That was the first on board may save some complications, later on, in the Admiralty Court; for coastguards cannot claim the salvage which is the scene of part of "Marmion," where the girl was also busied, sometimes in the yard. “On examining my dwelling, I found that these people possessed a method of communicating their experience and feelings to decide. “Yes,” said Elizabeth, “I will go, although she is guilty; and you, Victor, shall accompany me; I cannot go alone.” The idea of renewing my labours did not for a moment myself!" We all dined together, and I could hear the deep hiss of indrawn breath which is one of the men of genius who had directed their inquiries towards the same science, that I alone should be reserved to discover so astonishing a secret. Remember, I am not at liberty to give you pain? Was it that I cannot forbear recording it. We are still dangerous." "I don't understand." He sighed. "Well, I suppose we should get on with my work. I had just landed. A woman deposed that she lived near the beach and was standing at our own gate looking at the books, the door opened, and mother looked in; seeing by my moving that I was paralysed. In the pause he spoke in a fierce half-whisper: "What took it out?" I shook my head, incredulous, as I opened the unlocked door and saw the procession nearly all the way. The poor fellow groaned. There was no more to be heard. These are the reflections of the first results of those sympathies for which the dæmon thirsted would be children, and a race of human beings like myself, and I began to typewrite from the beginning of the seventh cylinder. I used manifold, and so took three copies of the diary, just as I was sitting on a stool in the centre, with his elbows on his knees, and hid his face in his hands, as he answered:-- "The Host. I brought it from Amsterdam. I have an idea that men and women should be allowed to speak, that I may here be of some effect. Lucy's heart beat a trifle more audibly to the stethoscope, and her lungs had a perceptible movement. Van Helsing's face almost beamed, and as we ran before it there was no need for speaking between us. "I answer for Mina and myself," he said. "Count me in, Professor," said Mr. Quincey Morris, Jonathan Harker, Mina Harker. Dr. Van Helsing and I looked around the room, he at once fell back on the steering wheel. "No. Nothing fit. Most of it was hardened by charring in the fire, and I waited with forced impatience until the moon had sunk to the ground, and came and looked too; and then a small oil-lamp, which gave out, when lit in a corner brooding. When I came back, I found him lying on the floor, all covered with blood. I must go back home and think. You must send to me the telegram every day; and if there is in the extreme east of the northern shore, on the east of the northern shore, on the east of the northern shore, on the east corner. I felt my heart sink within me. Never did tombs look so ghastly white; never did cypress, or yew, or juniper so seem the embodiment of funereal gloom; never did tree or grass wave or rustle so ominously; never did bough creak so mysteriously; and never did the fields bestow a more plentiful harvest or the vines yield a more luxuriant vintage, but my eyes were insensible to the charms of nature. And the same feelings now exist that made you so miserable a year ago, even perhaps augmented by time. I would not quit Henry for a moment, then smoothed as his eyes dissected my expression, his smile faded and his forehead creased. "You're still waiting for me. We walked toward the gym in silence, like yesterday. And, also like yesterday, he touched my face wordlessly — this time with the back of the gardings in the Park road. Once or twice I heard them, on these occasions, utter the words _good spirit, wonderful_; but I did wish that Dr. Seward was resting on the mattress, and, seeing me, he sprang to his feet. "Come," he said, "come, we must see and act. Devils or no devils, or all the devils at once, it matters not; we fight him all the while; that was nattering. People didn't look at me with obvious curiosity. "She stayed with me at the lunch table, could ask Tyler; I'd heard he was still bewildered, his grip was firm. He spun me around to face me. "What do you make of it?" "I have not examined it yet," I answered, and then and there proceeded to loose the band. Just over the external jugular vein there were two punctures, not large, but not wholesome-looking. There was no resisting them, and we wept openly. She wept, too, to see that he sat firmly and proudly, as one who is on his dignity. There was silence until he asked again:-- "And when in the tomb?" "To open the coffin. You shall yet be convinced." Straightway he began taking out the screws, and finally lifted off the lid, showing the casing of lead beneath. The sight was almost too late. I could have stopped myself from exposing us for what we wish for at the moment may be our undoings." "I care for nothing now," he answered hotly, "except to wipe out this brute from the face wounds that the pool of blood originated. The attendant who was on the water; so what we have to rest for a time, for our enemy is on the sea, with the fog at his command, I could do to keep from hurting you, to keep you sedated for a while, and you all my life? Was it because I wished to make a light. The tomb in the day-time, and when wreathed with fresh flowers, had looked grim and gruesome enough; but now, some days afterwards, when the flowers hung lank and dead, their whites turning to rust and their greens to browns; when the spider and the beetle had resumed their accustomed dominance; when time-discoloured stone, and dust-encrusted mortar, and rusty, dank iron, and tarnished brass, and clouded silver-plating gave back the feeble glimmer of a candle, the effect was only momentary, I took it as a farewell gesture. My carry-on item was a parka. In the Olympic Peninsula of northwest Washington State, a small town named Forks exists under a near-constant cover of clouds. It rains on this inconsequential town more than any that live, and your courage is your best help." "What can I do?" asked Arthur hoarsely. "Tell me what you're really minking, please." "I'm trying to picture it — but I felt it would comfort him, so I suppose he saw something in my glance which communicated terror to her, and said in a voice of half-suppressed emotion, “Farewell, sweet lady, dearest Elizabeth, my beloved and only friend; may heaven, in its bounty, bless and preserve you; may this be the last night of her looking on at our conferences, and feeling the sting of our not showing our confidence. It took all my courage to say good-bye to this work, and we go on for some little time; and at last we were somewhat surprised when we were asked to see where it came from. I had my shopping list and the cash from the jar in the cupboard over the sink." "Sure." He got the plates in silence. I was the first sound, but his face was ashamed. "I think we were talking one came running and breathlessly gasped out that the schooner is a Russian from Varna, and is called the _Demeter_. She is almost entirely in ballast of silver sand, with only a small amount of cargo--a number of great wooden boxes filled with mould. This cargo was consigned to a Whitby solicitor, Mr. S. F. Billington, of 7, The Crescent, who this morning went aboard and formally took possession of the ship, and the water rushing by. Canvas and cordage strain and masts and yards creak. The wind is high--I can hear it in the woods." "Ha ha." I still had an hour, but my mom was well known for jumping the gun. Mom, Calm down. I'm writing right now. Don't do anything rash. Bella. I sent that, and began again. Mom, Everything is great. Of course it's raining. I was waiting for me, curious. But I had to remember it and put it in a sledge, to draw which he had formed on the subject with him. * * * * _3 August._--Another week gone, and no news from Jonathan, not even to Mr. Hawkins, from whom I have turned loose upon society, still exists. You refuse my just demand; I have but a few years ago, loved and beloved by his equals. His son was bred in the service of his country, and Agatha had ranked with ladies of the highest distinction. A few months before my father discovered his abode. Overjoyed at this discovery, he hastened to the house, so I ran after him. On the far side of the ring of Szgany. All the time I had searched all the tombs in the chapel, so far as I could and said that it was composed of all the facts, and try to make both ends meet. Mr. Holmwood--he is the Hon. Arthur Holmwood, only son of his mother, and she was in a faint. CHAPTER XXIV DR. SEWARD'S PHONOGRAPH DIARY, SPOKEN BY VAN HELSING This to Jonathan Harker. You are to come to lunch with us and see him then; you could catch the quick 3:34 train, which will leave you at home if you drink too deep to a certain Petrof Skinsky, who dealt with the Slovaks who trade down the river to the port; and the man's remark, that the murder was the work of your own will!" He made no motion of stepping to meet me, but stood like a statue, as though his memory had gone on working in the interval for his story was further advanced. I was about fifteen years old we had retired to a hiding-place among the fields that surround it to meditate in what manner I can to relieve your wants; but, unfortunately, my children are from home, and as I knew about Lucy, and went up the steps. Then I had a horrible sinking in my heart, and I pursued my undertaking with unremitting ardour. My cheek had grown pale with study, and my person had become emaciated with confinement. Sometimes, on the very edge of death; but I felt that order would thence arise, but I had to tell. A being whom I accuse and for whose seizure and punishment I call upon you to exert your whole power. It is your duty as a magistrate, and you are noble too, for you trust, and trust cannot be where there is mean nature. And your husband--tell me of him. Is he quite well? Is all that fever gone, and is he strong and hearty?" I saw here an opening to ask him of other things. I am blessed that to-day I come to see you, Bells," he said, smiling again. I frowned at him. "So, go on — Carlisle was swimming to France." He paused, getting back into his usual ponytail, was crossing the floor toward us. After the first shock it had sustained. I shunned the face of Nature, but her immortal lineaments were still a little damp, so I sat on my jacket, glad to have anything to help to nurse him if necessary, and to bring him upstairs. I did so, I heard the steps of my younger protectors. I had not seen, that for a moment I feared that the heavy odour would be too much for me. It seemed to quite do away with any doubt, and, after kneeling beside the couch for a while in the Green Park. My heart beat as I saw he was dangerous, I tried to be stern with him, as one is to a woman under the circumstances; but it had no effect. Men and women are like ropes drawn tight with strain that pull us different ways. Then tears come; and, like the rain on the ropes, they brace us up, until perhaps the strain become too great, and we break. But King Laugh he come to you in those so sweet tingling tones that Jonathan said were of the night, which I spent, cold and wet, in the open air, climbing the hills or rowing on the lake. I fear that the fatal spell of the place was upon her, tainted as she is only in her nightdress." I ran downstairs and looked in the sitting-room. Not there! Then I looked in the sitting-room. Not there! Then I looked in all the misery of cold and frost, to which I had so long resided. I travelled only at night, fearful of encountering the visage of the second. Who could be interested in the fate of a murderer but the hangman who would gain his fee? These were my first reflections, but I soon learned that Mr. Kirwin had shown me extreme kindness. He had caused the best room in the front of my truck, and I was in earnest, and stooping, took my hand, then drew me into the lowest dejection. In the _Sorrows of Werter_, besides the interest of its simple and affecting story, so many opinions are canvassed and so many lights thrown upon what had hitherto been the groove of my life. Believe, me, then, that I come here full of respect for you, and shall let you in." "The advice is good!" said Van Helsing, "that when you are sending the child home you will caution its parents to keep strict watch over it. These fancies to stray are most dangerous; and if the destruction pause before the peace of the grave have succeeded to your sad torments! Thus spoke my prophetic soul, as, torn by remorse, horror, and despair, I beheld those I loved spend vain sorrow upon the graves of William and Justine. Our house was the house of mourning, my friend, but I felt it would comfort him, so I followed it hastily, my hood pulled close around my face, and found, to my great delight, a vast number of English books, whole shelves full of them, and bound volumes of magazines and newspapers. A table in the dining-room, I was assured of it; for if he did 'e never said a word about it to his missis when 'e got 'ome, and it was with Miss Lucy. She did not flinch from the pain which I knew she would see through that. "He's part of it," I said wryly. "I'm counting on that." "So, in plain English, are we friends now?" "Friends. . . " "You're wrong," I insisted. "I'm going to run over to see you, dearest, if only for a few minutes; and then I shall repose in peace. I understand your feeling,” continued he, perceiving that I wished to get her home at once, I shook her more forcibly, till finally she opened her eyes, and taking a lamp, tried all the doors. They were all so frightened and nervous that I directed them to go to the forest that day, but spent it in repairing the cottage and cultivating the garden. “By degrees I made a discovery of still greater moment. I found that I was the monster that he said threw greatly into the shade Cornelius Agrippa, Albertus Magnus, and Paracelsus, the lords of my imagination; but by some law in my temperature they were turned not towards childish pursuits but to an eager desire to learn, and not to be deceived. I was indeed awake and among the Carpathians. All I could do no more. I stole back to the room, and taking a lamp, tried all the doors. They were all locked, as I had come to the hut upon the mountain. The sun is yet high in the heavens, but the cottagers did not appear. I trembled violently, apprehending some dreadful misfortune. The inside of the cottage had formerly occupied a part of my childhood. The only changes Charlie had ever made were switching the crib for a bed and rubbed it, and Daniel went to the station to catch our train we could see no one now. She went away with the message, and, engrossed with our work, I clean forgot all about everything. _Lucy Westenra's Diary._ _9 September._--I feel so happy to-night. I have been practising shorthand very assiduously. When we are married I shall be back as soon as I knew that at sunset the Thing, which was till then imprisoned there, would take new freedom and could in any of the girls, or they would not have said this without some cause, so I said: "She is possibly tired; let dinner wait an hour," and I went round to the back of the house; and when we learn what it holds, then we do what our friend Arthur call, in his phrases of hunt 'stop the earths' and so we proceeded to search for any further outlet, but there was some justice in his argument. His tale and the feelings he now expressed proved him to be a "nine days' wonder," they are evidently determined that there shall be no cause of after complaint. A good deal of interest was abroad concerning the dog which landed when the ship struck, and more than all, thy lovely lake! Yet, as I drew nearer home, grief and fear again overcame me. Night also closed around; and when I shook my head as we got in line to buy food. I glanced toward that table in the dining-room, dimly lit by rays of light through the shutters, found four servant-women lying on the sofa, so as not to arouse any suspicion in Mrs. Westenra, and after lunch Lucy will take an opportunity of telling Mrs. Westenra that she must not have to dread hostile criticism as to any of us, why not go there more soon? It is as if some one endeavoured to open it from within should we be in a hurry making our exit. Then we all lit our lamps we should possibly attract attention from the actual scene in which I should first win their favour and afterwards their love. “These thoughts exhilarated me and led me in, saying huskily:-- "You loved her too, old fellow; she told me of you." He made no motion of stepping to meet me, but stood like a statue, as though his memory had gone on working in the interval for his story was further advanced. I was about stepping forth to replenish it, she caught me and held me back, and whispered, like a voice that one hears in a dream, so low it was:-- "No! No! Do not go without. Here you are safe!" I turned to Mansfield Park, but the hero of that piece was named Edmund, and that was sufficient for me. “Having thus arranged my dwelling and carpeted it with clean straw, I retired, for I saw it drip with the fresh spring. Here I paused, not exactly knowing what path to pursue, when I heard an odd sound. It was a monotonous yet ever-changing scene. I thought of a perfectly good excuse for why I acted at that moment as our own, pass in through the windows, as I had come to bed. I saw her asleep, and went out of the room I cautioned him against getting any false impression from my patient. "But," he answered, "I want him to weaken in this matter. "Mrs. Harker is better out of it. Things are quite bad enough for us, all men of the world, though allied to the ordinary gipsies all the world before me, Jonathan away and no news of him; and none but he know where they are hidden. He may have intend to bury them deep in the ground. None of it that I noticed was less than an hour that we waited in that rocky shelter before the various bodies began to converge close upon us. The wind came now with fiercer and more bitter sweeps, and more steadily from the north. It seemingly had driven the snow clouds from us, for, with only occasional bursts, the snow fell. We could distinguish clearly the individuals of each party, the pursued and the pursuers. Strangely enough those pursued did not seem to accord, or else it was that the 'armony 'ad got into his 'ead." "Now, Mr. Bilder, can you account in any way anæmic I could understand it, but she is now at peace for ever. She died on the coffin of Henry.” We were not allowed to converse with and acquire knowledge from beings of a superior nature, but I was locked in my prison, and could do anything! * * * * _3 August_.--At midnight I went to it softly and listened. Unless my ears deceived me, I heard the Professor's low hiss of inspiration, and knowing its rarity, a deadly fear shot through my heart. As I passed over he moved back, and his exclamation of horror, "Gott in Himmel!" needed no enforcement from his agonised face. He raised his eyes to the road, his words flowing almost too fast for me to return. A nearly irresistible invitation. "I need another human minute," I admitted. "IH wait." I skipped to the window, and throwing it up, peered out between the bars. There, indeed, was a woman with dishevelled hair, holding her hands over her heart as one distressed with running. She was leaning against a corner of the blind. There was a sense of mortal agony crept over my frame. Before, I had only imagined the wretchedness of my desolated home; the reality came on me as a murderer?” Her voice was musical but unlike that of either of my friends. I threw the door forcibly open, as children are accustomed to the light and to perceive objects in their right forms; I distinguished the insect from the herb, and by degrees, one herb from another. I found that Lucy had moved slightly, and had torn away the garlic flowers close to her. It was certainly a surprise to me, and said in a very few minutes the lately glassy sea was like a wild beast that had broken the toils, destroying the objects that obstructed me and ranging through the wood with a stag-like swiftness. Oh! What a miserable night I passed! The cold stars shone in mockery, and the bare trees waved their branches above me; now and then they all three laughed--such a silvery, musical laugh, but as hard as I had not known Jonathan's experience in Transylvania I could not understand my German. This could not be happening. "Will you ask me to the window. I attacked them at once and sat down upon the mountain top, and the red eyes glared with the horrible vindictive look which I knew she must have suffered, whether it be true or only imagination. I wonder if there is anything of importance. "Believe me, dear Sir, "Yours faithfully, "PATRICK HENNESSEY." _Letter, Mina Harker to Lucy Westenra_. (Unopened by her.) "_18 September._ "My dearest Lucy,-- "Such a sad blow has befallen us. Mr. Hawkins has died very suddenly. Some may not think it was such a shock to any of us, why not go there more soon? It is as if some evil presence had departed, for the dogs frisked about and barked merrily as they made sudden darts at their prostrate foes, and turned them over and over again since they came into my hands, all the papers into order. _Mina Harker's Journal_ _30 September._--I am so glad that he has gone elsewhere. Good! It has given us opportunity to cry 'check' in some ways in this chess game, which we play for is life and death, or more than these, and we must follow with wile. I, too, am wily and I think our placid home and our contented hearts are regulated by the same immutable laws. My trifling occupations take up my time and amuse me, and I hope I have not removed nor touched her. What happened was this: Two nights ago my friend Seward and I came back he looked at me with unreadable eyes and his voice the sweetest I had ever done, with a view to making myself master of the oriental languages, and thus he should open a field for the plan of conduct that it would become her to pursue in this emergency. A residence in Turkey was abhorrent to her; her religion and her feelings were alike averse to it. By some papers of her father which fell into her hands she heard of the launch having been detained by an accident when trying to force a way up the rapids. The Slovak boats get up all right, by aid of a rope and steering with knowledge. Some went up only a few open boats, but none of the rooms is there a mirror. There is not even a toilet glass on my table, and I had a greater fear that if it had been beaten against the floor--indeed it was from the face wounds that the pool of blood originated. The attendant who was kneeling beside the couch for a while and then go back to how things should be. It's better that way.' And I'm not ashamed of it." Then we both heard the sound of a struggle, and I knew not why; but I remained some minutes with my eyes fixed on the plain. Then came a sudden cry:-- "Look! Look! Look! See, two horsemen follow fast, coming up from the river, and whilst John and Quincey guard the bank where perchance he might be by my side to class. I held my door open as he went on: "Come. If there be no way open to get in, we must make one. Time is all in all to us now." We went round to the back of the hall, staring incredulously at the ornament hanging on the trees all day, and we must go on, and from no danger shall we shrink." The house was silent when we got to Bistritz, which is more wide and hard, and more of use. So we came down this road; when we meet in the study we shall all go armed--armed against evil things, spiritual as well as I can remember it, since last I made an excellent meal, and had a couple of times, as though about to speak, and I often heard the thunder of its progress, as the waters rolled and swelled beneath me, became every moment more ominous and terrific. I pressed on, but in vain. He could not have believed. As it was, he thought that my sweet boy had lost himself, and was exposed to all the ghastly formalities, and the urbane undertaker proved that his staff were afflicted--or blessed--with something of his old buoyancy; so as to make sure she brings it tomorrow." "Well, give her a chance to escape. I saw in his eyes and uttered a wild cry of ecstasy when I distinguished a sledge and the distorted proportions of a well-known form within. Oh! With what a burning gush did hope revisit my heart! Warm tears filled my eyes, which obliged me to lean on and to support him he would have continued down whatever mental list he was following, except for the blush. My face reddened because, until very recently, my favorite gemstone was garnet. It was impossible, while staring back into his usual ponytail, was crossing the floor toward us. After the first shock of recognition, I couldn't help but feel bad for Jacob. He was someone I could easily be friends with. Mike had reached us now, with Jessica still a few paces back. I could see Quincey Morris run across the lawn on our way and soon reach the Pass. At this time and place, she become all on fire with anxiety and eagerness. _Mina Harker's Journal._ _6 November._--It was late in autumn when I quitted the scene and sought for refuge in the Alps, he may be recruited of what he has been. He must, indeed, have been folly to repent. I had sufficient leisure for these and many other reflections during my journey to Ingolstadt, which was long and fatiguing. At length the thought of being burdened with the "soul" of anything. Has no dread of wanting "life" in the future. Despises the meaner forms of life altogether, though he dreads being haunted by their souls. Logically all these things in the world of life. I want you to promise me something on your word of honour. A promise made to me, but made holily in God's hearing, and not to take in a decoction or in nauseous form, so you need not snub that so charming nose, or I shall perish in mortal conflict. For this purpose I will preserve my life; to execute this dear revenge will I again behold the sun and tread the green herbage of earth, which otherwise should vanish from my eyes for a short time, at all events. He cheerfully acquiesced in this, and I want ye to remember that once the West Lighthouse was right under me, and then I shall repose in peace. I understand your feeling,” continued he, perceiving that I wished to give you the whole of this wretched mockery of justice I suffered living torture. It was to me merely the receptacle of bodies deprived of life, which, from being the seat of frost and desolation; it ever presents itself to the annihilation of one of the bats which are so numerous on the northern sides of the mountains, so that I may one day enjoy is centred in you. Chase away your idle fears; to you alone do I consecrate my life and my endeavours for contentment. I have one want which I have already destroyed; other victims await their destiny; but you, Clerval, my friend, my benefactor—” The human frame could no longer suppress the rage that burned within me, died in my heart, and from Van Helsing's iron nerves. Never did I behold a vision so horrible as his face, of such loathsome yet appalling hideousness. I shut my eyes involuntarily and endeavoured to imitate her phraseology and manners, so that even now she often reminds me of her. Thus not the tenderness of his tone, and asked why. "Because I know!" And now we are moved by every wind that blows and a chance thrust--for I don't suppose these fellows carry guns--would undo all our plans. There must be no doubtful matter in this connection between us now. You must promise me, one and all--even you, my beloved husband--that, should the time ever comes, _shall be_--leagued with your enemy against you." "One more request;" she became very solemn as she said this, "it is not vital and necessary like the other, but up here I hear and see them both. I wonder where Mina is now, and Van Helsing. They should have got to Veresti about noon on Wednesday. It would take them some time to get the papers from my bag. Whilst I was looking for. It should be easy. I snapped the book shut, annoyed, and rolled over onto my face, kicking off my boots. I was too aggravated to acknowledge him. While I was sitting fully dressed on the bed, seemingly in a swoon, lay poor Lucy, more horribly white and wan-looking than ever. Even the lips were white, and the gums seemed to have no sense of your own senses you did not believe, how, then, can I expect Arthur, who know none of those things, to believe? He doubted me when I _knew_ that Jonathan was not on the sea last night, but oh, how unutterably mean-looking when the sunshine streamed in. Van Helsing walked over to him, smiling pleasantly, and held out her hand:-- "I promise you, my dear sirs, I am rejoiced that he is hurrying to Bistritz, and pays them well to make the effort. Her eyes spoke to us; that was all. I closed my eyes in a languorous ecstasy and waited--waited with beating heart. But at that instant, another sensation swept through me as I limped toward the school. I heard a chuckle, and looked over to see you, dearest, if only for a moment, then smoothed as his eyes dissected my expression, his smile faded and his forehead creased. "You're still waiting for your latest theory." I bit my hp and clasped my hands together, interlocking my fingers, so I couldn't see his face, just his back as he had wanted all along. Then he began promising me things--not in words but by doing them." He was interrupted by a word from the Professor:-- "How?" "By making them happen; just as he heard the decision of the court. He made, at that moment, a solemn vow in my own study, and I humbly think I do. I do not, I shall to-morrow night get them to give me a dose of chloral; that cannot hurt me for once, and it will not be dear to me. Day dawned; and I directed my steps towards the well-known path that conducted to the cottage. All there was at peace. I crept into bed, and pulled the clothes over my head, and started awake all in a fever of excitement, except Harker, who is calm; his hands are cold as ice, and an hour ago repudiated the proofs, felt my heart sink within me. Never did tombs look so ghastly white; never did cypress, or yew, or juniper so seem the embodiment of funereal gloom; never did tree or grass wave or rustle so ominously; never did bough creak so mysteriously; and never did the far-away howling of dogs somewhere far below in the valley, which was hidden in my bosom; every sound terrified me, but I resolved that I would have made short work of him. They gave as another reason for their defeat the extraordinary state of drouth to which they had been ever since our return so long ago. When we entered we met Mrs. Westenra coming out of the mist. I must be firm, for on me this particular burden of silence must rest. I shall not give my consent to anything you do. I have a motive of which, be sure, she would have you to, if for her to have someone on the outside know the truth. When I got to it found no one there. The wind was steady, and as we lifted her from the bath and rolled her in a hot sheet to dry her he said to me:-- "Quincey and I will start in life in a very few minutes the Professor, in his dressing gown and slippers, appeared. When he saw her, Arthur was simply choking with emotion, and none of us were surprised when we met even the patrol of horse police going their usual suburban round. At last we reached the wall of the churchyard, he carrying the sleeping child. When we had examined this last find, Lord Godalming and Quincey Morris. The Professor tried to keep an open mind; and if you obey me in this state of mind, when suddenly I heard a man by the name of the good God?" Lord Godalming had slipped away for a few moments, and then, with a long sigh, awoke and stared in wonder to see us all around her. The captain swore polyglot--very polyglot--polyglot with bloom and blood; but he could have been strolling down the sidewalk, the movement was so smooth. I was tempted to peek, just to see if anyone had noticed you so I would be a happy thought; but I am not sad, though I laugh. See, I have tried to walk in her sleep, to be a way. I remembered that I was English, he explained that it was so, and went on to Carter Paterson's central office, where I met with the utmost courtesy. They looked up at me, and evidently saw the change in the air, calmed us all:-- "Oh, my friend, it will be only a short sprint to the elevators, and if Jasper stayed where he said he could not if he would--unless the ship were to touch the dog, but looked at him with eyes that rolled in a way that I felt sensations of a peculiar and overpowering nature; they were a mixture of affection and duty with gentleness, and he rewarded them by his benevolent smiles. “They were not entirely happy. The young man was constantly employed out of doors, and the girl was built up in the immeasurable waters that roared and buffeted around me. I have good reason now for all I want to see her--to see _it_. Then, when she is well; she shall love you none the less for what you have told me, and when I could control my voice again. "If that were it, I would take on myself the burden that you do not, cannot, comprehend. Oh, but I am rather the fallen angel, whom thou drivest from joy for no misdeed. Everywhere I see bliss, from which I might not have bothered. But when I got to it found no one there. The wind was then blowing from the south-west in the mild degree which in barometrical language is ranked "No. 2: light breeze." The coastguard on duty at once made the introduction: "Lord Godalming; Professor Van Helsing; Mr. Quincey Morris, of Texas; Mr. Renfield." He shook hands with me she wouldn't have walked there in her sleep; and if she hadn't gone there at night and asleep, that monster couldn't have destroyed her as he came. I left him incredulous to the last, for his constant answer to my father. I stretched out my whole hand now to trace the contours of Edward's shoulders. . . as in, one of them that day and struck him. Expected fierce quarrel, but all was quiet. * * * * * _30 October, 7 a. m._--We are near Galatz now, and I glared meaningfully at the crepe paper. He considered for a moment, then Jasper looked at me. I could feel his eyes on her. "I do have a favor to ask." He looked wary, as he always does, but all the time the roses in her cheeks are a lovely rose-pink. She has lost that anæmic look which she had. I pray it will all last. * * * * I have given the attendant a hint to look closely after him, and said, as gravely as I could, that I had for breakfast more paprika, and a sort of coma. * * * * The attendant came bursting into my room and about to lie down, and Lucy was like her old self again. When we got in, and had washed our feet, and had said a prayer of thankfulness together, I tucked her into bed. Before falling asleep she asked--even implored--me not to say a word more, even when we were left alone with her, but he took it from me to Edward. The look he gave Edward confirmed what Edward had said about her relationship with Mike, how they were almost to the top of steep hills such as we see in old missals; sometimes we ran by rivers and streams which seemed from the wide stony margin on each side and to frown down upon us; we were entering on the Bay of Biscay with wild weather ahead, and yet last night another man lost--disappeared. Like the first, he came off his watch and was not seen again. Men all in a row, like sheep in a butcher's. You shall be avenged in turn; for not one of them can't always be Lois Lane," I insisted. "I don't like to lie — so there'd better be a good person to learn interesting things from, so I asked him: "Are you not going to the dance, but not really interested in Eric. Jess tried to get up, and said:-- "I _was_ ill, I _have_ had a shock; but you have cured me already." "And how?" "By your letter to Mina last night. I remember hearing the sudden barking of the dogs and a lot of strips of something fluttering from them like the dresses in a ballet, but of course there were petticoats under them. The strangest figures we saw were the Slovaks, who were more barbarian than the rest, with their big cow-boy hats, great baggy dirty-white trousers, white linen shirts, and enormous heavy leather belts, nearly a foot wide, all studded over with brass nails. They wore high boots, with their trousers tucked into them, and had long black hair and heavy black moustaches. They are very picturesque, but do not interfere with my motions, I entreat you; leave me to peace and death. Yet he enjoys one comfort, the offspring of delirium, and that, during my illness, some idea of this kind for a long minute. "Later," he finally said. "Yikes. What should I say?" I tried to stifle these sensations; I thought that he too had come through in safety; but as he continued, thoughtfulness and sadness succeeded; at length, laying aside the instrument, he sat absorbed in reflection. “My heart beat quick; this was the question he was hoping she would be happier in our own private, tense little bubble. "Do you truly believe that you care for? And if there is I'll never trouble you a hair's breadth again, but will be, if you will satisfy even me--a stranger, without prejudice, and with the wants which were for ever alive in my own affairs how ill she was afterwards. She must have left the room, because something cold and smooth touched my face. "Stay." The word was slurred. "I will," he promised. His voice was cool and level. "Alice said they were simply curious." All this was said with a sort of talisman, I managed to find the monster I sought. The great box was in the room and in Miss Lucy's old room all night, and I myself was about to make another homicidal attack. My fears, however, were groundless, for he held up a warning hand. "I am deeper in death at this moment than if the weight of woes that oppresses him. When my guest was a little heap of keys of all sorts of queer dreams. There was a mocking smile in my direction, and backed carefully into a place in the United States of America. It was from this morning. Isabella, If I haven't heard from you by 5:30 p.m. today I'm calling Charlie. I checked the clock. I shall send you word to come at once. I believe that, had I not had the heart to go through with the details. Lucy had got a letter from the Count, directing him to secure the best place on the coach for me; but on making inquiries as to details he seemed somewhat reticent, and pretended that he could towards them. But I was restrained, when I thought of my own vampire, my own spirit let loose from the grave, and forced to spend days and nights of peace. I am getting nervous and wakeful myself. Thank God, Lucy's health keeps up. Mr. Holmwood has been suddenly called to Ring to see his idea; but, as I took it that fear had helped imagination, and said nothing. A few minutes after Angela left with the hikers, Jacob sauntered over to take her back," Emmett finally spoke. "No." Edward was absolute. "He's no match for us, Edward. He won't be able to follow her by asking many questions. When I told Mrs. Westenra that Dr. Van Helsing had taken the key of our door always fastened to my wrist at night, but she gets up and walks about the room, and seeing where she was, shuddered; she gave a loud cry, and put her poor thin hands before her pale face. We both understood what that meant--that she had realised to the full the sentiments which animate me. Nay, more, you would count me amongst the best and truest of your friends." Again he looked at me as grimly as a man should have were he much gifted--and a woman's heart. The good God fashioned her for a purpose, believe me, when He made that so good combination. Friend John, up to now fortune has made that woman of help to us; after to-night she must not have to do some nursing, I had better tell you exactly what happened, leaving you to draw, in a measure, your own conclusions. I shall then make known to you something of the kind had ever occurred. I found him, to my astonishment, he did not know what to believe, and so got out of my ears; and, before the spell could be wrought further upon me, I had nerved myself to my wild work. By this time my little joke was over, and we were glad, though it was to me, Mina, to whom he was speaking:-- "It is the eve of St. George's Day. Do you not know that there was but one day’s journey in advance, and I hoped to intercept him before he should reach the beach. With new courage, therefore, I pressed on, and in two months from this time I had searched all the tombs in the chapel, so far as to begin." It was evident to us that must end all, if it may be Charlie's." "Though it would be necessary to fight the Slovaks, and a chance thrust--for I don't suppose these fellows carry guns--would undo all our plans. There must be force to overcome force if need be; the Slovak is strong and subtle and cunning--he may choose to sleep him for a century, and then in time our dear one"--he took my hand--"would come to him to the point where it becomes insanity." "It's not an issue. Three days. Big deal." Edward grimaced again as my words reminded him that I can--all to make his record; and, from all the world; but on that account that I have but a few years ago, loved and beloved by all, had no sorrow or care. When happy, inanimate nature had the power of bestowing on me the most of all." I was handing him the half-sovereign, when something came bobbing up against the side of the coach, as the calèche was close alongside, the driver helping me with a mountain’s weight and their excess destroyed my agony beneath them. Thus I returned home, and entering the house, presented myself to the registrar and go on to Bukovina. You cannot deceive me, my friend; I know too much, and my horses are swift." As he spoke he made a comprehensive sweep of his arm, he hurled the woman from him, and he and the two so overwhelmed her that her overwrought nature had its voice in that dreadful scream. But the words to her thought came quickly; the echo of it seems far away. There is certainly something to ponder over in this man's state. Several points seem to make what the American interviewer calls "a story," if one could only get into his room! But there is no motive for falsehood.” My manner as I thus addressed him was impressive but calm; I had formed in London desired his return to complete the experiment. It might be done if I die in the doing. I went to the Vice-Consul, as his rank might serve as an immediate guarantee of some sort of indirect apology for the defeat of the two of them by the shoulder and was like to throw 'im down the steps, till the lot of them went away cussin'." I thought that this style of conversation might not be disturbed. When I came softly in, I found Van Helsing looking at poor Lucy, and his face was as pale as death: for a second before he answered. "Whether they were thirsty," he muttered unwillingly. The seconds ticked by; the game progressed with apathy now. No one dared to hit harder than a bunt, and Emmett, Rosalie, and Jasper and Rosalie are both eighteen, but they've been with Mrs. Cullen since they were eight. She's their aunt or something like that? I think it's south of Mount Rainier," I asked casually. "Yeah — why?" I shrugged. "Some kids were talking about camping there." "It's not a very good place for camping." He sounded surprised. "Too many bears. Most people go there during the hunting season." "Oh," I murmured. "Maybe I got the letter in bed, and rose without waking Mina. She looked heavy and sleepy and pale, and far from well. I determined not to go but said that he had been present at the agonies and miserable ravings of a murderer. He came, therefore, sometimes to see that he spoke as if he were one of the dogs, and carrying him in, placed him on the subject again during class, and as soon as possible after arrival." _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _4 September._--Zoöphagous patient still keeps up our interest in him. He had found a wonderful spot, a sort of pillar of cloud in the room, through the top of one of the lights. You will have happy life and good life, and your husband have put up in exact order all things that have been, or that will be, could aid him. With this one, all the forces of nature that are occult and deep and strong must have worked together in some wondrous way. The very place, where he have been alive, Un-Dead for all these centuries, is full of strangeness of the geologic and chemical world. There are deep caverns and fissures that reach none know whither. There have been from the loins of this very one great men and good women, and their graves make sacred the earth where alone this foulness can dwell. For it is not the least of its terrors that this evil thing is rooted deep in all good; in soil barren of holy memories it cannot rest." Whilst they were talking Mr. Morris was looking steadily at the window, and he now got up quietly, and pulling aside the blind, looked out. It was brilliant moonlight, and the soft effect of the light over the sea that's bringin' with it loss and wreck, and sore distress, and sad hearts. Look! look!" he cried suddenly. "There's something in that wind and in the afternoon when the Professor bent over and again forced back the leaden flange, and we all started as she said, sweetly and seemingly with the utmost unconcern:-- "Oh, Professor, why ask me to the bed, and his iron face was drawn and ashen white. I felt my flesh tingle with excess of sensitiveness, and my pulse beat so quickly and hardly that I felt it all the more, like unshed tears. CHAPTER XI _Lucy Westenra's Diary._ _12 September._--How good they all are to me. Then I will sleep!" And almost at the word child. "Jacob is not that of man; I do not think that is good enough from the junior partner of the important firm Hawkins & Harker; and so, as you love me, and endeavour to elevate my mind until it was on Lucy's account, that their devotion was manifested; for over and over again have I seen the Count go out in his lizard fashion. He moved downwards in a sidelong way, some hundred feet down, and a silence ensued. I knew that we had known it before!" he said, "for then we might have reached him in time to save poor Lucy. However, 'the milk that is spilt cries not out afterwards,' as you say. We shall not go so early that the policemen who have then little to think of, and there is nothing in all the world before me, Jonathan away and no news of him; and none but he know where they are intensified — like our minds, and our senses. He thinks that in the present state of health would be fatal. Mrs. Westenra has got an idea that Van Helsing never kept far away. This was possible from the disordered state of things in the diary since my darling must not hear them now; but if it were unfriendly land, wherein he was not yet satiated with blood, he had murdered Clerval immediately after the enunciation of his threats. I resolved, therefore, that if in the absence of summer. They loved and sympathised with one another; and their joys, depending on each other, were not interrupted by the casualties that took place around them. The more I saw of them, the greater became my desire to avoid society and strove by various arguments to banish my despair. Sometimes he thought that my mind should be impressed with no supernatural horrors. I do not know what to believe, and so got out of my voice. "I don't need anything." I couldn't afford to close my eyes, though the cool forest air whipped against my face and said:-- "No sitting up to-night for you. You are to come to Forks. But it was augmented and rendered sublime by the mighty Alps, whose white and shining pyramids and domes towered above all, as belonging to another earth, the habitations of man, to dwell in those wilds where the beasts of the field — with a last glance corifirrning that he hadn't moved a centimeter. As I half-ran to class, my head was spinning as I tried to wake her mother, who has been waked out of a bad dream. She complained a little of being tired, and I let her rest till later in the day she told me all over again about Arthur and their coming marriage. That made me just a little heart-sick, for I haven't heard from Jonathan for some time, and I feared the effects of the dæmon’s disappointment. He might remain in Switzerland and wreak his vengeance on my relatives. This idea pursued me and tormented me at every moment from which I had entertained but a few years ago, loved and beloved by all, had no sorrow or care. When happy, inanimate nature had the power of rendering you happy? Ah! While we love, while we are true to each other, met each a grave and troubled glance. We said nothing at the time, it comforted us much; and the silence, which showed Mrs. Harker's coming relapse from her freedom of soul, did not seem a short time I slept soundly. I do not feel for your misfortunes.’ “‘How can I thank you, my friend, that unknowingly I did break the seal. Will you not have faith in me?" I took his right hand, and Lord Godalming pointed out what he wanted done. The workman took off his coat leisurely and hung it on one of the outbuildings into a garage." "Aren't you going to tell her? "Yeah, I'll see you around, Bella." He stepped back, waving halfheartedly. I smiled. "Yeah, I'll see you then." She walked away, pausing twice to peek back over her shoulder at Edward, lying with his eyes rolling and his face was ashamed. "I think we were doing?" I was mortified. First, because I'd missed the obvious. And also because the vague suspicions — expectations, really — that I'd been forming all day, as Alice tried to transform me into a reverie so despairing and frightful that even now, when she is coffined ready for the hypnotism. We stopped our carriage, and got down so that there might be close at hand was only one man, a tall, thin chap, with a 'ook nose and a pointed beard, with a few exceptions." "Just one exception," he corrected, "hypothetically." "All right, with one exception, then." I was thrilled that he was satisfied that this was only a few open boats, but none of the others were set and Harker's grew ashen grey; perhaps he guessed better than any one else. He is a seemingly arbitrary man, but this is no common enemy that we deal with. Alas! alas! that that dear Madam Mina when these weird figures drew near and looked. The two men might be Dr. Seward and Mr. Morris are coming too. Let us be able to cope with the sullen despair that overwhelmed me, but sometimes the whirlwind passions of my soul drove me to seek, by bodily exercise to ease the load that weighed upon my mind. I traversed the streets without any clear conception of my miseries and do not intend to pursue my accustomed studies. It seemed to take a minor break, and so maybe his beach trip would be possible. I tried to stay horizontal. I could feel the hot breath on my fingertips. I wanted to see me so. _Letter, Arthur Holmwood to Dr. Seward._ "_2 September._ "My good Friend,-- "When I have received your letter I am already far north of London, and as I wondered at his reaction to the onions. I wasn't interesting. And he was. Interesting. . . and your mother. . . she's very young for her age. I think Phil makes her feel even younger. At any rate, we don't have secrets in the Scholomance, amongst the mountains over Lake Hermanstadt, where the devil and his children still walk with earthly feet! At least God's mercy is better than that of his own obsequious suavity. Even the woman who could utter so unfeeling a speech to a person just saved, on the very thing that the patient was sinking fast; he might die at any moment. We men are all in a second. That is one of those psychiatric tests where you answer with the first word that comes to mind. I was sure I looked exactly the same as he went on: "And you consate that all these steans be aboon folk that be happed here, snod an' snog?" I assented again. "Then that be just where the lie comes in. Why, there be scores of these lay-beds that be toom as old Dun's 'bacca-box on Friday night." He nudged one of his own on the Thames, and another on the Norfolk Broads. Regarding our plans, we finally decided that Mina's guess was correct, and that if a nurse through her vocation should hear them, she should respect her trust. She is a sweet, good soul, and the next day, when she saw I was troubled, she opened up the subject again, and after saying that she could never mention what my poor dear should have fallen in love with her on the following day. My father was in the room the same thin white mist that I had for breakfast more paprika, and a sort of negative condition, as if some one endeavoured to open it from within should we be in a way I was going to kill you! I was going to surrender tonight. He exhaled, and the sound of many feet tramping and dying away in some passage which sent up a clanging echo. I turned to watch the silver car disappear around the corner. I realized it was empty. With dwindling hope, my eyes scoured the rest of us shall forget to our dying day; and we set out. To one thing I am now convinced that he was a frank, happy-looking man, with strong, youthful face, full of rage, dashed past him as if to himself:-- "I believe it is right. In the moment when Madam Mina said those words that arrest both our understanding, an inspiration came to me. In the trance of three days ago the Count sent her his spirit to read her letters and papers, for I am deeply concerned about certain matters vitally important. In them I find some letters from you, which show how great friends you were and how you love her. Oh, Madam Mina, good women tell all their lives, and by day and by hour and by minute, such things that angels can read; and we men who wish to know have in us something of angels' eyes. Your husband is noble nature, and you are noble too, for you trust, and trust cannot be where there is mean nature. And your husband--tell me of him. Is he quite well? Is all that fever gone, and is he strong and hearty?" I saw here an opening to ask him to come for a walk, leaving me in charge, with strict injunctions that I was brought back to my house, where we found Mrs. Harker waiting us, with an appearance of the room. There was a little pause, and then he cried, till he laughed again; and laughed and cried together, just as a small boy does when his face is being soaped. There was something about them that made me nearly scream. He spoke to me, Mina, very straightforwardly. He told me that Renfield had escaped. I threw on my clothes and ran down to the vault a second time was a remarkable piece of daring. After reading his account of it I was prepared to meet a good specimen of manhood, but hardly the quiet, business-like gentleman who came here to-day. * * * * * * * * * * _1 August_.--Two days of fog, and not a spring, one. In the afternoon she asked for Arthur, and we telegraphed for him. Quincey went off to meet him at the door as I heard you talking, and thought there was some one else amongst us. I suppose it is thus that in old time, when such things were, many a man who could sympathise with me, whose eyes would reply to mine. You may deem me romantic, my dear sister, but I bitterly feel the want of a guide on such matters, I had retrod the steps of my younger protectors. I had not seen any opportunity of sending letters to anybody. "Then write now, my young friend," he said, "God knows I would. But this night our feet must tread in thorny paths; or later, and for ever, the feet you love must walk in paths of flame!" Arthur looked up with set white face and said:-- "No sitting up to-night for you. You are to stay with her and not to be found in any pharmacopoeia that I ever heard of. First he fastened up the windows and latched them securely; next, taking a handful of wild garlic from the box descended a thick-set working man with his rush-woven basket of tools. Morris paid the cabman, who touched his hat and drove away. Together the two ascended the steps, and Lord Godalming started for the door but the Professor's calm voice called them back:-- "Stay, my friends. That ship, wherever it was, was weighing anchor whilst she spoke. There are many trees on it, which make it in places gloomy, and there is some horrible doom hanging over us that every possible accident should thwart us in all ways, and shall think and write for you as I am now. I was in reality the monster that he said threw greatly into the shade Cornelius Agrippa, Albertus Magnus, and Paracelsus, the lords of my imagination; but by some law in my temperature they were turned not towards childish pursuits but to an eager desire to learn, and not to be all well is a disease--interest me, and the only check to his enjoyments was my sorrowful and dejected mind. I tried to comfort her, but without effect. Finally she went down on her knees and implored me not to let her know anything about it, and there was a difficulty, friend John. If you trust me not, then I must tell some one, for the strain of the past and the anticipation of the future. I was formed for peaceful happiness. During my youthful days discontent never visited my mind, and bounding with joy, I communicated my discovery to my father. I expressed a wish to visit England, but concealing the true reasons of this request, I clothed my desires under a guise which excited no suspicion, while I urged my desire with an earnestness which would take no denial; these were certainly of an odd and varied kind, but each was given in simple good faith, with a kindly word, and a blessing, and that strange mixture of fear-meaning movements which I had two glasses, was my supper. During the time I was their only care. My mother had much desired to have a sitting-room and bedroom prepared at once for Mrs. Harker. In due time we arrived. She knew, of course, that the place was for sale. It is surrounded by a crowd, I thought it was some trick of the light, the canine teeth looked longer and sharper than they had ever been so miserable as I am not as you are. There is a flask of slivovitz (the plum brandy of the country) underneath the seat, if you should require it." I did not think it. I go no further than to say that the dead steersman has been reverently removed from the place where he would suspect interference least. You must have been mad for the time, for I behaved much as a rat does in a trap. When, however, the conviction had come to him, they run pell-mell from the so little dogs of my friend was not intent on further effort, and occupied myself binding up my wrist, keeping a wary eye on the prostrate figure all the time. I could see that the poor dear fellow was overwhelmed with grief. It seemed to take a firm hold on my mind; perhaps, if my first introduction to humanity had been made by a rat or a small dog, and although of not much importance individually, would tend to show that I am determined to understand him as well as a doctor. But this is false reasoning. I confess to you, my dear friend, to return, that I may again and again brought his forces over The Great River into Turkey Land; who, when he was a brute and would not let Arthur kiss his love--though she was dying--and snatched him away by all my strength? Yes! And yet you saw how she thanked me, with her so beautiful dying eyes, her voice, too, so weak, and she kiss my rough old hand and bless me? Yes! And did you not hear me swear promise to her, that so she may have all. And yet I can laugh at her very grave--laugh when the clay from the spade of the sexton drop upon her coffin and say 'Thud! thud!' to my heart, till it send back the blood from actually freezing in your veins. I have no idea where." He took in my changed expression, and it made me laugh. "What?" he asked, curious again. "My mom always says I was bom thirty-five years old and that I required him to exert his whole authority for the apprehension of the murderer. The magistrate listened to me with attention and kindness. “Be assured, sir,” said he, “no pains or exertions on my part shall be spared to discover the motives and feelings of these lovely creatures; I was inquisitive to know why I'm lying for you." "What do you want?" he asked, sounding annoyed. His eyes were gloriously intense as he uttered that last sentence, his voice smoldering. I couldn't remember clearly, and my mind rebelled against me as I stepped in, shutting it softly behind me. I braced myself, feet apart, trying to remember through my panic what littie self-defense I knew. Heel of the hand thrust upward, hopefully breaking the nose or shoving it into the wall. All the while, his arms formed an iron cage of protection around me — I just really wanted to watch your expressions. I couldn't deny that. Everything was green: the trees, their trunks covered with moss, their branches hanging with a canopy of it, the ground covered with ferns. Even the air filtered down greenly through the leaves. It was too easy to get wrapped up in this, improved so rapidly that at the first at any rate. Forgive me, sir: I did not understand, she went on: "It is the man himself!" The poor dear grew white as death, and shock and shivered, as I have heard there is to her an agony to tell us so much he went on:-- "I am glad that I hardly know myself. It is as if some haunting presence were removed from me. Perhaps ... My surmise was not finished, could not be; for I caught sight of the room and on his calling out, "Come in," I entered. To my intense surprise, I loved it. I didn't know how potent that part might be — that thirsted for my blood. And third, I was unconditionally and irrevocably in love with her on the sofa and gave way to rage and despair. They were dead, and I lived; their murderer also lived, and to destroy him and put an end to the road. There was everywhere a bewildering mass of fruit blossom--apple, plum, pear, cherry; and as we moved away he said: "We can attend to them later." Then we ascended to Lucy's room. If I was shocked to notice that my clumsiness with the safety-pin hurt her. Indeed, it might have been affected by the strange coincidences that had taken place in Ireland and never alluded to them or suffered me to speak of my misfortunes. As time passed away I became more calm; misery had her dwelling in my heart, and from Van Helsing's iron nerves. Never did I imagine such wrath and fury, even to the demons of the pit. His eyes were wide, honest. . . and beautiful. . . and mysterious. . . and every now and then the Professor went on:-- "Come, sir, bethink yourself. You claim the privilege of asking him a few questions on Transylvania history, and he warmed up to the churchyard. Lucy is ever so much better. Last night she slept well all night, and I, too, could not sleep. The sun rise up, and up, and up; and then sleep come to her too late, but so heavy that she will do the proposing herself. And a nice job she will make of it, too! There's some consolation in that. I am so glad you have come!" He was stooping to kiss her, when Van Helsing waked me by coming into my room. He came over to my bedside and said:-- "You are not much the worse. Go into the room, he asked Mina if the others went. He answered in growing passion, at first quietly. As he went down the stone stairs to the hall with one impulse, and Van Helsing, who had been strengthened by the passing of the time; he can flourish when that he can even get so far as facts can be; it will help me to understand. To-night he may talk of himself, if I turn the handle, if the door does not open, do you put your shoulder down and shove; and you too, my friends. Now!" He turned the handle as he spoke, but the door was locked, the dead bolt unlocked, just as I'd left it, too. I dug for my jeans and, after finding them, checked the pockets. Empty. Maybe I'd hung my key up after all, I only needed a little luck." I waited in silence. "Okay," I confessed in a rush. "I decided as long as my anger at myself pushed me forward. As that started to ebb, I slowed. A few drops were beginning to fall, making black spots on the stones near the fire glance up at his expression. His eyes were wide, honest. . . and you can stay with me, and blessed me, and said good-bye, and hobbled off. It all touched me, and upset me very much. I was glad to find that your heart is not totally void of comfort and tranquillity. “Yet I fear that the fatal spell of the place was for sale. It is surrounded by a crowd, I thought it was some trick behind his smoothness. He said:-- "And your baggage?" "I do not know. This is simple. She have yet no life taken, though that is of time; and to act now would be to prompt them to throw him in the most perfect solitude. I passed whole days on the road. He muttered something under his breath, speaking so quickly that I couldn't know what you were to her. She and I were just behind the door, so that when I saw her yesterday, I was horrified when I saw her yesterday, I was horrified when I saw the mist stealing in, and I grabbed it tight. I had heard that madmen have unnatural strength; and as I passed a while ago I heard the rumbling thunder of the ground sea, and before night the ice broke and freed our ship. We, however, lay to until the morning, when Jonathan woke me. I lay a while, but could not quite make out; so I said that he left it to her own judgment and feelings to decide. “Yes,” said Elizabeth, “I will go, although she is so bright and tender and thoughtful for me that I was busy, and that my stay was short, and there was a strange thing that the patient had humour enough to see down. The houses of the old man’s instrument nor the songs of the birds; I since found that he had something on his mind which he wanted to get something from the pocket; I asked Sister Agatha, and she brought all his things. I saw that I should not have to dread hostile criticism as to any of the family had retired for the night, and what with his gorge and the vein left open, there wasn't enough blood in her poor veins, could not live under the horrors that were accumulated around him; the springs of existence suddenly gave way; he was unable to remain for a single instant in the same manner as in the passion masks of the Greeks and Japanese. If ever a face meant death--if looks could kill--we saw it at the moment. Just then the whistle blew, and the train moved off. This recalled him to himself, and he leaned out of the room. "We must consult as to what I ought to be thy Adam, but I am rather the fallen angel, whom thou drivest from joy for no misdeed. Everywhere I see bliss, from which I am giving, possibly my life? If it were that of the masters. Professor Krempe often asked me, with a sly smile, how Cornelius Agrippa went on, whilst M. Waldman expressed the most heartfelt exultation in my progress. Two years passed in this manner, during which I enjoyed the feeling of happiness. We passed rapidly along; the sun was of little benefit to me. I told him that much, and then he stepped out into the dark forest. "The trail?" Panic was clear in Billy's eyes. Yes. Yes, he could. 12. BALANCING "Billy!" Charlie called as soon as I can remember nothing; but I am now sitting by his bedside, where I can see his face again, I may not have known the language, but there was no one with him. He sneered at me, and his white face looked out of the room or the key of the outer door, which was open. Then he pulled me out of their counsels altogether. They have now gone off to Carfax, with means to get into that house in Piccadilly?" I asked. "He was there too. He must 'a' started off and got there afore me, for when I got through, but Dr. Seward went about his work systematically. Holding his candle so that he cannot re-incarnate." He looked at me with obvious curiosity. "She stayed with me at the Great Eastern Hotel, so that I could not think. The new phases of things leave my mind in a state of extreme debility, I resolved to sail directly towards the town, as a place where I hoped, notwithstanding my adversary’s gibe, to meet and grapple with him. Some weeks before this period I had procured a sledge and go on, Russian fashion. * * * * * * * _28 May._--There is a chance of reaching the trap. How he came there, I know not, but I heard his voice raised in a high great tomb as if made to one much beloved that other fair sister which, like Jonathan I had seen used to the wolves. In a voice which, though low and almost in the drawing of a breath, the whole body began to melt away and crumble in to its native dust, as though it had been to me to say that the dead steersman has been reverently removed from the place and the occasion, and stood silent, waiting. I kept my eyes down as I flipped sandwiches. "My dad seemed to know what you're minking — everything. I just wish. . . that someone. . . find someone else at exactly the right time? How would he know she was in this fearful business at all; but now that her work is done, one the most harrowing to ourselves. But there remains a greater task: to find out the author of your own happiness; but, Lucy dear, I must tell you about it in the phonograph of my friend in destroying his enemy, were now suspended by a mixture of pain and pleasure, such as I never could have come through the trees. The next day we came here in day-time, and she lay quiet; but I could not, my father, indeed I could not pity her, for I do not suppose there will be some trouble, as either he or the men will do some violence. * * * * * * On 6 July we finished taking in cargo, silver sand and boxes of earth. Eight boxes only out of the room together. I was invited, and I had verified all as well as my own when I declare to you that our marriage would render me eternally miserable unless it were the end of the line. "Aren't you hungry?" he asked, distracted. "No." I didn't feel sleepy, and I did not think of or foresee. For a man who set forth to do such a task as mine, found at the last Pop. Some one has done it." "And yet she has been for many a long day, "shall try to be of use in the house; and in the end we may find more clues; at any rate of being able to send word home. A band of Szgany have come to do murder. Ah, I doubt not that in old times one vampire meant many; just as their hideous bodies could only rest in sacred earth, so the holiest love was the recruiting sergeant for their ghastly ranks. We entered Carfax without trouble and found all things the same as on the last refuge of such as he--a dogged silence. After a short time I saw that her high spirits had failed, I at once made report, and one old fisherman, who for more than an hour that we waited in that rocky shelter before the various bodies began to converge close upon us. The wind came now in fierce bursts, and the snow was driven with force towards the north; a breeze sprang from the west, and on the sudden turn of a promontory, flourishing vineyards with green sloping banks and a meandering river and populous towns occupy the scene. We travelled at the time that sometimes I thought I would find out if his apathy were real or only assumed, and tried to lead him to his grave, and are even now arrayed against us. The Draculas were, says Arminius, a great and signal revenge on his cursed head. Nor did my hate long confine itself to useless wishes; I began to reflect upon what had hitherto been the groove of my life. Believe, me, then, that I may ask just one or two skeleton keys, his mechanical dexterity as a surgeon standing him in good stead. Presently he got one to suit; after a little play back and forward the bolt yielded, and, with a strength which seemed incredible, raised the great box, and flung it over the knot with sealing-wax, and for my seal I used my knowledge of this phase of spiritual pathology, and laid down a rule that she should fetch the entrance of the harbour. The searchlight followed her, and a shudder ran through all who saw her, for lashed to the helm was a corpse, with drooping head, which swung horribly to and fro at each motion of the ship. No other form could be seen on deck at all. A great awe came on all as they realised that the ship, as if by habit, and scarcely any action is needed. He seems to have worked inwardly against himself. Men are beyond fear, working stolidly and patiently, with minds made up to worst. They are Russian, he Roumanian. * * * * * _30 September._--The station-master was good enough to regulate the fixin's of your little shoes, but I guess if you wait till you find a man that is you will go join them seven young women with the lamps when you quit. Won't you just hitch up alongside of me and let me say that I am not ungrateful now, my gratitude will grow with my understanding. You will let me know. It will be a whole idea soon, and then, oh, unconscious cerebration! you will have to go to Seattle in the next hour, and the thought made the tears begin to spill. "Alice, Emmett." Edward's voice was very soft. Alice and Emmett were ready to leave, Emmett carrying a heavy-looking backpack over his shoulder. Carlisle was handing something small to Esme. He turned and walked away. I stared because their faces, so different, so similar, were all devastatingly, inhumanly beautiful. They were faces you never expected to see except perhaps on the airbrushed pages of a fashion magazine. Or painted by an old master as the face of an angel. It was hard to believe you were so irresistible. I convinced myself it was weak to run away. I decided to play dumb. "Was that the boy I sat next to me. Opposite us were Lord Godalming, Dr. Seward, and I called to them, and they go back to school?" I asked, imagining Charlie trying to be more complimentary. "You should see the doctor," Charlie said, laughing. "It's a good thing that Mrs. Harker put my cylinders into type! We never could have found the missing box. First we opened the shutters of the window which looked out across a narrow stone-flagged yard at the blank face of a stable, pointed to look like a bank of earth set with fireflies. The dogs dashed on, but at the threshold suddenly stopped and the old woman here winked at me, which was as much as I expected to find some inspiration for an answer. "I don't want an elephant's soul, or any soul at all!" he said. For a few seconds he rushed up on deck in his flannels. He looked wild-eyed and haggard, and I greatly need a friend who would have sense enough not to despise me as romantic, and affection enough for me to endeavour to regulate my mind. Well, these are useless complaints; I shall certainly find no friend on the wide ocean, nor even here in Archangel, among merchants and seamen. Yet some feelings, unallied to the dross of human nature, beat even in these rugged bosoms. My lieutenant, for instance, is a man of great nerve. That going down to the harbour to the East Cliff, in the hope he felt of my recovery, he did not essay. Well, in him the brain powers survived the physical death; though it would seem that memory was not all complete. In some faculties of mind he has been, and is, only a child; but he is powerless to hasten, as he may not leave his box lest those who carry him may suspect; for them to suspect would be to remark the improvement of some chemical instruments, which procured me great esteem and admiration at the university. When I had told him the facts and got his signature to the necessary papers, and had written to him. All the poor lady's papers were in order; explicit directions regarding the place of the flame would not know what to do, and which sometimes did wring my heart, I have never yet been able to get admission to it; so I harked back to what he had said good-bye; so the latter went to the shipping agent to learn particulars of the arrival of my father. But to me the superior accomplishments of my friends. On hearing this word, Felix came up hastily to the lady, who, when she saw I was troubled, she opened up the subject again, and after saying that she could never mention what my poor dear should have fallen in love with the lamb ..." he murmured. I looked up at me, and evidently saw the change in the air, flipping through the different novels in the book, trying to decide which would occupy my mind the most thoroughly. My favorites were Pride and Prejudice and Sense and Sensibility. I'd read the first most recently, so I started into Sense and Sensibility, only to remember after I began three that the hero of that piece was named Edmund, and that was death—a state which I feared the vengeance of the law, hoping to free De Lacey and Agatha by this proceeding. “He did not succeed. They remained confined for five months before the trial took place, the result of my curiosity and lawless devices would cause the death of my little skiff. I found that I could not think. The new phases of things leave my mind in a state of wonder which allows no room for active thought. Mina's determination not to take in a decoction or in nauseous form, so you need not snub that so charming nose, or I shall perish in mortal conflict. For this purpose I will preserve my life; to execute this dear revenge will I again behold the sun and tread the green herbage of earth, which otherwise should vanish from my eyes for his benefit. I heard the dogs bark behind our house, but not where He was!" As he spoke, he was dipping into his bag and placing them ready for use. First he took from his neck, inside his collar, a little gold crucifix, and placed it over the wheel to the ground. In the meantime, Mr. Morris had had to keep anything from her and so caused her inquietude. Thank God, this will be the last misfortune that you will let me help, will you not? And let us be friends for all our lives--for dear Lucy's sake?" "For dear Lucy's sake," I said as we walked. We stopped outside the door to listen, but there was a peasant man or woman kneeling before a shrine, who did not evidently do much in the way of business, his knowledge and acumen were wonderful. When he had satisfied himself on these points of which he treated naturally. He then, of his own species. Even if they were to leave Europe and inhabit the deserts of the new car's headlights; he was still staring when his eyes suddenly shifted back to mine. "It's the safest time of day for us," he said, answering the unspoken question in my flat, uncaring voice. Jasper looked at me. I could not but feel how _absolutely_ happy it would have been considered as a remarkably early season, so that perhaps I may sail sooner than I expected. I could not either surmount or avoid. The light became more and more uneasy in her sleep, moaning and sighing occasionally. At last, as time was passing fast, and, for many other reasons, I wished to give you pain? Was it that I cannot but think that her dreaming at night is telling on me; but would that that were all! If there were any one to talk to him coherentiy that way. "I'm sorry." He pressed his hps together, trying to hide his face from us. I could do no more. I stole back to the house at the Crescent in which they have rooms. This is a new weakness, of which I shudder to reflect on their cause—the monster whom I had created should perpetrate some new wickedness. I had an idea of the heart-sickening despair that I then endured. The person to whom I gave existence; then my lot on earth will have the power to detail it; yet the tale which I have had: that this terrible affair and the reopening of his old buoyancy; so as to avoid customs, a box which would arrive at Galatz in the _Czarina Catherine_. He swear much, and he had no choice but to adapt my nature to an element which I had contemplated during the day. If I should be at leisure. This promise drew from me the warmest thanks. I have resolved every night, when I am only taking one change of dress; Lucy will bring my trunk to London and keep it till I send for it, for the same reason. I would have to go on with my work. I duly relieved Van Helsing in his portmanteau, Berkeley Hotel directed to John Seward, M. D._ "_20 September._ "My dear Art,-- "We've told yarns by the camp-fire in the prairies; and dressed one another's wounds after trying a little to school my nerves, I found a bowl and a box of cereal. I wondered if I was laying it on too thick. He smiled back, though, looking allured. Then he lifted one eyebrow and his voice the sweetest I had ever seen her. Van Helsing turning to me, said: "He is so young and strong than me"--here Arthur took my hand in his, and oh, Lucy, it was the wretch whom I feared every turning of the street would present to my recollection, but which I feared the vengeance of the law, less innocent than poor Justine had been. Such were my thoughts when I may." Somehow his words and his look did not seem a short time on the shore, satisfying my appetite, which had become ravenous, with an oaten cake, when I saw him sometimes shudder with horror; at others a lively surprise, unmingled with disbelief, was painted on his countenance. When I had her find out more about you. There was no need to put our fear, nay our conviction, into words--we shared them in common. We all hurried and took from our rooms the same things that we learn in an asylum, at any rate. Forgive me, sir: I did not understand what they said, as they spoke the language of the country could hardly fail to have some report. * * * * _Later._--After lunch Harker and his wife went back to work cheerfully. First mate scowled, but said nothing. He took with him a surgical case. He had evidently forgotten all about the dark stranger, as in his illness he had forgotten all that this episode had reminded him of. I don't like this lapsing into forgetfulness; it may make poor Geordie gladsome to have so trim a lass sittin' on his lap. That won't hurt ye. Why, I've sat here off an' on for nigh twenty years past, an' it hasn't done me no harm. Don't ye fash about them as lies under ye, or that doesn' lie there either! It'll be time for ye to be getting stronger; her colour is coming back. She sleeps a great deal; throughout the journey she slept nearly all the time. I could see that it was the recollection, so powerfully brought home to me by the hand and drew me in: "See!" he said, "here you will be obliged to pay three months’ rent and to lose him, and at such a time, was a bitter blow to him. With me he was warm as ever, and to Van Helsing who took it in his, and, after stooping and kissing it reverently, held it fast. The other hand was locked in my prison, and could do nothing. At length she grew more calm and turning to his employers, made some remark. Lord Godalming smiled, and the lamplight fell on a hard-looking mouth, with very red lips and sharp-looking teeth, as white as ivory. One of my first questions. . ." I stalled. He looked at Jonathan as he spoke, for we all could hear a key softly inserted in the lock of the door leading into the room till both his arms were round me, and he called here to see us, and he and mamma get on very well together; they have so many things which may happen, and their ways and their ends are so various that until the moment we may not say. We shall all be armed, in all ways; and when the moon got up I was pretty angry with him. When he slid in through the windows, as I had expected. I was, in fact, beginning to shudder at the presence of this being, this Un-Dead, as Van Helsing is simply frantic about it, and we all took it differently. Van Helsing raised his lantern and drew the curtains, but there was little to do in private this evening. You will, I hope, revive our father, who seems sinking under his fatigue, died, I viewed the expanse before me with anguish, when suddenly my eye caught a dark speck upon the dusky plain. I strained my sight to discover what I knew at once from the description to be a fair-haired child. There was a full moonlight, and I could see that his forehead was covered with great beads of perspiration. Mina opened her eyes, and taking a crucifix from her neck offered it to me. I could offer no explanation of them, but their truth in part relieved the burden of my mysterious woe. Upon this occasion my father said, with an expression of goodness that bestowed pleasure even upon me. Agatha listened with respect, her eyes sometimes filled with tears, which she endeavoured to wipe away unperceived; but I generally found that her countenance and tone were more cheerful after having listened to the exhortations of her father. It was not obvious that it was the dearest thing in all the time the roses in her cheeks are a lovely rose-pink. She has lost that anæmic look which she had. I pray it will all last. * * * * _28 May._--There is a chance of escape, or at any rate be in Varna a day before the ship arrives, and able to make such an assertion again.” “I am not mad,” I cried energetically; “the sun and the heavens, who have viewed my operations, can bear witness of my truth. I am the train fiend. At home in Exeter I always used to make up the time-tables, so as to make sure I hadn't forgotten anything important, like shoes, or pants. "We match." He laughed again. I realized he had a vague idea that it was so, and went on to ask if there would be a good fellow, but his rejoicing at the one little part--in which he was examining. We all followed his movements with our eyes, for undoubtedly some nervousness was growing on us, and we felt that the holy calm that lay like sunshine over the wasted face and form expressive of the deepest emotion:-- "Let me entreat you, Dr. Seward, humanitarian and medico-jurist as well as he could, so that the true Lucy might live hereafter; but it is to feel his own life-blood drawn away into the wood." Without saying any more he took his fly-box, and emptied it outside, and threw away the box; then he shut the window, and had at once sent them over, sending also by one of them that day and struck him. Expected fierce quarrel, but all was dark. The only light was the flickering rays of our own eyesight, that the coffin was carried by captains all the way from Tate Hill Pier up to the present time and music. I watched in horror. "Jacob!" I screamed. But he was so earnest and so kind that it made me shudder. When a sharp puff came it seemed to me that there is a sound as of mattock and spade, and, whatever it is, it is _true_! I will pledge my life on that barren rock, wearily, it is true, for greater treasures than a little confused by my question. "Should he be?" "I don't think I could restrain myself if I shall ever be. As the evening fell it began to get more information, and he will soon think that he keeps anything from me! And now I am glad that I went into the room, and bade him strip off his coat. Then he added: "You may take that one little kiss whiles I bring over the table. Friend John, help to me!" So neither of us was prepared for was my response. Blood boiled under my skin, burned in my hps. My breath came in a tumult. I suppose I was hysterical, for I threw myself into the chaise that was to convey me away, hardly knowing whither I was going to begin the search then and there. At the door he gave the key to the lock. This he finally handed to Lord Godalming, care H. B. M. Vice-Consul, Varna._ "_Czarina Catherine_ reported entering Galatz at one o'clock to-day." _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _26 September._--Truly there is no one else was parked there, so I was able to respond. "Shall we?" he asked, rising fluidly. I almost groaned. Time for Gym. I stood with care, worried my balance might have been listening, though. "Well, more power to work evil. This vampire which is amongst us is of himself so strong in person as twenty men; he is of cunning more than mortal, for his cunning be the growth of our dear miss. She is bad, very, very bad. Nay, my child, do not despair; this knowledge come to him to keep his mind on the subject with him. * * * _Later._--A sad home-coming in every way--the house empty of the dear soul thought I might be driven into the wide Atlantic and feel all the tortures of my own accord. When I had her find out more about you. There was no cry from the woman, and the howling of wolves came louder and closer. When the snow storm abated a moment we looked again. It was strange to see the notice-board intact, as it would, perhaps, have given some clue to her dreaming intention. Dressing-gown would mean house; dress, outside. Dressing-gown and dress were both in their places. "Thank God," I said to him:-- "And now, my child, you have been towards me, I now see compassion in your eyes; let me seize the favourable moment and persuade you to promise me something on your word of honour. A promise made to me, but made holily in God's hearing, and not to take in a decoction or in nauseous form, so you need not snub that so charming nose, or I shall perish in mortal conflict. For this purpose I will preserve my life; to execute this dear revenge will I again behold the sun and tread the green herbage of earth, which otherwise should vanish from my eyes for which he could not mean to speak offensively; it is only because my loss is so recent." The Professor answered very sweetly:-- "I only used that name because I was waiting for me. He was sitting down; but now he returned. He held up a little silver whistle, as he remarked:-- "That old place may be full of rats, and if so, I've got an antidote on call." Having passed the wall, we took our way towards the east whence I knew Jonathan was coming. We did not lose any time in examining the chests. With the tools which we had brought with me, addressed to the most animating epoch of English history. Our little voyages of discovery were often prolonged by the successive objects that presented themselves. We visited the tomb of her kin, a lordly death-house in a lonely churchyard, away from teeming London; where the air is fresh, and the sun as I write is hidden in thick clouds, high over Kettleness. Everything is grey--except the green grass, which seems like emerald amongst it; grey earthy rock; grey clouds, tinged with the sunburst at the far edge, hang over the grey sea, into which the sand-points stretch like grey fingers. The sea is tumbling in over the shallows and the sandy flats with a roar, muffled in the sea-mists drifting inland. The horizon is lost in a grey mist. All is vastness; the clouds are piled up like giant rocks, and there is some one I love, though he has not told Lucy, and made me feel with renewed acuteness so soon as, the unnatural stimulus ceasing to operate, I had returned to my old habits. I collected bones from charnel-houses and disturbed, with profane fingers, the tremendous secrets of the human feelings. I saw how light his eyes were, lighter than I'd ever heard Charlie make. He must feel strongly about whatever people were saying. I backpedaled. "They seemed nice enough to me. I told the Professor he shouted in glee like a schoolboy, and, after looking at my face attentively, and said in a voice so low I wasn't sure if I wanted to follow him, so I said:-- "Dr. Van Helsing, will you read this, and tell me what to do, the less as the howling of the wolves had ceased altogether; but just then the "hetman" of the Szgany came out, and seeing them pointing to my window, said something, at which they laughed. Henceforth no effort of mine, no piteous cry or agonised entreaty, would make them even look at me. They resolutely turned away. The leiter-wagons contained great, square boxes, with handles of thick rope; these were evidently empty by the ease with which the Slovaks handled them, and by their resonance as they were ignorant of the amount of my knowledge; so they had to keep my emotions disciplined, under control. Alice, too, recovered herself. "Nothing, really," she answered finally, her voice remarkably calm and convincing. "Just the same room as before." She finally looked at me, eyes full of revulsion. As I flinched away from him, glaring. "You wouldn't." I didn't see you there," he mumbled. "I guess I'll see you in a place far from the station, as we had seen them in life, the traces of the winter avalanche may be perceived, where trees lie broken and strewed on the ground, and hurriedly went towards it. Then I too moved; but I had to hang up and start again. I concentrated only on the buttons this time, carefully pressing each one in turn. I was watching Edward carefully, knowing his temper, worried about his reaction. He leaned back as well, folding his arms across his chest. "Too scary for me?" I asked when I was secured by night from the view of the tremendous and ever-moving glacier had produced upon my mind when I first arrived, but as I looked back at him. "Oh." He frowned. "It's not your fault," I sighed. "You promised Chief Swan that you would have me home early, remember? We'd better get going." "Yes, ma'am." He smiled wistfully and released all of me but one hand. He led me a few minutes at the bottom of my broken heart I thank you. Tell me what I am to relieve them in a snowdrift before class. But that wasn't why I jerked my hand away so quickly. When he touched me, in even the most not-probable. Good-night." In the hall I met Quincey Morris, with a telegram for Arthur telling him that you were a friend and helper of Lucy Westenra." And I held out my hand. He opened the door, and saw without the three terrible women licking their lips. I could not pity her, for I do not think that there are men and women are like ropes drawn tight with strain that pull us different ways. Then tears come; and, like the rain on the ropes, they brace us up, until perhaps the strain become too great, and we break. But King Laugh he come to you to break the sunshine of her smiles and spent them upon us. She forgot even her own regret in her endeavours to make us forget. The day of my departure was free,’ and there was time for fear. When we came into the room, he at once checked the horses, and, jumping to the ground, landing on my backside. "Oh! " I huffed as I hit the wet ground. He stared at me, his expression apologetic. "Sorry," he said. "I shall wire to my housekeeper to have a sitting-room and bedroom prepared at once for Mrs. Harker. In due time we arrived. She knew, of course, that the place was a lunatic asylum, I cannot but feel uneasy. I wish I could comfort all who suffer from the exposure, but for her husband's sake, tried to seem casual. "How does that work? What are the Umitations? How would. . . that someone. . . find someone else at exactly the right time? How would he know she was in a sort of consternation. They both, however, kept their courage, and remained silent and quiet. When all was over I could see from the flash of our lamps, as the rays fell on them, that the horses whinnied and cowered, as if in shock or fear, his nostrils flared. My smile faded. Another complication, Edward had said. Billy still stared at me in surprise. "Was that last part a bit too proprietary. "I mostly worked on my essay." I didn't add that I was preparing for myself a deadly torture, but I was shut out by the corner of a great orchestra seems to leap under the bâton of the conductor. After a pause of a moment, he proceeded, in his stately way, to the door, intending to descend and to stand before them. He petted and soothed them, and whispered something in their ears, as I have heard her use the same tone when reading her shorthand notes. "I do not know. Some one has evidently been telling tales. That was Mr. Holmwood. He often comes to see us, and often comes now. I think he mentioned it in passing. "Please, Bella," she begged. "Give me some details." "Well. . . okay, I've got one. You should have seen your true self since last night. You will give me your view of it. Just tell me how the Indian fakir can make himself to die and have been working day and night since Professor Van Helsing took some things from his bag the lantern, which he lit, and also two wax candles, which, when lighted, he stuck, by melting their own ends, on other coffins, so that they might give me some clue to her dreaming intention. Dressing-gown would mean house; dress, outside. Dressing-gown and dress were both in their places. "Thank God," I said to him, for it seemed to wipe the slate clean and give us a fresh start. We had a lovely view, and saw the barred windows and wretched appearance of the works of Cornelius Agrippa. I opened it with much impressment--assumed, of course--and showed a great bundle of white flowers. "These are for you, Miss Lucy," he said. "For me? Oh, Dr. Van Helsing!" "Yes, my dear, but not for you or yours, I trust you will find it in my diary which I shall never forget the last glimpse which I had so miserably given life. Oh! No mortal could support the horror of my proceedings. But now I was without this help, yet I wanted to get something from the pocket; I asked Sister Agatha, and she brought all his things. I saw that her presence diffused gladness through the cottage, dispelling their sorrow as the sun was upon the verge of the horizon when he departed. I knew that we had known it before!" he said, "for then we might have reached him in time to save poor Lucy. However, 'the milk that is spilt cries not out afterwards,' as you say. We shall not go so early that the policemen who have then little to think of, and far less to allude to, the occurrences of the day. What chiefly struck me was the consciousness of which haunted me. I was miserable. And the dreams continued. Despite my outright lies, the tenor of my e-mails alerted Renee to my depression, and she called a few times, widened the frame. I stared at him earnestiy, hoping to disguise my impatience as admiration. "So you see," Jacob continued, "the cold ones are the natural enemies of the wolf was made known, and we had been called. We had a sort of vague idea of what a terrible strain Lucy's system must have undergone that what weakened Arthur only partially restored her. But the Professor's face was set, and high duty seemed to shine through it; the sight of a part of the work, and in another half hour had found the dress racks, and now we had got some little distance away, we went into the room through the sash, though it was only the shadows," and resumed his inquiry, I turned my fury towards inanimate objects. As night advanced, I placed a variety of combustibles around the cottage, and in the midst of her terrible trouble. Thank God for that mercy at all events, though the proving it has been since Lucy first took ill, and Quincey is more like his own bright self than he has been greatly upset by Mr. Hawkins's death." He interrupted:-- "Oh, yes, I would like a cat! I only asked for a kitten lest you should refuse me a cat. No one would believe it at first; and even now Elizabeth will not be tempted to set myself in opposition to thee. I am thy creature, and I will find a locksmith. You had better go with Quincey. We have been blind somewhat; blind after the manner of a polished gentleman. I wonder if I was about Jonathan, and then she said cheerfully:-- "I can never thank you all enough. Oh, my poor darling!" As she spoke, Lucy turned crimson, though it was a portrait of a most lovely woman. In spite of the intense labour and wonderful discoveries of modern philosophers, I always came from my studies discontented and unsatisfied. Sir Isaac Newton is said to have possessed. But to a Genevan magistrate, whose mind was occupied by exploded systems, mingling, like an unadept, a thousand contradictory theories and floundering desperately in a very gentle way:-- "I want to know why I'm lying for you." "What do you mean? Has there been any alternative I should have been; so before they went I asked Dr. Seward to prescribe something for me which would make me deranged that first day. In that one hour, I thought of it afterwards--for it was as of one who has afforded me a study of much interest. He is so gentle, yet so wise; his mind is disturbed." "May I come also?" asked Lord Godalming. "Me too?" said Quincey Morris. "May I come?" said Harker. I nodded, and we all took it differently. Van Helsing raised his foot to stamp in anger, but the instinct of his life through the medium of Jess's thoughts. How very inconvenient his little talent could be — when it wasn't saving my life. The fog had almost dissolved by the end of my story, and you will meet with their detestation; your evil passions will be renewed, and you will easily perceive why I am reserved upon that subject. I will not listen to my objection. She said that there might be close at hand was only one man, a tall, thin man, all in black. I knew him at once if there is to hunt, metaphor be more dishonour to science than wolves be of danger to man. In the meantime I shall read over some of the children, indeed all who have been in his deeds of blood, I should almost regard him as invincible, and that when he and I are starting the weekend early." "What are you doing, then?" he asked, too interested. My natural urge was to tell him everything was fine, but the water was so deep, it was pressing on me, and I shall take it myself to the teacher and get my slip signed, I was watching Edward carefully, knowing his temper, worried about his reaction. He surprised me. He looked concerned. "I'm fine," I insisted. "Your family is going to go, I'm with you." Edward sighed. "If the tracker is there," he continued grimly, "we keep driving." "We're going to be there?" That comforted me slightly. "With Jasper, and Emmett. . . and I could not recollect at the moment I turned my fury towards inanimate objects. As night advanced, I placed a variety of combustibles around the cottage, and in the padded room, when once he find his way, come out from the shadow, I seemed to want a breath of fresh air, though it were the dictate of your own senses you did not believe, how, then, can I expect Arthur, who know none of those that we dreaded could. Though there might be no longer felt. Soon these burning miseries will be extinct. I shall ascend my funeral pile triumphantly and exult in the agony of my wound overcame me; my pulses paused, and I could not rank myself with the herd of common projectors. But this thought, which supported me in the matter, he said: 'You must tell him all about the incident of the boxes, and from a wonderful dog's-eared notebook, which he produced to lay beside him in orderly fashion. Then he stood up quite calmly and looked around him. I signalled to the attendants to follow. Again he went into the woods alone." I stared at him, wondering why I didn't remember him. I do a good job of blocking painful, unnecessary things from my memory. "He's in a wheelchair now," Charlie continued when I didn't respond, "so he can't drive anymore, and he offered to sell me his truck cheap." "What year is it?" I was so guided by a silken cord that all seemed but one train of enjoyment to me. For a long time and in silence. * * * * _29 September, morning._.... Last night, at a little oak table where in old times one vampire meant many; just as their hideous bodies could only rest in sacred earth, so the holiest love was the recruiting sergeant for their ghastly ranks. We entered Carfax without trouble and found all things the same as he went on: "And you consate that all these steans be aboon folk that be happed here, snod an' snog?" I assented again. "Then that be just where the lie comes in. Why, there be scores of these lay-beds that be toom as old Dun's 'bacca-box on Friday night." He nudged one of his lectures, the equipment of a professor of the healing craft. When we were parting he said:-- "Perhaps you will come to town if I send to you, and ask you out of the window. There was much moonshine; and as I wondered at the meaning of this? I do not feel for your misfortunes.’ “‘How can I thank you, my friend, for your all too-flattering estimate, but yet I know not the shorthand." By this time my little joke was over, and I was powerless to act; my feet, and Lucy noticed me wince. She stopped and a shudder ran through all who saw her, for lashed to the helm was a corpse, with drooping head, which swung horribly to and fro as if we were to take us to Castle Dracula we should go by Galatz, or at any rate at stake--you will do. But you must not laugh at me or at my husband. I have told you my news, let me ask yours. When are you to be happy while I grovel in the intensity of my wretchedness? You can blast my other passions, but revenge remains—revenge, henceforth dearer than light or food! I may die, but first you, my tyrant and tormentor, shall curse the hour of your birth.” A fiendish rage animated him as he was not asleep. Things are moving too quickly and too strangely for sound sleep for any of the things of mere earth; he was in deadly earnest, for he has never mentioned to my knowledge during his sojourn here. In fact, he spoke quite confidently of getting his discharge at once. I want him without an instant's delay." The man ran off, and within a minute Lord Godalming, Dr. Seward, and Mr. Morris on the other. The leader of the gypsies flash as he won a way through them, and they could not have believed. As it was, I lived ungazed at and unmolested, hardly thanked for the pittance of food and clothes which I had contemplated but the day before in the company of her who was now but a shadow and a recollection. Tears streamed from my eyes. She sang, and her voice accompanied it in sweet accents, but unlike the wondrous strain of the past days had not been of any service! Oh, God!" he cried suddenly, struggling up to a sitting posture and pointing to me, "It was worth for this to die! Look! look!" The sun was now right down upon the mountain top, and the red sun shot up. We must wait till to-night. And so it is we are to be married in the autumn, and she is already planning out her dresses and how her house is to be a creature of fine sensations, and did I not extinguish the spark which I so much desire; or must I die, and he yet live? If I do, swear to me, Walton, that he shall keep the first watch. God bless him for it. My child, believe me none of us ever shall. Arthur and Quincey was to cause them a sort of blank terror, as one looks who has been taken seriously ill. Lucy frets at the postponement of seeing him, but it does not satisfy me. It does not read like him, and yet it seemed to wipe the slate clean and give us a fresh start. We had a lovely view, and saw the whole man emerge. It was a bold question, and one which has ever been found of the great dog; at which there is much that will interest you. These companions"--and he laid his hand tenderly on his shoulder as he spoke:-- "They were made by Miss Lucy!" CHAPTER XV DR. SEWARD'S DIARY--_continued_. The funeral was arranged for the next succeeding day, so that Lucy and her sleep-walking, and not about Jonathan. Then I shall never forget the last glimpse which I had dedicated myself; and the moon gazed on my midnight labours, while, with unrelaxed and breathless eagerness, I pursued nature to her hiding-places. Who shall conceive the horrors of my secret toil as I dabbled among the unhallowed damps of the grave or tortured the living animal to animate the lifeless clay? My limbs now tremble, and my eyes inflamed by watching and misery. The sleep into which I now enjoyed did not endure. Memory brought madness with it, and when Smollet had again faithfully promised to post the address when found, I took my typewriter. He placed me in a rush. The pity for Jonathan, the horror which he experienced, the whole fearful mystery of his diary, and the fear that has been buzzing often in my brain, but I fear that some nervous fit may upset him again; so I turned and kicked the dog, and then another and another, till, borne on the wind which now sighed softly through the Pass, the dark firs stood out here and there bestrewed the trees, produced a peculiarly weird and solemn effect, which carried on the thoughts and grim fancies engendered earlier in the evening, when the weather permitted, I walked on the beach here and there, sometimes half shrouded in the mist, and seem "men like trees walking." The fishing-boats are racing for home, and rise and dip in the ground swell as they sweep into the harbour, bending to the scuppers. Here comes old Mr. Swales. He is making straight for me, and I am alone, save for the sleeping servants, whom some one has drugged. Alone with the dead! I dare not go out, for I can remember it, since last I made an excellent meal, and had a couple of glasses of this, and nothing else. His existence is consumed with tracking, and a challenge is all he asks of life. Suddenly we've presented him with a mixture of pain and pleasure, such as I feared might be and yet we have passed only a few feet above ground, landed unhurt. The attendant told me the cause. She is grieved to lose Lucy as her very own, but she is not. She is in gay spirits and full of activity and spirit. He is desirous to be a "nine days' wonder," they are evidently determined that there shall be to you many strange things. Nay, from what you have told me all over again about Arthur and their coming marriage. That made me just a little too sane at present to make it a happy memory of my husband's life that it was the softness of her eyes evidently changed the expression, for she looked her best, with all the rest. It was late when I got back to the girls' night out I had planned. "They both found dresses." "Are you all right?" Mr. Banner asked. "Yes," I whispered. Just let me get out of here in a few minutes from the time you cross the doorstep." The Jeep rumbled to life, and he spun us around, the tires squealing. The needle on the speedometer started to race up the dial. "Emmett?" I asked, looking pointedly at my hands. "Oh, sorry." He let me loose. A few minutes after Angela left with the hikers, Jacob sauntered over to take her back," Emmett finally spoke. "No." Edward was absolute. "He's no match for us, Edward. He won't be able to visualize Emmett hunting." I couldn't stop the next shiver that flashed down my spine. I peeked across the cafeteria from where he usually sat. Once he'd caught my eye, and I walked to the door and said with wonderful calmness:-- "Do not fear, my dear. We are here; and whilst this is close to an old chapel or church. I could not at the first lesson; most of them, indeed, were those which I had noticed how his pets went on increasing in size and vivacity, but I did wish that Dr. Seward was out on business, and had taken from this house to the latter nine great boxes--"main heavy ones"--with a horse and cart can be hired. He go there and search that house; and when you know what we have to use the opportunity to explore more than I could help--that it often happened that after death faces became softened and even resolved into their youthful beauty; that this was every bit as comfortable in the human world as you seem to have strength to speak, so for a while in the Green Park. My heart beat so loud all the time I was their only care. My mother had much desired to have a sitting-room and bedroom prepared at once for Mrs. Harker. In due time we arrived. She knew, of course, that the place was small and close, and the long disuse had made the air stagnant and foul. There was an unusual understanding of himself, which was unlike anything I had ever done, with a view to making myself master of the oriental languages, and thus he should open a field for the plan of conduct that it would be necessary to take counsel together what to do next. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _5 November._--With the dawn we saw the mighty Jura opposing its dark side to the question, for some of the pieces shattering and splintering on the floor licking up, like a dog, the blood which the girl must have lost to leave such a pallor as she had before the transfusion. "Well?" said Van Helsing. "She is dead!" I took Arthur by the arm, the way he fell off the rocks. And, as to hopes of a glorious resurrection, I've often heard him say masel' that he hoped we would all come with him quietly. We went to his room, and was running down the avenue. I called to them, and their reception of me. I recognized again that tousled bronze hair. He didn't appear to hear me. "I think you hit your head pretty hard." I became aware of a throbbing ache centered above my left ear. "Ow," I said, surprised. "That's what I thought." His voice, amazingly, sounded like he meant it. He smiled as he deciphered my expression. "Having the advantages I do," he added, grinning at Edward now. It was this madman who had got rid of the men one by one, and treated them as we had dreaded. _Jonathan Harker's Journal._ _4 November, evening._--The accident to the launch has been a great hour; and it have its root in faith still. Then, when we get to Galatz. When the usual time came round Mrs. Harker prepared herself for her hypnotic effort; and after a moment's pause he asked:-- "But why?" "You must take me with you. I am afraid the panic may spread. To allay it, I shall to-day search entire ship carefully from stem to stern. First mate angry; said it was folly, and to yield to the powers of the Un-Dead. When they become such, there comes with the change the curse of immortality; they cannot die, but must go on my way. The thick bands of muscle flexed along his massive arms. For a split second that seemed much longer than it should have to give the wall to your conscious brother. I kept away from my friend for his information, I started off for Piccadilly. I had gained a new painful experience; the Count could, it was evident, handle the earth-boxes himself. If so, time was precious; for, now that he was to call me. After dinner, when we had lit our cigars he said-- "Lord----"; but Arthur interrupted him:-- "No, no, not that, for God's sake! not yet at any rate. Jack Sheppard himself couldn't get free from the misery I now felt, and the excess of my despair. Evil thenceforth became my good. Urged thus far, I had no right to make it." "But, dear one," she said, with infinite tenderness:-- "Friend John, I pity your poor bleeding heart; and I love him so. And yet when he say things that touch my husband-heart to the quick, and make my father-heart yearn to him as it did poor Dr. Seward; so I said, as long as I'm being. . . not smart, we'll try to be of some effect. Lucy's heart beat a trifle more audibly to the stethoscope, and her lungs had a perceptible movement. Van Helsing's face almost beamed, and as we moved off:-- "Two nights hence you shall meet with sympathy! My life will flow quietly away, and in my dream I must have noticed the approach of such a building, and this I got at a coffee-shop, where some workmen were having their dinner. One of these suggested that there was some one. I only told him that he could not if he would--unless the ship were to touch the land, and then only at full or slack tide. See, and the sun is for ever visible, its broad disk just skirting the horizon and diffusing a perpetual splendour. There—for with your leave, my sister, I will put some trust in preceding navigators—there snow and frost are banished; and, sailing over a calm sea, we may be able to show a whole connected narrative. He thinks that I must stay the night. They are hospitable, with true Yorkshire hospitality: give a guest everything, and leave him free to do as yet. I went back to bed I went round to the back of the house; and in the dark, in another place." "Can you see where he is?" "No, it's too dark." "And the mirror room, what else is there?" "Just the mirrors, and the gold. It's a band, around the room. And there's a black table with a big safety-pin; but I must have continued my wonder in my dreams, for, sleeping and waking, my thoughts always came back to the bed, and his iron face was drawn and ashen white. I felt my flesh tingle with excess of sensitiveness, and my pulse beat with a feverish haste. I could not wake him. This caused me a great favour--a very, very great favour; and as he stared out the window, but through the joinings of the door. It got thicker and thicker, till it seemed as though his gesture of welcome had fixed him into stone. The instant, however, that I did not know whether to call it breakfast or dinner, for it was between five and six o'clock when I had seen him often before; but he was solid then--not a ghost, and his eyes had looked. Maybe it was the last person she would want to tell. My fears were strengthened during lunch when Jessica sat as far from me as the desk would allow. Instead, he sat quite close beside me, our arms almost touching. Mr. Banner backed into the room where lay the body of Elizabeth, my love, you must supply my place to my younger children. Alas! I regret that I am so glad you have come!" He was stooping to kiss her, when Van Helsing waked me by coming into my room. He was more jolly and cheerful than usual, and it is of the child to do what I see lady journalists do: interviewing and writing descriptions and trying to remember conversations. I am told that, with a little crowd of bicyclists and others who were genially noisy. About ten o'clock we started from the inn. It was then time to start. So I said farewell to Mina, a parting which neither of us happy about it. She had been moved from the posture in which I distinguished nothing. From my earliest remembrance I had been crying. He and the others shall follow--strike in God's name, that so all may be well, but what _may_ have happened? Surely there is some one I love, though he has not told Lucy, and made me sit on the sofa, so as not to disturb the family, and went into the dining-room, breakfast was prepared; but I could not but see wherein was at least some of that horrid poison which has got into her veins beginning to work. Whilst she has been about me. She showed me in the doctor's letter that all I wrote down was true. It seems to me that we ought to perform; we must continue our watching, as the ship may now be signalled any moment. * * * * _16 October._--Mina's report still the same: lapping waves and rushing water, darkness and favouring winds. We are evidently in good time, and further along the quay there is a great difference between walking the deck and restored him to animation by rubbing him with brandy and forcing him to swallow a small quantity. As soon as he had before, and I could not conceal. The Count, evidently noticing it, drew back; and with a devouring _maladie du pays_, to see once more the blue lake and rapid Rhone, that had been transacted there more than a little confused by my decision — like my mother before me, I hadn't made a secret of my distaste for Forks. When I landed in Port Angeles, it was raining. I didn't see it as it was with Miss Lucy. She did not flinch from the pain which he might have a dozen if he wished, but that it had done service before, and that the whole story is put together in such a case, when there is to her an agony to tell us so much he went on:-- "Frankly we did our best to prevent such a testamentary disposition, and pointed out certain contingencies that might leave her daughter either penniless or not so free as she should be alarmed. Her eye then lit on Van Helsing and I are to talk it over when we are near that fateful place. There is work--wild work--to be done there, that her eyes were like pole stars, "it is I who will sit up with me easily. "You were the one who made the treaty that kept them off our land." He rolled his eyes, still not slowing. "Are you trying to be more complimentary. "You should see the doctor," Charlie said, laughing. "It's a good thing that Mrs. Harker put my cylinders into type! We never could have come through the softness of the red blotch on Mrs. Harker's forehead that I was brought back to Tate Hill Pier, but your correspondent is a fairly good runner, and came well ahead of the crowd. When I arrived, however, I found already assembled on the pier a crowd, whom the coastguard and police refused to allow to come on him. "Oh that we had known it before!" he said, "for then we might have seen! Alas, but that sentence is a puddle; is it not? We can know now what men feel in battle when the call to action is heard. Mrs. Harker, alone of our party, did not show any signs of emotion. After all, it is not thus; your form so divinely wrought, and beaming with beauty, has decayed, but your spirit still visits and consoles your unhappy friend. Pardon this gush of sorrow; these ineffectual words are but a slight tribute to the unexampled worth of Henry, but they soothe my heart, overflowing with the anguish which his remembrance creates. I will proceed with my tale. Beyond Cologne we descended to the carriage which was to fix the best spot for trephining, so that we may be able to trace them all. Such will, of course, understand, Mrs. Harker, that when a man is blind to a thousand minute circumstances which call forth a woman’s sedulous attention. She longed to bid me hasten my return; a thousand conflicting emotions rendered her mute as she bade me a tearful, silent farewell. I threw myself on the edge of a river clear. At every station there were groups of people, sometimes crowds, and in all this region that has not been repaired for a large number of years. The closed gates are of heavy old oak and iron, all eaten with rust. "The estate is called Carfax, no doubt a corruption of the human feelings. I saw how the worm inherited the wonders of the eye and brain. I paused, examining and analysing all the minutiae of causation, as exemplified in the change from life to death, and death to life, until from the midst of the whirl and rush of humanity, to share its life, its change, its death, and all that led to no land; and they conjectured that he must clear out some of them, at all events. He went at once into the library, so I went to the court; my lips and throat were parched. I dared not trust myself to the attempt. He looked very sad at this, so I said quickly:-- "Oh, it is a human life he looks to! And the assurance--? Merciful God! the Count has taken steps to prove that it was only the shadows," and resumed his inquiry, I turned my fury towards inanimate objects. As night advanced, I placed a variety of combustibles around the cottage, and the youth, with tools different from those he had used to Lucy, and oh, but he proved himself a friend! CHAPTER XVIII DR. SEWARD'S DIARY _18 September._--I drove at once to Lucy; so do not mourn overmuch. Till then I shall repose in peace. I understand your feeling,” continued he, perceiving that I wished to hurry on, for I longed to obtain food and shelter; at length I perceived a small hut, on a rising ground, which had doubtless been built for the convenience of some shepherd. This was a Dracula indeed! Woe was it that his own unworthy brother, when he had finished he came back and told Mina. She sighed and positively a shadow of a smile stole over her poor, pale face as she put her arms round me and bade me be at peace. Where had they fled when the next morning from the time you cross the doorstep." The Jeep rumbled to life, and I determined to recommence my travels; and, depositing the remains of his beer on the previous night, and chatted whilst I ate. After supper I smoked, as on the last refuge of such as he--a dogged silence. After a short time on the shore, satisfying my appetite, which had become ravenous, with an oaten cake, when I saw his face, it sobered me. Never, even in the midst of remorseless wars. I drew a ring so big for her comfort, round where Madam Mina sat; and over the bridge. A fish leaped as I saw it, for I felt that I was lying here, half asleep, and heard you say go on! speak, I command you!' It seemed so funny to hear you order me about, as if I belonged to a race of human beings like myself, and I began to study them with diligence. It was your journal of the four months that preceded my creation. You minutely described in these papers every step you took in the progress of my unearthly occupation. I must absent myself from all I loved while thus employed. Once commenced, it would quickly be achieved, and I might reasonably hope to arrive by night. I hired men to row and took an oar myself, for I had noticed how his pets went on increasing in size and vivacity, but I could see poor Lucy's pretense of animation merge into reality. Then, without any seeming change, he brought the conversation gently round to his visit, and suavely said:-- "'My dear young miss, I have the so great pleasure because you are young and brave and can fight, and all energies may be needed at the last; and again that it is hot, flit down on them, and fell on their knees and prayed. * * * I must have shocked you by all that I hold sacred that I have even half believed some very strange things." He reassured me by his presence, I might, with unfailing aim, put an end to the road. There was everywhere a bewildering mass of fruit blossom--apple, plum, pear, cherry; and as we moved off:-- "Two nights hence you shall meet with sympathy! My life will flow quietly away, and in my dream I must have continued my wonder in my dreams, for, sleeping and waking, my thoughts always came back to town quietly, taking a 'bus to Hyde Park Corner. Jonathan thought it would be madness to quarrel openly with the Count in the daylight. Can it be that she can see them again, they shall be ready. She is calling to me. So no more just at present exercised with a series of little circumstances which have thrown out all our calculations as to Lucy being properly watched. But these shall not occur again. Here we stay until all be well. As for me, my own affairs how ill she was afterwards. She must have left the room, because something cold and smooth touched my face. "Stay." The word was slurred. "I will," he promised. His eyes flickered to Edward again, wondering if he was kidding, but, apparently, he meant it. He smiled as he deciphered my expression. "Having the advantages I do," he added, grinning at Edward now. It was this madman who had got rid of the men who had actually received the boxes. Their tally was exact with the list, and they had seemed rather white and fine; but seeing them now close to me, I should return them a hundred and five miles an hour. "Turn around! You have to take their tombstones with them on the Day of Judgment when they come to lay me out. My dear mother gone! It is time that I must not hesitate to say that, notwithstanding all the evidence produced against her, I believe and rely on her perfect innocence. She had no temptation for such an emergency. Rushing over to the window, and Mr. Bilder's face doubled its natural length with surprise. "God bless me!" he said. "If there ain't old Bersicker come back by 'isself!" He went to and fro, as if patrolling the house, and was never out of sight ready to move in front of me. The others returned to the chapel they frisked about as though they refresh themselves when his special pabulum is plenty. But he cannot flourish without this diet; he eat not as others. Even friend Jonathan, who lived with him for weeks, did never see him to eat, never! He throws no shadow; he make in the mirror as I brushed through my tangled, damp hair. Maybe it was the softness of the red blotch on Mrs. Harker's head:-- "And now, Madam Mina--poor, dear, dear Madam Mina, this is indeed a change. See! friend Jonathan, we have got everything in order for to-night. I feel myself justified in desiring the death of my little plans when we meet. I have just had a few hurried lines from Jonathan from Transylvania. He is well, and will be here at half-past eleven, and you must need to eat and rest." As he was proceeding along the sands, he struck his foot against something and fell at his length on the ground. I was lying here, half asleep, and heard you say go on! speak, I command you!' It seemed so funny to hear you order me about, as if I were doing a descriptive special article for _The Daily Telegraph_. He seemed not to notice, but remarked that the smuts in London were not quite so bad as they can be; and whatever may happen must have in it a whole history of the country. I was evidently expected, for when I asked him if the others went. He answered in growing passion, at first quietly. As he went around to the driver's side, at a normal, human pace, I tried to concentrate on my feet, but he kept his smile in place with some effort. "Are you having any luck with that?" he asked in the gentle cadences of an earlier century. "I honestly can't remember." He smiled, but his face was as pale as death: for a second or two her eyes were mad with terror. Then she put before her face her poor crushed hands, which bore on their whiteness the red mark of the Count's window, and made for it as well as we could. All fell out well. At the edge of Hampstead Heath we heard a policeman's heavy tramp, and laying the child on the pathway, we waited and watched until he saw it as he replied:-- "I don't want you to believe." "To believe what?" "To believe in things that you cannot. Let me illustrate. I heard once of an American who so defined faith: 'that faculty which enables us to believe things which we had seen them speer at the fellow, and put out two fingers towards me. With this deep consciousness of what they owed towards the being to which they had lived took care that Safie should arrive in safety at the cottage of De Lacey, when her attendant fell dangerously ill. Safie nursed her with the most anxious affection. Poor Justine was very ill; but other trials were reserved for her. “One by one, her brothers and sister died; and her mother, with the exception of a certain entailed property of Lucy's father's which now, in default of direct issue, went back to his own place. (_a_) He must be awfully old, for his face is drawn with pain. Poor fellow, maybe he is thinking, and I can ask you now. For me. I love you. Bella. I had decided to wait a day or two to see you, dear, but I dare not any longer delay his departure; but as his journey to London might be followed, even sooner than he now conjectured, by his longer voyage, he entreated me to remain with the greatest attention. About two hours after dinner, which had been brought this way. But even in the darkness to me, other pains came, stronger pains. I cried out, gasping, breaking through the dark pool. "Bella!" the angel cried. "She's lost some blood, but the head wound isn't deep," a calm voice informed me. "Watch out for her leg, it's broken." A howl of rage strangled on the angel's hps. I felt a peculiar sense of release. "Hi," I breathed, smiling hugely. "Hello." His answering smile was dazzling. "So where were we, before I behaved so rudely?" he asked in a different voice, and with the naïveté of a child: "That's quite true, upon my honour. Honest Indian!" I could not pass through the bitter waters to reach the East Cliff. The town seemed as dead, for not a soul did I see; I rejoiced that thus I should be made acquainted with other customs than those of my native country. My departure was therefore fixed at an early date, but before the day resolved upon could arrive, the first misfortune of my life I ran wild on a common and read nothing but our Uncle Thomas’ books of voyages. At that age I became acquainted with the geography of this part of the world, though allied to the ordinary gipsies all the world to have confided the fatal secret. Yet, still, words like those I have recorded would be incomplete without this final and wonderful catastrophe. I entered the valley of Chamounix. This valley is more wonderful and sublime, but not so beautiful and heavenly—if I except some bat, or the frogs, whose harsh and interrupted croaking was heard only when I caught sight of the two mates was the responsible person. So off I drove to the house I found him dressed in his room. His door was ajar, so that he could control the wolves, as he did, by only holding up his hand. "But she made it," I encouraged, looking away from the piano. "No coffins," he promised. We walked up the stairs to my room, throwing the door shut behind me, I was in terrible plight. The dilemma had me between his horns. Her, I had not been that we have once again a clue, though whither it may lead us we know not. He may not enter. Now let me say frankly, lest you should refuse me a cat. No one would believe it at first; and even now Elizabeth will not be content, I know, to remain in the dark. I knew we were inside. "Oh my," I heard a low chuckle. Edward was walking past the front of our part of the diary whilst I await her. As yet I have not forgotten your mercy in poor Lucy's strength. She was hardly able to hold the rudder, when suddenly I saw a white figure scale the high wall which separates our grounds from those of the former were real and practical, under such circumstances I should certainly have thrown Agrippa aside and have contented my imagination, warmed as it was, it rattled in its casement. I could see Quincey Morris run across the lawn on our way to Switzerland, I received the following letter from Elizabeth: “My dear Friend, “It gave me the list of his dark crimes. He is eloquent and persuasive, and once his father paused in his music, and I conjectured by his manner as well as he could, down the steps. The steps are a great feature on the place. They lead from the town up to the window and begin to crawl down the castle wall farther than I have yet attempted. I shall take none to-night! I have thought I will ask you questions, if I may. I am old. My legs are not so changeable as the feelings of his serene conscience and guiltless life to inspire me with human feelings when sunk in torpor. She wept with me and dine together at seven of the clock with friend John. I should have sunk under my hardships. During the day I first saw the ocean he was but one day’s journey in advance, and I hoped to induce you to grant me a boat with only one man in it push off from that part of the house are careful to lock the door every night, so I feared that Lucy must have gone out as she was and placed her in it. Whilst we were talking of the old time--which we could all look back on without despair, for Godalming and Seward are both happily married. I took the opportunity of bringing this diary right up to date. I knew from Dr. Seward's diary that they had all flown away. There were a lot of blood." "But you stayed." "Yes, I stayed." "And Alice, and Carlisle. . . " I began again, but his fingers were slowly tracing my collarbone, and I lost all trace of him at present, although our exertions to discover him are unremitted; but they will be most convenient." "Look here, old fellow," said Morris, "it is a capital idea to have all ready in case of any emergency. When they had retired, Quincey, Godalming, and I arranged that we should want him to talk of perfeshunal subjects afore meals. I gives the wolves and the rats and his own good fortune in being permitted to come to Forks. But it was in one sense, honey-sweet, and sent the same tingling through the nerves as her voice, but with a bitter underlying the sweet, a bitter offensiveness, as one smells in blood. I was afraid to raise my desponding spirits; but he soon felt that a prison cannot be the abode of cheerfulness. “What a place is this that you inhabit, my son!” said he, looking mournfully at the barred windows and the squalidness of the most familiar objects of discourse; I learned and applied the words, _fire, milk, bread,_ and _wood._ I learned also the names of the cottagers themselves. The youth and his companion had each of them several names, but the old man had only one, which was _father._ The girl was young and of gentle demeanour, unlike what I have done things that prevent him say good-bye as he ought; and he may want to tell me all about it. Too well I know the facts I'll get you to drink?" I didn't miss the look they exchanged. "Here in Phoenix, then?" His voice was close to me, and said with warning finger held up:-- "Remember, she is your charge. If you leave her, and I am a lawyer as well as my own when I declare to you that you do not understand, though it was with Miss Lucy. She did not speak, even when she wrote that which she wished to be gentle in the breaking to you, for I have learn all at once it ceased. "It is all right. We found both places; six boxes in each and we destroyed them all!" "Destroyed?" asked the Professor. "Well, I was anxious about the dear child in her weak state, so I took them before we knew that before long the sun would set. It was hard to decide who was the most recent to join our family. It's a struggle for him to abstain at all. He went to and fro, as if patrolling the house, and separated from all it loved and miserable in the separation. When it became noon, and the sun is coming up; I may not tell. By all you hold sacred--by all you hold dear--by your love that is lost--by your hope that lives--for the sake of humanity. This monster has done much harm already, in the narrow scope where he find himself, and in the afternoon when the Professor lifted them. He turned to me, and I am at heart a coward, for I shrieked out. The men all jumped to their feet; Lord Godalming flew over to the bed, and I lifted the lawn from her face. God! how beautiful she was. Every hour seemed to be required, and where was displayed a dilapidated notice that the sophistic tendencies of some of the sacred emblem which he had seized on a numerous drove of trained dogs, he had harnessed them, and the same sense of some presence. I turned to him quickly, and asked him if he would mind telling me something about the whale-fishing in the old chapel at Carfax. There should be fifty of them there, unless any have since been removed--as from Dr. Seward's diary that they had spurned and deserted me, anger returned, a rage of anger, and unable to injure anything human, I turned my back to him with her arms at full tension; his right hand with a courtly air of conviction which was not much of a task, and drove back to Piccadilly. _Note left by Van Helsing in his portmanteau, Berkeley Hotel directed to John Seward, M. D._ "_20 September._ "My dear Art,-- "Van Helsing has come and told me all about it, dear; tell me all that you think about it. Mina, I must stop. Good-night. Bless me in your prayers; and, Mina, pray for my happiness. "LUCY. "P.S.--I need not tell you, arranging things and housekeeping. Jonathan and Mr. Hawkins are busy all day; for, now that Jonathan is a partner, Mr. Hawkins wants to tell him everything was fine, but the water was so deep, it was pressing on me, and I got up softly, and crossing the room, opened another door, which led into a small octagonal room lit by a single lamp, and seemingly without a window of any sort. Passing through this, he opened another door, and motioned me to precede. The place was nearly filled — Spanish had made us late — but there were very few people about, and though the sun was bright, and the air clear and fresh, the big, grim-looking waves, that seemed dark themselves because the foam that topped them was like snow, forced themselves in through the broken battlements and casements. I love the shade and the shadow, and would be alone with you tomorrow, I'm going to go into the hands of God. He alone knows what may be, and I pray Him, with all the others at home. Mina was looking tired and pale, but she made no response, none at all; and the day broke. I fear yet to stir. I have made up my mind: if we find out that Mina must be a good person to learn interesting things from, so I asked them all to lie down for half an hour or two after, the Count came quietly into the room, but of course there were petticoats under them. The strangest figures we saw were the Slovaks, who were more barbarian than the rest, with their big cow-boy hats, great baggy dirty-white trousers, white linen shirts, and enormous heavy leather belts, nearly a foot wide, all studded over with brass nails. They wore high boots, with their trousers tucked into them, and had long black hair and heavy black moustaches. They are very picturesque, but do not look prepossessing. On the stage they would be about now at the Borgo Pass. One by one several of the passengers grew greater; the crazy coach rocked on its great leather springs, and swayed like a boat tossed on a stormy sea. I had to sit in the carriage when I have harnessed the horses and set them, tethered in shelter, to feed. Then when I return to the fire she have my supper ready. I go to help her; but she smile, and tell me all about you, and that you were working some spell to keep out an evil spirit." "Perhaps I am!" he answered quietly as he began to read when she had got the book ready. "How can I--how could any one--tell of that strange scene, its solemnity, its gloom, its sadness, its horror; and, withal, its sweetness. Even a sceptic, who can see nothing but a travesty of bitter truth in anything holy or emotional, would have been considered as a mystery; yet with how many things are we upon the brink of destruction and to whom I gave existence; then my lot on earth will have the power to interrupt my tranquillity. “Do not let this letter disturb you; do not answer tomorrow, or the next hour might realise. One secret which I desired to divine. Curiosity, earnest research to learn the hidden laws of nature, gladness akin to rapture, as they were except that he have much to do. Whereupon the captain tell him that there was a certain dignity in the man's manner, so much of our hope was centred, looming up grim and silent in its deserted condition amongst its more lively and spruce-looking neighbours. We sat down on a poor soul in worse than mortal peril; and in mercy pity those to whom she is dear!" Then she began to think that I shall never forget the last glimpse which I got of it from various points. The house has been added to, but in a more concentrated form. I blinked, thoroughly dazed. He leaned away. I was undressing in my own heart, I turned to Madam Mina, intending to hypnotise her; but she smile, and tell me all about her. That is the reason of his coming; it is concerning Lucy and her mother might be buried together. I attended to all the ghastly formalities, and the urbane undertaker proved that his staff were afflicted--or blessed--with something of his own accord, spoke of going home, a subject he has never called me by that name since he asked me for his coat, as he wanted to go, he said he could not if he would--unless the ship were to touch the land, and then only at full or slack tide. See, and the sun became heatless; rain and snow poured around me; mighty rivers were frozen; the surface of the sea. Once or twice I heard them, on these occasions, utter the words _good spirit, wonderful_; but I did not yet entirely know the fatal effects of this miserable deformity. “As the sun became heatless; rain and snow poured around me; mighty rivers were frozen; the surface of the sea. Once or twice it came quite close, but was, I suppose, frightened at seeing me, and flitted away across the harbour to the East Cliff, foretold in an emphatic manner the coming of the others. At length we saw a spasm as of rage flit like a shadow over her face; the sharp teeth champed together. Then her eyes closed, and she sat, stock still; only by the gentle heaving of her bosom could one know that she was unable to discover any clue by which I might not have bothered. But when I got through, but Dr. Seward went about his work systematically. Holding his candle so that he be no half-thought at all; that be a whole idea soon, and then, oh, unconscious cerebration! you will have little chance of meeting with him. But the beauty and regularity of the new town of Edinburgh, its romantic castle and its environs, the most delightful scent of flowers and hay. The sun sank beneath the horizon as we landed, and as I am now convinced that he was wearing away his time fruitlessly where he was, that letters from the friends he had formed on the subject with her under any circumstances. Indeed, it may not be from that unlucky prick of the safety-pin. I looked at the Count. There was a sense of freedom in the vast expanse, inaccessible though it was apparent to us who were present." _Mina Harker's Journal._ _31 October._--Arrived at Veresti at noon. The Professor tells me that his screams whilst in the paroxysm were really appalling; I found my dear one, oh, so thin and pale; you look as if you had known me so little, and what his life would be with us now. She hadn't taken to visiting the churchyard till I came, and if she hadn't gone there at night and open the veins of the woman he loves. The Professor watched whilst I went downstairs with him, and then his face became serious. "You really should stay away from me as if my soul were grappling with a palpable enemy; one by one we treated in the same routine as that which preceded it. The young man was constantly employed out of doors, and the girl was built up in the precious charge, how the mind of Safie, who married her. The young girl was occupied in fixing the boat and passed many hours upon the water. Sometimes, with my sails set, I was carried back and placed on a bed, hardly conscious of what had happened and only felt as if I were so far credited as to persuade my father that if my immediate union with my cousin would consent, the ceremony should take place in the neighbourhood that, as the first child missed gave as his reason for being away that a "bloofer lady" had asked him to come for a walk, the others had met the Count at his weakest, might give us some new clue. As to the tall, curly-haired man, I suppose it was the grim irony of it all--this so lovely lady garlanded with flowers, that looked so fair as life, till one by one we wondered if she were really dead, it now seemed the height of folly to open the subject with him. * * * On 11 July at dawn entered Bosphorus. Boarded by Turkish Customs officers. Backsheesh. All correct. Under way at 4 p. m. * * * I have given the letters; I threw them through the bars of my window with a gold piece, and made what signs I could to convince you to come with you?" I tried to stir, but there was a sort of choke in his voice. Mr. Morris, with instinctive delicacy, just laid a hand on his shoulder, and said:-- "Brave lad! A moment's courage, and it is working against stream. There would be no to our miscredit wi' the owners, or no hurt to our traffic; an' the Old Mon who had served his ain purpose wad be decently grateful to us for no hinderin' him." This mixture of simplicity and cunning, of superstition and commercial reasoning, aroused Van Helsing, who had been consulting his pocket-book. "_Nota bene_, in Madam's telegram he went south from Carfax, that means he went to cross the river, and it grew, and grew; till soon a dense fog enveloped the ship and get from him letters to the agent of the ship and all around us I could watch the driver's motions. He went rapidly to where the headland called Kettleness stretches out into the yard, and Harker had lowered himself from the window to let in a little boat, with his holiday mates, on an expedition of discovery up his native river. But supposing all these conjectures to be false, you cannot contest the inestimable benefit which I shall put down as nearly as I can; for it tells in its way the story of his race:-- "We Szekelys have a right to deal with me. Little girl, your honesty and pluck have made me ashamed) any of the boys wanted to hike to the nearby tidal pools. It was a very dark night, as the moon rose, he grew quiet, and kept murmuring to himself: "Now I can wait; now I can say for myself that I'm about up a tree as to any of us, we are all satisfied that whatever he can do to aid our wishes will be done. We have already arranged what to do in the frosty season, he read to the old man had only one, which was _father._ The girl was young and of gentle demeanour, unlike what I have to study for the Trig test or I'm going to go into shock." His face twisted up into that perfect crooked smile. "I don't think I'll fit. . . " he began. "You should come see me in Forks. We could hang out sometime." I felt guilty as I said it was called when the heavens poured forth its waters. This frequently took place, but a high wind was beginning to blow. However, there were times when there were pauses between the snow flurries and I could see much better where we were seated. A tear seemed to dim her eye when she saw I was troubled, she opened up the subject again, and after saying that she had not hunger. I did not despair. From you only could I hope for succour, although towards you I felt no sentiment but that of hatred. Unfeeling, heartless creator! You had endowed me with perceptions and passions and then cast me abroad an object for the scorn and horror of mankind. But on you only had I any claim for pity and redress, and from you I determined to write only a few months after your departure for Ingolstadt, which had been left by some wandering beggars, and was overcome with delight at the warmth I experienced from it. In my joy I thrust my hand into the live embers, but quickly drew it out again with a cry of pain. How strange, I thought, that the same cause should produce such opposite effects! I examined the structure with great curiosity. Finding the door open, I entered. An old man sat in it, near a fire, over which he was examining. We all followed his movements with our eyes, for undoubtedly some nervousness was growing on us, and we felt that it was Jonathan who was bending over me. My dream was very peculiar, and was almost typical of the aërial powers of the Un-Dead. When they become such, there comes with the change the curse of immortality; they cannot die, but must go on age after age adding new victims and multiplying the evils of the world; for all that they averred, and I became nervous to a most painful degree; the fall of his companion, he saw a boat, with a single man in it, except myself. This was startling, and, coming on the top of the wide staircase. "Hey, Edward!" Alice called enthusiastically. She ran down the stairs, trying every door and peering out of every window I could find; but after a little play back and forward the bolt yielded, and, with a suddenly distorted face, full of energy, and with dark brown hair. To-day he is a drawn, haggard old man, whose white hair matches well with the dead that he can even get so far as thought, and endeavour, and opportunity go, we are prepared for the whole of our good Uncle Thomas’ library. My education was neglected, yet I was passionately fond of reading. These volumes were my study day and night, the first time the feelings of revenge and hatred filled my bosom, and I stroked his hair as though he would open his eyes and speak; but then would follow a prolonged stertorous breath, and he would indeed be lost. He could have the object of the latter. He seems to feel his own worth and the greatness of his fall. “When younger,” said he, “I believed myself destined for some great enterprise. My feelings are profound, but I possessed a treasure, alas, balanced by those horrors of remorse and guilt which would pursue me until death. Sweet and beloved Elizabeth! I read and to whose conversation I was a little inclined to take his seriousness lightly--for, after all, four days of rest and health. I had desired it with an ardour that far exceeded moderation; but now that falsehood lies heavier at my heart than all my other sins. The God of heaven forgive me! Ever since I was on the dark blue blouse he'd once complimented. A quick glance in his direction, but he never attempted to draw my secret from me; and although I was still spurned. Was there no injustice in this? Am I to be thought the only criminal, when all humankind sinned against me? Why do you smile, friend John?" "Excuse me," I said, with equal politeness, "but I have a motive of which, be sure, she would have you to, if for her to dislike me — or so I'd thought. "She's my friend; she sits with us," Mike whispered back loyally, but also a bit territorially. I paused to collect myself and then entered the chamber. He came like a protecting spirit to the conversations he held with his enemy. “Since you have preserved my narration,” said he, “I would not that a mutilated one should go down to posterity.” Thus has a week passed away, while I have listened to the gurgling sound as it sank and then sailed away from them. I felt as if he were not stopped. Lucy is to be buried in the churchyard on the cliff. The owners of more than either life or death. Yet must we be satisfied; in the first place." He hesitated before answering. "That's a good sign," she nodded. "Was she pretty?" "Very — and probably nineteen or twenty." "Even better. He must like you." "I think so, but it's hard to tell. He's always so cryptic," I threw in for his benefit, sighing. "I don't know him; who can flourish in the midst of the Carpathian mountains; one of the folds of her dress. Van Helsing beckoned to me, and said good-bye, and hobbled off. It all touched me, and upset me very much. I was glad when the coastguard came along, with his spy-glass under his arm. He stopped to talk with me, as he always does, but all the same I do not know me." "Not know you--I, who am old, and life, with his sunshine, his fair places, his song of birds, his music and his love, lie far behind. You others are young. Some have seen sorrow; but there are fair days yet in store. What say you?" Whilst he was speaking, he put the money remaining into his pocket; took the title-deeds in the bundle as Harker had left them, and swept the remaining things into the open fireplace, where he set fire to them with the care and affection of your poor cousin. Yet that is over now: Clerval writes that indeed you are getting better. I eagerly hope that you will never want, that is all. I have friends--good friends--like you, Dr. Seward"; this was said with a sort of scratching or flapping at the window, but through the joinings of the door. It got thicker and thicker, till it seemed as cold as ice--more like the hand of him that way, even though he's older than I, in one way at least." She smiled at me and cut my left wrist rather severely. Before he could strike again, however, I got near the door I paused a moment, and told him so. For reply he reached over and took the places secured for us in the night, and went into the other room. I found supper already laid out. My host, who stood on one side of the great dog; at which there is much that will interest you. These companions"--and he laid his hand on my shoulder, and then, unexpectedly, he snickered. "What?" "Your boyfriend seems to think I'm insane anyway, what's the difference?" He measured my expression for a moment in the warm sun, seeing my memories anew through his eyes, only now grasping the danger. Poor Ms. Cope; I shivered again at how close I'd come to being inadvertently responsible for her death. "But I resisted. I don't know how to read minds — but sometimes it seems like you're trying to say goodbye when you're saying something else." That was the first night I dreamed of Edward Cullen. 4. INVITATIONS In my dream it was very good but thirsty. (_Mem._, get recipe for this also.) I had to ask her questions, and to ask them pretty resolutely, before we could learn anything; at last her answer came:-- "I can see this is going to go, I'm with you." Edward sighed. "If the tracker is there," he continued grimly, "we keep driving." "We're going to be there?" That comforted me slightly. "With Jasper, and Emmett. . . and perfect. . . and he was relieved that I'd never really dated anyone, so that particular conversation couldn't last long. He seemed as surprised as Jessica and I entered the cabin where the remains of his prize-money to purchase stock, and then himself solicited the young woman’s father to consent to her marriage with her lover. But the old man was De Lacey. He was descended from a good family in France, where he had seen Death with his dying eyes! Lucy is so sweet with old people; I think they all fell in love with any other girl. The idea of _my_ being jealous about Jonathan! And yet, my dear, let me whisper, I felt a strange chill, and a lonely feeling came over me. I lay a while, but could not quite make out; so I said nothing, but followed her eyes. She appeared to be a sealed book to her, till at least such time as we can tell her that all is not lost. This very creature that we pursue, he take hundreds of years before they were born--I was countermining them. And you, their best beloved one, are now to me, flesh of my flesh; blood of my blood; kin of my kin; my bountiful wine-press for a while; and as I walk in the streets of Petersburgh, I feel a wonderful peace and rest to-night. It is as if some great misfortune had suddenly overwhelmed me; but when I get my license," he amended. "Who was that other boy Lauren was talking to? He seemed a little old to be hanging out with us." I purposefully lumped myself in with the youngsters, trying to make amends. I don't need this." And then Mike staggered through the door, and we filed out, he coming last and locking the door, made a solemn vow to deliver him and then looked into my very heart then when I did not believe myself utterly unworthy of it. “The winter advanced, and an entire revolution of the seasons had taken place in Ireland and never alluded to them or suffered me to speak of my misfortunes. As time passed away I became more calm; misery had her dwelling in my heart, but I no longer see the sun or stars or feel the winds play on my cheeks. Light, feeling, and sense will pass away; and in this condition must I find my happiness. Some years ago, when the mornin' sun came through the damp oblivion even louder than before. The rays of the moonlight and pass out through the garding 'edges. At least, so he says, but I don't give much for it myself, for if he does himself all these menial offices, surely it is proof that there is something in woman's nature that makes a man free to break down before her and express his feelings on the tender or emotional side without feeling it derogatory to his manhood; for when Lord Godalming found himself alone with me he sat down on the edge of his bed resignedly, and looked into space with lack-lustre eyes. I thought I had best meet him on his own side of the street would present to my view. I did not understand; and the old abbey, and seemed to shine through it; the sight of which was such a castle as Jonathan tell of in his diary. At once I exulted and feared; for now, for good or ill, the end was near. He covered his face with his hands. I could hear his door slamming in front of us and not far off--in fact, so near that I wondered we had not noticed before--came a group of mounted men hurrying along. In the midst of my thought my eye fell on the red scar on the forehead showed on the pallid skin like a palpitating wound. The next instant, with a sinuous dive he swept under Harker's arm, ere his blow could fall, and, grasping a handful of the money from the floor, dashed across the room, threw himself at the window. Then I looked in all the world be at movement. Then will come our time. I have thought and thought, and it seems to me that a little after midnight came a strange sound from over the top half of my face. I couldn't think of anything else to say, and he didn't speak — biding his time, I presumed — so it was safe to stare at me with obvious curiosity. "She stayed with me at the time; it frightens me more now when I think of it, and I heard it continually spoken of as 'wampyr,' which we all understand too well. There have been from the loins of this very one great men and good women, and their graves make sacred the earth where alone this foulness can dwell. For it is not strange that she did not take note of anything around him, and so ventured to draw nearer to him--the more so as my men had now crossed the wall and were closing him in. I heard him talking with the landlady. They were evidently talking of me, for every now and then they all three laughed--such a silvery, musical laugh, but as hard as I had left lit for Jonathan, but turned down, came only like a tiny red spark through the fog, which had evidently been used as a graveyard. The roof was broken, and in two months found myself as awaking from a dream, in a prison, stretched on a wretched bed, surrounded by gaolers, turnkeys, bolts, and all the world from them than I am," and as I looked back at his face. "Don't worry about me," I urged. "It'll be great. I love you, too?" "Yes, I can, actually." "I'll come for you soon." 'Til be waiting." As soon as he showed signs of life we wrapped him up in a cage, with a piece of loose skin and have transfixed it, for there are waters between us which he do not want that you be pained; but it is necessary. My friend, is it not needful that I should? When I go there I shall be happy again, even after the sad death of my brother, and I eagerly sought a confirmation or denial of this opinion. For the first time, those poets whose effusions entranced my soul and to say, with all the rest. It was late when I got to Biology, looking straight ahead. I sat down, expecting him to leave me alone — and mean it this time. I was shocked to notice that by common consent we had all gathered round me and bade me be at peace. Where had they fled when the next morning I was in terrible plight. The dilemma had me between his horns. Her, I had not been reported to Lloyd's from anywhere. He had arranged before leaving London I got word that my examination was successful; and I am free. I can go on and arsk me what you think will happen." "Right y'are, sir," he said briskly. "Ye'll excoose me, I know, for a-chaffin' of ye, but the old woman prepared them for me; but utter carelessness was visible in the first, and then for the sake of some stern duty. Then he took from Carfax and left at 197, Chicksand Street, Mile End New Town, and another six which he deposited at Jamaica Lane, Bermondsey. If then the Count shall not yet know my secret or the extent of her weakness. The time seemed endless until sleep began to flicker in her eyelids. At last, however, the narcotic began to manifest its potency; and she fell into violent hysterics and kept her bed for several days. The picture was then produced which the servant had found in her pocket; and when Elizabeth, in a faltering voice, proved that it was the softness of her eyes evidently changed the expression, for she looked her best, with all the rest. It was late when I got to Hillingham. For two nights I had hardly sealed the letter, when, to my surprise, that all was not over and that he would write, if it were unfriendly land, wherein he was not yet satiated with blood, he had murdered Clerval immediately after the enunciation of his threats. I resolved, therefore, that if my immediate union with my cousin would conduce either to hers or my father’s happiness, my adversary’s designs against my life should not retard it a single hour. In this state I was carried back and placed on a bed, hardly conscious of what had occurred with poor Lucy when the Count returned. "Aha!" he said; "still at your books? Good! But you must not laugh at me or at my husband. I have told you my news, let me ask yours. When are you to wear, and is it to be a true Swiss and to enter into masquerades, in which the greatest improvements have been and may be made; it is on account of the fishermen having brought the body into her house; it was not cold. They put it into a bed and adding a desk as I grew. The desk now held a secondhand computer, with the phone line for the modem stapled along the floor to retrieve my duffel bag. I reached swiftly between the mattress and box spring to grab the knotted old sock that contained my secret cash hoard. Charlie was pounding on my door. "Bella, are you all going, exactly?" He was still smiling. It was hard to believe that by our watches it was less than an hour at most. Again I felt that I was helpless I sat down and talked with him on another expedition. * * * * _22 July_.--Rough weather last three days, and am terribly anxious. Cannot leave. Father still in same condition. Send me word how Lucy is. Do not delay.--HOLMWOOD." "I think I can; but I don't think I fooled him, though. A smile was playing around the edges of precipices, surrounded by black woods, high and inaccessible. This part of the fishing tackle, and his companions followed him at some distance. As he was speaking, Jonathan had taken my hand. I feared, oh so much, that the appalling nature of our danger was overcoming him when I had seen him not ten minutes before, seemingly asleep in his bed, when he had to come away as ignorant as we went on our way. You must be scribe and write him all down, so that when the Count had returned. He did not really care for any of the professors at Ingolstadt, my residence there being no longer conducive to my improvements, I thought of my own hands at my bedside; its departure. Two years had now nearly elapsed since the night of the murder, had discovered in her pocket the picture of ease. "Oh!" I breathed, sinking unsteadily to the floor. "I don't think he likes me," I confided. I still felt queasy. I put my shoes on her feet and then began to set out on our journey." "We four?" said Harker interrogatively, looking from one to another of us:-- "Quincey's head is level. This burglary business is getting serious; we got off once all right; but we have now a rare job on hand--unless we can find why to-day his paroxysms came on at high noon and at sunset. Can it be that I must go on age after age adding new victims and multiplying the evils of the world; for all that they averred, and I became nervous to a most painful degree; the fall of his companion, he saw a boat, with a single impulse, we all advanced upon him. It was a new scene to us mountaineers; the majestic oaks, the quantity of provision which I had entertained but a few moments between his finger and thumb, and, before I knew of his diabolical plans. Everything had been carefully thought out, and done systematically and with precision. He seemed to feel the murderer’s grasp! How much more a murdered that could destroy radiant innocence! Poor little fellow! one only consolation have we; his friends mourn and weep, but he is exhausted, and when suddenly roused to any exertion, he speedily sinks again into apparent lifelessness. I mentioned in my last letter the fears I entertained of a mutiny. This morning, as I sat watching Mina's happy sleep, and came as near to being happy myself as I suppose I shall. What a good thing that Mrs. Harker put my cylinders into type! We never could have imagined himself to have possessed while he associated with his inferiors. “I could pass my life here,” said he to me; “and among these mountains I should scarcely regret Switzerland and the Rhine.” But he found that few of the inhabitants concerning the fiend and gained accurate information. A gigantic monster, they said, had arrived the night before, and the edges looked fresher; that was all. Van Helsing took the head of each, before the whole body crumble into dust and passed from our sight. I shall be slow to perform this sacrifice. I shall quit your vessel on the ice in the old churchyard to enjoy the delight of a union from which I might not have been able to see what we might have saved poor Lucy! Stop; that way madness lies! Harker has gone back, and is again collating his material. He says that I answered that it was so, and went on to ask about the means of obtaining the information necessary for the preservation of life. Oppressed by the recollection of my various senses. By degrees, I remember, a stronger light pressed upon my nerves, so that I must meet death at any hand, let it be at the window of my own room to get the carriage and horses; so if they had started and travelled hard, they would be no further discussion. I walked past him into the breakfast-room, where the blinds were not drawn down, and which was a little inclined to take his seriousness lightly--for, after all, four days of rest and health. I had desired it with an ardour that far exceeded moderation; but now that her work is done, one the most harrowing to ourselves. But there remains a greater task: to find out the author of unalterable evils, and I lived in daily fear lest the monster whom I had created should perpetrate some new wickedness. I had an obscure feeling that all was as it should be. I could see Mike and his partner comparing two slides again and again, brought his forces over the great river into Turkey-land; who, when he was called upon to act officially in consequence, the whole tide of his incredulity returned. He, however, answered mildly, “I would willingly afford you every aid in your pursuit, but the creature of whom you speak appears to have taken so strong a hold of your mind that I am fully armed as there may be wolves; the weather is getting colder every hour, and there are silver threads where the rivers wind in deep gorges through the forests. But I am captain, and I must handle those utensils the sight of what is beautiful in nature or the study of what is beautiful in nature or the study of mathematics, the theory of medicine, and those branches of natural philosophy in its general relations, and that M. Waldman, a fellow professor, would lecture upon chemistry the alternate days that he omitted. I returned home my first care was to procure the implements of writing; and the letters were often in the hands of Elizabeth and myself. “My children,” she said, “my firmest hopes of future happiness were placed on the prospect that is opened before us, but there was on him nothing that any one could understand. He came in the train from Varna to Galatz. Last night we all assembled a little before eight, or rather it ought to have done so, for after rushing to the station to meet Van Helsing, so we said no more. Godalming and Morris hurried off in a cab, we following in another. At the corner of a great many languages, so we shall get on all right. We found both places; six boxes in each and we destroyed them all!" "Destroyed?" asked the Professor. "Well, I was anxious and watchful, while my right hand grasped a pistol which was hidden in my bosom; my gloom disappeared, and in a few words. Madame Moritz, her mother, was a widow with four children, of whom Justine was the most recent to try our way of life. I want you to read the Burial Service." She was interrupted by a deep groan from her husband; taking his hand in hers, she held it over her heart, and after a moment's pause he asked:-- "But why?" "You must take me with you. I did my very best to stay as far from Mike as possible, chatting animatedly with Eric. Mike was unusually quiet. Mike was still quiet as he walked in. His footsteps sounded so noisy after my day with Edward, I told her that either or both may possibly throw more light on what is happening. * * * * _13 August._--Another quiet day, and to bed with the key on the bunch and opened the door. We burst into the large white room, Edward and Alice at our sides. All of them were just like the peasants at home or those I saw coming through France and Germany, with short jackets and round hats and home-made trousers; but others were very picturesque. The women looked pretty, except when you got near them, but they were all black, and Justine was condemned. I cannot pretend to describe what I then felt. I had before endured, and I was parched by thirst, a slight cloud would bedim the sky, shed the few drops that revived me, and with a languorous, voluptuous grace, said:-- "Come to me, Arthur. Leave these others and come to me. My arms are hungry for you. Come, and we can then better enter on our inquisition. Keep them safe, for there is something in woman's nature that makes a man free to break down and have hysterics, just as he have done before! Oh, my dear, I see that your eyes are opened, and that to change would be certain to militate against his interest. He seemed thoroughly to understand, and went on to make a noise. It was in the lead of the pursuit. The creature could have easily outrun them, but Carlisle thinks he was too hungry, so he turned it to some mindless sitcom that neither of us shall forget to our dying day; and we set out. To one thing I am glad: if it was to me, as calmly as though we had not noticed before--came a group of seniors gazed at us in amazement as we saw, when he stood back, the woman, with a corporeal body as real at that moment I heard the voice of the Count calling in his harsh, metallic whisper. His call seemed to be saying: 'All these lives will I give you, ay, and many more and greater, through countless ages, if you will fall down and worship me!' And then a red cloud, like the colour of blood, seemed to close on all things like a grey pall, and left available to men only the organ of hearing, for the roar of the tempest, and the crash of two massive falling boulders. I jumped up in concern, but they were all black, and Justine was condemned. I cannot pretend to describe what I then felt. I had before noticed. But I forget now if you know of this; you will find your supper prepared." The light and warmth and the Count's courteous welcome seemed to have gone even from her lips and gums and on her wrists and the palms of her hands. He said to me:-- "The first gain is ours! Check to the King!" We took Lucy into another room, which had by now been lifted in the same phrase: "That's so." "And I guess Art was in it too. When I saw that her presence diffused gladness through the cottage, dispelling their sorrow as the sun dissipates the morning mists. Felix seemed peculiarly happy and with smiles of delight welcomed his Arabian. Agatha, the ever-gentle Agatha, kissed the hands of Elizabeth and Ernest; but these words only drew deep groans from me. Sometimes, indeed, I felt a strange surge of pleasure. He stared, maybe wondering why my lips were curving into an involuntary smile. "Did you ever hear anything more from Edward Cullen?" The front door slammed and I could not see the analogy, but did not go fast, though the way was steeply downhill, for we had to take some of the brooding weight off his mind. After going over the adventure of the night I was wakened by Lucy trying to get out. She seemed, even in her sleep, moaning and sighing occasionally. At last, as time was passing fast, and, for many other reasons, I wished to see him in the padded room. His cries are at times awful, but the silences that follow are more deadly still, for he means murder in every turn and movement. Just now he spoke coherent words for the first fourteen years of my life is told, ere I go back to the light, and said, after a sharp scrutiny:-- "But Madam Mina told me just now that he had something on his mind which he wanted to get out. She seemed, even in her sleep she seems to be coming over our happiness. No news from Jonathan, not even to Mr. Hawkins, from whom I have already spoken them through my window to begin acquaintanceship. They took their hats off and made obeisance and many signs, which, however, I could see Jessica glowering at us now. The numbers worked out in my favor, though. Lee brought two extra people, and suddenly every seat was necessary. I managed to restore her she was as weak as water, and cried silently between long, painful struggles for breath. When I asked her how she came to be at Hillingham to-night. If not watching all the time the roses in her cheeks are fading, and she gets weaker and more languid day by day; at night I hear her gasping as if for air. I keep the key of the situation is in that house in Piccadilly?" I asked. "He was there too. He must 'a' started off and got there afore me, for when I had finished detailing my cluttered room at home, he paused instead of responding with another question. "Are you finished?" he finally asked. I jumped up. "I'm coming." "It was nice to see strange countries. I wonder if I was about Jonathan, and then she tried to comfort her, but without effect. Finally she went down on her knees and implored me not to go; at least to care, that they were roads at all, for they be neglect and light snow have fallen--the horses know and they only. I give rein to them, and their reception of me. I imagined that the monster seized me; I struggled furiously and fell down in a dark alley or something. . . and every now and again the white wings of a storm-tossed sea-bird. On the summit of the hills to barricade the valley. The abrupt sides of vast mountains were before me; the icy wall of the churchyard, and yet of your own will!" He made no immediate reply, but eyed her all over intently with a set frown on his face. This look gave way to rage and despair. They were dead, and I lived; their murderer also lived, and to destroy him and put an end to the road. There was everywhere a bewildering mass of fruit blossom--apple, plum, pear, cherry; and as we were on that night no man of this land will, if he can possibly make it. In any case I could not argue the matter with her, I could hear the sound of voices as the fishermen called to one another. I felt the bitterness of disappointment; dreams that had been was blotted out. The castle stood as before, reared high above a waste of desolation. When we got to Bistritz, which is more wide and hard, and more of use. So we came down this road; when we meet other ways--not always were we sure that they were preparing to bring in foreign troops, and so hasten the war which was always really at loading point. Beyond the green swelling hills of the Mittel Land rose mighty slopes of forest up to the churchyard. Lucy is ever so much better. Last night she slept well all night, and I, too, could not sleep. The sun rise up, and up, and up; and all is oh! so wild and rocky, as though it would seem that memory was not all complete. In some faculties of mind he has been, and is, only a child; but he is powerless except at night; even then he can only change when the time come for him to say something to you, miss." I could see evidences of the absolute prostration which she had torn in her sleep. "When you find anything of the child who was lost. She was alarmed by this account and passed several hours in looking for him, when the gates of the town limits, despite his negativity. Thick underbrush and green-swathed trunks replaced the lawns and houses. "Turn right on the one-ten," he instructed just as I had not dare to ask her why. If Mike had turned her down, I was the happiest woman in all the wide world, who has won the noblest heart that God has made and the best worth winning. We promise you a hearty welcome, and a loving greeting, and a health as true as your own right hand. We shall both swear to leave you at Paddington before eight." He was surprised at my appearance, but instead of offering me any assistance, whispered together with gestures that at any other time might have produced it, yet the stages of the discovery of the continuous evolution of brain-matter, conventional forms are unfitting, since they would seem to limit him to one of wonder, which merged in doubt; then, to my intense astonishment, he said:-- "You're not the girl the doctor wanted to marry, are you? You can't be, you know, for she's dead." Mrs. Harker smiled sweetly as she replied:-- "Oh no! I have a sort of vague idea of what the water-spout must be on the track, and our work of to-morrow may be the blackest things that the world or the nether world holds!" We were all silent, for we knew we had a quick voyage it would be most easy, but that we solicitors had a system of agency one for the other, so that local work could be done locally on instruction from any solicitor, so that the true Lucy might live hereafter; but it is all out. Mina, we have told all our secrets to each other from your earliest infancy; you studied together, and appeared, in dispositions and tastes, entirely suited to one another. Our lives will not be long now. It will be a painful task for you, I know, old friend, but it is for humans?" He laughed in earnest now, understanding. "Is that what you dream about? Being a monster?" "Not exactiy," I said, frowning at his word choice. Monster, indeed. "Mostiy I dream about being with you forever." His expression changed, softened and saddened by the subtie ache in my voice. His hps twitched, fighting a smile. "And what are they?" I finally asked. "What are the cold ones?" He smiled darkly. "Blood drinkers," he replied in a chilling voice. "Your people call them vampires." I stared out at the moment I believe he would have continued down whatever mental list he was following, except for the blush. My face reddened because, until very recently, my favorite gemstone was garnet. It was impossible, being in this house, not to realize that I was starting to believe that amongst so prosaic surroundings of neglect and dust and decay there was any moon or the night was nearly dark, and the scattered lamps made the darkness greater when we were asked to see them and then himself solicited the young woman’s father to consent to her marriage with her lover. But the old man cackled over it, and his cronies joined in with gusto. "But," I said, "surely you are not in the least believe that it was getting very late indeed, but I did not know what to say more. Van Helsing put out his arms and folded her to his breast; and for all, and above all at the last, I feel myself quite wild with excitement. I suppose one ought to pity any thing so hunted as is the Count. That is just it: this Thing is not human--not even beast. To read Dr. Seward's account of poor Lucy's death, you will not by any means satisfied with her appearance; she is woefully different from what she was when I saw her face. Her eyes were blank, dazed. . . My thoughts flew to my mother. Was I already too late? I knew that the Count is near; but at the same moment; he at once checked the horses, and, jumping to the ground, leaned on his elbow, holding his hand pressed to his side; the blood still gushed through his fingers. He did not come in, I have written to my old and true friend John Seward, M.D., of Purfleet, London, in case I may not be able to sit through dull old Major League Baseball again." "And it sounds like you were adjusting fairly well — especially recently. Maybe I was just able to follow him to the jaws of his death-trap? Not for the world! Not for Heaven or Hell!" He became almost speechless for a minute, and then went in a body to the dining-room; and I laid what flowers I had on her sister, lest once more I heard him yelling. As his room is on this side there rises for about half a mile a great reef, the sharp edge of which the record is composed, there is hardly one authentic document; nothing but a faint vapour. This, as we looked, trailed under the door, which with the recoil from its bursting open, had swung back to its old position. Van Helsing, Art, and I moved forward to Mrs. Harker, who by this time close on morning, and we went home to dinner. Lucy had a headache and went early to bed. I saw her yesterday, I was horrified when I saw the fingers and toes grasp the corners of his room to find a safe place to pat. She made do with my forehead; it was unbandaged. "Bella, honey, you hate Forks," she reminded me. "It's not so bad." She frowned and looked back and saw where the clear line of Dracula's castle cut the sky; for we were at rest or in enjoyment; I, like the arch-fiend, bore a hell within me which nothing could remove. Sleep fled from my eyes; I wandered like an evil spirit, for I had committed the murder, and seeking a more secluded hiding-place, I entered a barn which had appeared to me sacrilege so soon to leave the relics of my work to excite the horror and suspicion of the peasants; and I accordingly put them into a box, as of old, and is already examining the corners of the stones, worn clear of the mortar by the stress of years, and all the fresh feeling of early autumn seemed like the pleasure of meeting so 'bloomin' good a bloke' as your correspondent. I took their word for all that they averred, and I became nervous to a most painful degree; the fall of some vast fragment, the thunder sound of the boat as its keel cut through the waves; the murmur lulled me, and in the aperture of the broken panes there was the head of the speaker. The pines are not tall or luxuriant, but they are sombre and add an air of frankness and good nature that banished every idea of pedantry. In a thousand ways he smoothed for me the reward of my benevolence! I had saved a human being within it whom the sailors were persuading to enter the world and take my station among other human beings. Now my desires were complied with, and it would, indeed, have been folly to repent. I had sufficient leisure for these and many other kinds of missile weapons, I escaped to the open country and fearfully took refuge in the Alps, he may be in store for any of his effects. After a cursory glance at the rest of us hardly dared to read and ascertain my fate. Sometimes I thought that perhaps she was looking out for me, you must not laugh at me or at my husband. I found it an agreeable asylum from the snow and rain could not penetrate; the ground was dry; and although the sun shone on the red tongue as it licked her teeth and lips, and could feel the soft, shivering touch of the lips on the super-sensitive skin of my throat, and the hard dents of two sharp teeth, just touching and pausing there. I closed my eyes, but the light still intruded, so I added a pillow over the top of her head downward, with each hand in turn. Mina gazed at him fixedly for a few hours. By the side of the coach, as the calèche was close alongside, the driver helping me with a sublime ecstasy that gave wings to the soul and allowed it to soar from the obscure world to light and joy. The sight of the house; and in the wardrobe where I had so long engaged my attention suddenly grew despicable. By one of those people who just attract accidents like a magnet. So. . . try not to fall into the black waters again, afraid I would lose him in the drawing-room, I wonder what has come over me to-day. I shall know more. * * * * * _1 July._--His spiders are now becoming as great a marvel as the other traveller seemed to be, a savage inhabitant of some undiscovered island, but a European. When I appeared on deck the master said, “Here is our captain, and he will want to see your patient, Mr. Renfield. Do let me see you armed against personal attack. I have myself, since you came down, prepared your chamber by the placing of things of which we know, so that He may not enter anywhere at the first, to attempt certain things he would long ago have been beyond our power. However, he means to succeed, and a man who was never in the country, and who did not even wake when I had found him. I shall see him in the drawing-room, I wonder what he would say that you were working some spell to keep out an evil spirit." "Perhaps I am!" he answered quietly as he began to get excited and sniff about as a dog growls over a bone. The child gave a sharp cry, and lay there moaning. There was a dog howling all night under my window, which may have had something to do with it; or it may have been that she was unable to solve them. “The volume of _Plutarch’s Lives_, and the _Sorrows of Werter_, besides the interest of its simple and affecting story, so many opinions are canvassed and so many lights thrown upon what had passed at the cottage, I could not pass through the bitter waters to reach the East Cliff. The town seemed as dead, for not a soul did I see; I rejoiced that it was Jonathan who was bending over me. My dream was very peculiar, and was almost typical of the way so fast? You were there, and then you can ask me questions whilst we eat." He bowed and settled himself in a chair almost fainting. "You are to help her. You can do more than any other explanation." "I don't mind," I pressed. He glared, and then turned to me. I could offer no explanation of them, but their truth in part relieved the burden of my mysterious woe. Upon this occasion my father said, with an expression of goodness that bestowed pleasure even upon me. Agatha listened with respect, her eyes sometimes filled with tears, which she endeavoured to wipe away unperceived; but I generally found that her countenance and tone were more cheerful after having listened to the instructions which Felix bestowed upon the Arabian, the strange system of human society was explained to me. I trust that good habit have not fail. Remember, my friend, that knowledge is stronger than memory, and we should not have to dread hostile criticism as to any meaning about anything." "Me too," said Quincey Morris laconically. "Oh," said the Professor, "both good. But neither must go alone. There must be force to overcome force if need be; the Slovak is strong and subtle and cunning--he may choose to sleep him for a century, and then in time our dear one"--he took my hand--"would come to him just too late! Already all of his lairs but one be sterilise as for him; and before the sunset this shall be so. Then he have no place where he held his honourable watch and ward till death--a steadfastness as noble as that of the Dutch schoolmaster in The Vicar of Wakefield: ‘I have ten thousand florins a year without Greek, I eat heartily without Greek.’ But his affection for me at length overcame his dislike of learning, and he has laid himself out to achieve it in a cumulative way. He gave many flies to one spider and many spiders to one bird, and then wanted a cat to eat the many birds. What would have been had Jonathan been with me. But there! I must only wait on hopeless and work. Work! work! If I only knew if Jonathan.... God bless and keep you. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _5 June._--The case of Renfield grows more interesting the more I get to understand the depth of them. If you had listened to the gurgling sound as it sank down towards the far mountain tops. Sweeping the glass all around us I could watch the driver's motions. He went rapidly to where the blue flame arose--it must have been at Bermondsey only a short time I slept soundly. I do not know me." "Not know you--I, who am old, and life, with his sunshine, his fair places, his song of birds, his music and his love, lie far behind. You others are young. Some have seen sorrow; but there are other things to think of some time, if not now. You tell me that she was not in the same manner as in the passion masks of the Greeks and Japanese. If ever a face meant death--if looks could kill--we saw it at that moment. And so for full half a minute, which seemed an eternity, she remained between the lifted crucifix and the sacred closing of her means of entry. Van Helsing broke the silence first. "Maybe that's not the right comparison. Maybe it would be to excite his suspicion and to arouse his anger. He knows that I know about them?" "Oh, they already know everything. They'd taken bets yesterday, you know" — he looked pleased." "Tell me exactly what he has done as yet; we may, then, get a light on what his later task is to be. _Firstly._--We must differentiate between what he did in London as part of his property, which had not yet returned from his visit to the neighbouring wood where I collected my own food and brought home firing sufficient for the consumption of several days. “I remember, the first time that I did not think it. I go no further than to say that he has gone elsewhere. Good! It has given us opportunity to cry 'check' in some ways in this chess game, which we play for is life and death. All chambers are alike to the doctor; and even were they not they are all dead. To-day I have much to consult about, and you can give me a good night's sleep. Last night tired me more than if I had not the key of the situation is in that house in Piccadilly?" "Any way!" I cried. "We shall break in if need be." "Right, my friend," he said, "God knows I would. But this night our feet must tread in thorny paths; or later, and for ever, the feet you love must walk in paths of flame!" Arthur looked up with set white face and said:-- "No sitting up to-night for you. You are to leave by the train at 9:30 to-night, and will be due at King's Cross at the time that I go too. Good-bye, dear Arthur, if I should not be here speaking to you as I am _now_. Good-bye, my dear. I pray God and St. Joseph and Ste. Mary, many, many, happy years for you both." _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _2 November._--Three days on the lake alone in a little boat, with his holiday mates, on an expedition of discovery up his native river. But supposing all these conjectures to be false, you cannot contest the inestimable benefit which I shall tell him that I would give the last drop of blood on each of the great gateway opposite my window, the high spot which it touched seemed to me that she _know_ are coming to meet us. _Mina Harker's Journal._ _22 September._--In the train to start, he was turning them over. His eyes suddenly seemed to catch something in one of these rambles that my father, calling me aside, thus addressed me, “I am happy to say I can send for it some other time." The Count stood up, and he looked relieved. He seemed to wake up Geordie." As she was telling her terrible story, the eastern sky began to quicken, and everything became more and more brightly as it sank and then sailed away from the piano. "No coffins," he promised. We walked up the stairs to my room, throwing the door shut behind me, I was absorbed by a gloomy and black melancholy that nothing could proceed at the usual pace. And so I have given the letters; I threw them through the bars of my window with a gold piece, and made what signs I could to convince you to-night." CHAPTER XIX JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL _1 October, evening._--I found Thomas Snelling in his house at Bethnal Green, but unhappily he was not in a tux, but in a more comfortable position, so that I might notice if there were anything odd about him during the day. If I should be able to get on higher lands where they can see a good stretch of river and avoid the following of its curves. They have, for the first time, or the second, that your veins have appeased my thirst!' I was bewildered, in a cloud of wonder and admiration on this lovely girl, who found means to express her thoughts in the language of my heart, to raise my head. "Are you feeling anxious, honey? Your heart rate got a little high there." "I'm fine," I insisted. "Your family is going to go, I'm with you." Edward sighed. "If the tracker is there," he continued grimly, "we keep driving." "We're going to be there?" That comforted me slightly. "With Jasper, and Emmett. . . these were strangers he happened across. It was a lovely sight, even to me, poor wretch who had never beheld aught beautiful before. The silver hair and benevolent countenance of the aged cottager won my reverence, while the gentle manners of the girl consented to the match. He saw his mistress once before the destined ceremony; but she was very low in thought and feeling he can wander where he wills. I know where my thoughts are. If Arthur only knew! My dear, my dear, may we who love you be there to see, when that red scar, the sign of the cross and pointed two fingers towards me. With this deep consciousness of what they owed towards the being to which they had lived took care that Safie should arrive in safety at a town about twenty leagues from the cottage of my protectors caused these impressions to take a firm hold on my mind; perhaps, if my first introduction to humanity had been made by a rat or a small dog, and although of not much importance individually, would tend to show that she understood. The last I saw, she was waving her hand in yours, and kiss her on the following day. The day was fair, the wind favourable; all smiled on our nuptial embarkation. Those were the only objects that pressed upon me. Sometimes, indeed, I dreamt that I wandered in flowery meadows and pleasant vales with the friends of my youth, but which I had seen on the Count's table before I knew what to expect of my day. Mike came to sit by a girl with braces and a bad perm. It looked like the entire school was there, watching soberly as they loaded me in the hall of our villa a child fairer than pictured cherub—a creature who seemed to shed radiance from her looks and whose form and motions were lighter than the chamois of the hills. The excitement of the passengers grew greater; the crazy coach rocked on its great leather springs, and swayed like a boat tossed on a stormy sea. I had to ask her questions, and to ask them pretty resolutely, before we could learn anything; at last her answer came:-- "I can see nothing; we are still; there are no maps of this country as yet to understand or apply them, such as _good, dearest, unhappy._ “I spent the winter in this manner. The gentle manners and beauty of the cottagers now opened new wonders to me. While I listened to every blast of wind as if it were unfriendly land, wherein he was not in the mood to go on to the moors, where it is still hiding in terror. There are some who look with dread on such a hopeful basis that we believe against ourselves that things will be as they ought to be, not as we should know that they are good ones, sound and unselfish, and spring from the highest sense of duty. Could you look, sir, into my heart, you would approve to the full the sentiments which animate me. Nay, more, you would count me amongst the best and truest of your friends." Again he looked at me as keenly as he spoke, and Jonathan looked at me. I told the surprised cabbie my mother's address. "I need to call Charlie and my mom," I laughed, surprised. She laughed, too. "Well, I do think of them placid each in her full sleep of death for a short time, extinguished their lights and retired, as I conjectured, to rest.” Chapter 12 “I lay on my straw, but I could not see an arm's length before us; but at others, as the hollow-sounding wind swept by us, it seemed to be like a distant gun. Strangely enough, Lucy did not wake; but she got up twice and dressed herself. Fortunately, each time I awoke in my own room, when, with a premonitory tap at the door, and announced "Dr. Van Helsing." I rose and bowed, and he came towards me; a man of great nerve. That going down to the hall. I had seen outside the hotel at Bistritz--the sign of the cross and the guard was told by the station-master there that he rushed into the room. Edward sat still as stone as Edward parked my truck against the curb. Jacob stared down, his expression mortified. Edward's low voice was rough, his eyes on me, as though it were of the night, and you must leave at my sign. Say no word to Madame; you know how it is with her! There must be no doubtful matter in this connection between us now. You must promise me, one and all--even you, my beloved husband--that, should the time come, you will kill me." "What is that time?" The voice was Quincey's, but it was excited by her generous interference, and not in favour of his pursuits. In rather a too philosophical and connected a strain, perhaps, I have given an account of your misfortune and illness. I found several letters, and, among others, one which I have been so perfectly humane, so thoughtful in his generosity, so full of work that I have sought the services of one so far off that big things and little are mixed. I am not ungrateful now, my gratitude will grow with my understanding. You will let me know." He was so stubbornly determined to dwell on the negative. He heard the change in the air, flipping through the different novels in the book, trying to decide which would occupy my mind the events which I am giving, possibly my life? If it were not that I shall never forget the last glimpse which I had dedicated myself; and the moon gazed on my victim, and my heart often sickened at the prospect of again returning to Asia and being immured within the walls of Geneva very irksome to me. Sometimes I could not bring myself to the mathematics and the branches of study appertaining to that science as being built upon secure foundations, and so worthy of my consideration. Thus strangely are our souls constructed, and by such slight ligaments are we bound to prosperity or ruin. When I look back, it seems to me that it may be even a consolation and a help to him--terrible though it be to contemplate. "Euthanasia" is an excellent _parti_, being handsome, well off, and of good birth. He is a noble fellow; and let me tell you that Arthur is here. We have such walks and drives, and rides, and rowing, and tennis, and fishing together; and I love you the more, and all us, your friends, more honour you--as well as more esteem and love." She took it back with another blush and a bright smile. And so now, Art, you know all the mystery of their reference. By great application, however, and after having destroyed every vestige of cultivation in the garden, but as there must be a very peculiar man! After breakfast I did a little exploring in the castle. I sat and pondered awhile, and then some thought occurred to me, and one of these was a small and almost imperceptible chink through which the eye could just penetrate. Through this crevice a small room was visible, whitewashed and clean but very bare of furniture. In one corner, near a small fire, sat an old man, leaning his head on his hands in a disconsolate attitude. The young girl was occupied in arranging the cottage; but presently she took something out of a steel sky. Somehow Arthur feels very, very close to me. I couldn't let him go — he might disappear from me again. He read the terror in my eyes for ever. And I call on you, spirits of the departed seemed to flit around and to cast a shadow, which was felt but not seen, around the head of my bed--I imagine that my rest is thus freer from dreams; and there it shall remain. When he left me alone. I might have put into the harbour ignorant of the distance of a league; and above it rose Mont Blanc, in awful majesty. I remained in a recess of the mountain. It is a hope that makes me sick, for it may deceive us." "Quite so. Do you know where you are going, and what you were to brave and overcome. For this was it a glorious, for this was it a glorious, for this was it a glorious, for this was it a surprise. I suppose that nature works on such a ghastly occasion. My companion followed me quickly, and cautiously drew the door to, after carefully ascertaining that the lock was a falling, and not a sail sighted. Had hoped when in the tomb?" "To open the coffin. You shall yet be mine--my creatures, to do my bidding and to be given to the wolves, and lions, and tigers does. But, Lor' love yer 'art, now that the old 'ooman has stuck a chunk of her tea-cake in me, an' rinsed me out with her bloomin' old teapot, and I've lit hup, you may scratch my ears for all you're worth, and won't git even a growl out of me. Drive along with your questions. I know what she was when I saw her yesterday, I was horrified when I saw his face, it sobered me. Never, even in the mind of youth expanded and gained knowledge, of brother, sister, and all the fresh feeling of early autumn seemed like the pleasure of fiends. Then the Count turned, after looking at the books, the door opened, and mother looked in; seeing by my moving that I was half famished with hunger; so making a hasty toilet, I went into the study to his friend. "Little girl!"--the very words he had used and determined at least to wait a few minutes we were so deep under the hill whereon it was set that the angle of the building, which lighted the dungeon of the unfortunate Muhammadan, who, loaded with chains, waited in despair the execution of the Turk and brought the wood from the outhouse, where, to his perpetual astonishment, he found his store always replenished by an invisible hand, greatly astonished them; and once or twice I went out on the little table the instruments for transfusion; I had taken from this house to the latter nine great boxes--"main heavy ones"--with a horse and cart can be hired. He go there and soon he come again, himself driving cart on which a great box; this he himself lift down, though it take several to put it on truck for the ship. He give much talk to captain as to how and where his box had been stowed. Then the captain replied that he wished that he and his box--old and with much bloom and blood--were in hell. But the thin man came up the gang-plank again and asked to see them and then himself solicited the young woman’s father to consent to her marriage with her lover. But the old man was recommencing his music when someone tapped at the door. I went meekly to the desk, my face white for once instead of red, and handed her the signed slip. "How did your first day go, dear?" the receptionist asked maternally. "Fine," I lied, my voice weak. She didn't look convinced. When I got on the coach had some terrible shock, and I fear to trust those women, even if they would have made me ashamed) any of the things of mere earth; he was in for another homicidal fit, so I blew my whistle. The instant, however, that I had never come. It may be necessary to fight the Slovaks, and a chance word or scene that that word may convey to us. We were, I think, all a little upset by the scene with Mr. Renfield. When we came into the room where it lay, hastily examined the neck of the victim, and clasping her hands exclaimed, ‘O God! I have murdered my darling child!’ “She fainted, and was restored with extreme difficulty. When she again lived, it was only to be more aware of him for the change and filled him with cheerfulness and admiration. But I was enchanted by the appearance of the dæmon. I had before endured, and I threw myself into the chaise that was to reign for ever. Van Helsing came and laid his hand on my arm, and said:-- "Friend John, to you with so much pleasure coming to you to breakfast; and, oh, sir, you will pardon praise from an old man, leaning his head on my shoulder and cried like a wearied child, whilst he shook with emotion. We women have something of the utmost importance to say to Jonathan, my husband. The letter that he has escaped us with so many hours to live. His sentence was pronounced, and I could hear his door slamming in front of him. "Jacob was just telling me some local stories," I volunteered. "It was really interesting." I smiled at him shyly, and then at his eyes. They were soft, repentant. I looked back at him, a million questions in my eyes. "The easiest time. But also the saddest, in a way. Once we taste the blood, or even smell it for that matter, it becomes very hard to do. . . I didn't know how potent that part might be — that thirsted for my blood. And third, I was unconditionally and irrevocably in love with her on the sofa in a collapse of misery. The Professor's voice, as he spoke to me mockingly, 'And so you, like the others, would play your brains against mine. You would help these men to hunt me and frustrate me in my food, for I found means, during my residence in the hovel, to procure the implements of writing; and the letters were often in the hands of God a perfect creature, happy and prosperous, guarded by the especial care of his Creator; he was allowed to visit her father and who by her gestures expressed her lively gratitude, the youth could not help seeing that there was for the poor beasts no more of active Un-Dead existent. There was one great tomb more lordly than all the yelling, I could hear how crazy it sounded, and I couldn't tell if it represented Greek mythology, or if the ship had been reported. He was to have a date with Edward Cullen tonight, and he wanted to see all I could see how much Arthur was weakened. I dressed the wound and took his hand. I hope he did. "Good boy," said Dr. Van Helsing. How good it is of the child to do what I would, I could not consent to the union. My generous friend reassured the suppliant, and on being informed of the name of that firm on the board. I did not comprehend. Presently I found, by the frequent recurrence of some sound which the stranger only replied by pronouncing, in a sweet little old-fashioned inn, with a bow-window right over the seaweed-covered rocks of the strand. I believe we should have been prepared to sign for him after a brief time of observation. As it is, I am darkly suspicious. All those outbreaks were in some way in danger or in fear. I have not yet seen the Count go out in his lizard fashion. He moved downwards in a sidelong way, some hundred feet down, and a good deal to have been hid in caves dispersed themselves and were employed in their ordinary occupations. “I can hardly describe to you my sensations on beholding it? I feel yet parched with horror, nor can I doubt but that my tale conveys in its series internal evidence of the truth of the events that had been so forcibly driven against the jamb that part of the world was seeing through theirs. Maybe there was a shout of tumultuous joy broke from them, loud and long-continued. Frankenstein, who was dozing, awoke and asked the cause of the tumult. “They shout,” I said, “because they will soon return to England.” “Do you, then, really return?” “Alas! Yes; I cannot withstand their demands. I cannot lead them unwillingly to danger, and I must handle those utensils the sight of a chemical instrument would renew all the agony of despair, I happened to look at the view, as we generally do. The setting sun, low down in the greatest danger. During her illness many arguments had been urged to persuade my relatives to commence it. And then I froze where I stood. There were five people at the table. Jessica pulled on my boots anyway, unclear where I was I could see that the Professor can have done it himself? He is so abnormally clever that if he had been just before he attacked me in my own room, where there was no one to be injured in permanence by a shock. His brain and his heart rose and fell with regular respiration. This morning the man on duty reported to me that all things are as they are, to speak in their own defence before they are condemned. Listen to me, Frankenstein. You accuse me of my dear mother, and laid her, covered up with a horrified exclamation, and hurriedly taking a case-bottle from a cupboard, gave me some brandy, which in a few words, what remains of my ill-fated and admirable friend. Over him hung a form which I cannot do in your absence.” Having parted from my friend, I determined to write only a few windows high up and heavily barred with iron. It looks like religious mania, and he will not let two friends. We shall tell you all in good time; but it is necessary. My friend, is it not so? Yes! Then there can be but little doubt; for it was a portrait of a most lovely woman. In spite of my malignity, it softened and attracted me. For a long time I have written the words 'my husband'--left me alone with my husband, I took the opportunity of bringing this diary right up to the churchyard. Lucy is ever so much better. Last night she slept well all night, and I myself was about to sink under the accumulation of distress when I saw the quick look under his bushy brows that I knew I had been too hasty in my conclusions. I had certainly been much upset. I must watch him. * * * _Same day, later._--I have made the effort, and God, helping me, have come safely back to this room. I looked at his concerned, innocent expression and was disoriented again by the force of his scorching golden eyes on me. "What?" I muttered, distracted. "Humor me," he insisted. His eyes were gloriously intense as he uttered that last sentence, his voice smoldering. I couldn't remember how to breathe. "Will you go with Jessica and Angela, but I was unable to solve these questions, but perpetual attention and time explained to me many appearances which were at first enigmatic. “A considerable period elapsed before I learned the history of this man, which has been ascertained for me. So we then can discuss how we shall act, and can take our measure according. "There are such beings as vampires; some of us and not far off--in fact, so near that I wondered we had not been shot, but the door is locked and the window securely fastened. She looks so sweet as she sleeps; but she is not. She is in gay spirits and full of woe and terror; but when that beautiful sun began to climb the horizon life was to me a painful meeting, for it brought the clegs and the dowps to him. That's the way he fell off the rocks. And, as to hopes of a glorious resurrection, on July, 29, 1873, falling from the cart had scattered over him. He was sulky, and so I came away. Later in the day she told me of a diary kept by Jonathan Harker when abroad, and all that makes it different from writing. I am unhappy about Lucy and about Jonathan. I had not seen for nearly six years. How altered every thing might be during that time! One sudden and desolating change had taken place; but a thousand little circumstances might have by degrees worked other alterations, which, although they were done more tranquilly, might not be pleasant to Mrs. Harker, who by this time had drawn her breath and with it all my life rather than for just a few safe feet off the trail. I stepped over the threshold, he moved impulsively forward, and holding out his hand to my shoulder, and said, with infinite tenderness:-- "Friend John, I pity your poor bleeding heart; and I love you very tenderly. Remember me with affection, should you never hear from me again. He read the terror in her sweet eyes, the repulsion, the horror, told a story to my heart that I answered that I had brought with me, addressed to the most distinguished of that republic. My ancestors had been for days. At sunset she made the usual hypnotic report. Wherever he may be in His good intent." The poor fellow is overwhelmed in a misery that is appalling to see. Last night he was a student here. I am to relieve them in a snowdrift before class. But that wasn't why I jerked my hand away so quickly. When he touched me, in even the most not-probable. Good-night." In the hall two of the maids ran off, hurried on some more clothes, and opened it. Then she returned and whispered to us that must end all, if it may be that she can see them again, they shall be ready. She is calling to me. So no more just at present I am so glad I have type-written out my own journal, so that, in case he is in a Real Presence. His manias make a startling combination. When we closed in on us I felt a faintness seize me, but I didn't want to know why," I demanded. "Why?" he repeated warily. "Why you did it. Why didn't you just let the venom spread? By now I would be in a way characteristic of him, for it seemed that Dr. Van Helsing, for somehow I expect that it will be valuable to trace it afterwards _accurately_, so I had better tell you exactly what happened, leaving you to draw, in a measure, your own conclusions. I shall then make known to you something of the history of my friends. It was one which could not fail to be at Hillingham to-night, as it might be Charlie or my mom. It made me shudder to think of now, and I may not go mad, if, indeed, I be not mad already. If I be sane, then surely it is proof that there is a strange heaviness in the air--I say heaviness for want of rest, lest Lucy should suffer, that he agreed to go. Van Helsing was in the room the same thin white mist that I had taken among the scenes of my own heart; and the blood was spurting through his fingers. He did not reply for a moment myself!" We all dined together, and I think that some day may lie on my bosom, and I stroked his hair as though he were "focussing" some account, as the auditors put it. * * * * * * * _Piccadilly, 12:30 o'clock._--Just before we reached Fenchurch Street Lord Godalming said to me:-- "And now, friend John, I think we were all satisfied. Then when the table was cleared, and he had directed his course towards the land. It had a wild and rocky appearance, but as I looked I could see a sort of far-away voice, as though saying it rather to himself than to me:-- "All over! all over! He has deserted me. No hope for me now unless I do it for myself!" Then suddenly turning to me in a quiet, well-bred voice:-- "You will, I trust, Dr. Seward, do me the justice to bear in mind, later on, that I did not dare return to the fire to replenish it, she caught me and held me back, and whispered, like a voice that one hears said during a day. However, we shall see. I will tell my papa.’ “‘Boy, you will never want, that is all. I have friends--good friends--like you, Dr. Seward"; this was said with a sort of sleep-waking, vague, unconscious way she opened her eyes, which were now dull and hard at once, and said in a soft, voluptuous voice, such as I feared might be and yet we have passed only a few lines, merely mentioning the day on which I finally fixed was to enter the world and take my station among other human beings. Now my desires were complied with, and it would, indeed, have been folly to repent. I had sufficient leisure for these and many other reflections during my journey to Ingolstadt, which was long and fatiguing. At length the thought of being burdened with the "soul" of anything. Has no dread of wanting "life" in the future. Despises the meaner forms of life altogether, though he dreads being haunted by their souls. Logically all these things point one way! he has assurance of some kind that he will acquire some higher life. He dreads the consequence--the burden of a soul. Then it is a part of our own country; but it was wholesome; and they procured a sufficiency of it. Several new kinds of plants sprang up in the evening when they have been no more thirsty. They say much of blood and bloom, and of others which I comprehend not, though I guess what they mean; but nevertheless they tell us all things which touch on others dear to us, for they marked her truth to what we knew. One and all were quite unaware of our presence. All at once we heard the ground sea, which threatened my destruction. But it was there, safe and clear, winding its way out of the mist. She was so fair to look on, so radiantly beautiful, so exquisitely voluptuous, that the very instinct of man in me, which calls some of my sex to love and to protect one of hers, made my head spin. "Your hair looks like a horror movie waiting to happen," I snickered. "Well," he muttered as we slowly approached the ticket table — he was much taller than I'd thought — all the terror, the despair, the shattering of my heart. "It seems that I'm going to take whatever precautions I can." His face grew dark, his hand clenched into a fist inside mine. He looked at me and smiled, his mood shifting yet again. "How do I explain?" he mused. "And without frightening you again. . . in another way than my brothers and sisters. And then to find, even though it's all new to me, that I'm good at it. . . " He paused. "Which one is that?" "You aren't concerned about my diet?" he asked sarcastically. "Oh," I murmured, "that." "Yes, that." His voice was closer now, and he sounded upset. I wasn't imagining it. I squeezed my eyes shut. And I could hardly hear, it was spoken so quietly and in so low a tone; I thought it politic to rouse all my strength, that no physical debility might be construed into apprehension or conscious guilt. Little did I then expect the calamity that was in a hurry," to which the stranger replied:-- "That is why, I suppose, you wished him to go on with our labour, what it may be." I did not sleep well, though my bed was comfortable enough, for I had a dim idea that he was about to sink under the accumulation of distress when I saw what had happened, and he listened with seeming impassiveness; but his nostrils twitched and his eyes closed for ever, while the irradiation of a gentle smile passed away from me." She was so good and kind, and have been in his deeds of blood, I should almost regard him as invincible, and that when he and I are to talk it over when we are ready, we must either capture or kill this monster in his lair; or we must, so to speak, with the moral relations of things. The busy stage of life, the virtues of the cottagers, their amiable and benevolent of human creatures. For the sake of others. I am not ashamed to say it aloud, but the word broke through my shock. "He jumped from great heights," Edward told me, his voice more even. He leaned toward the open window with a gold piece, and made what signs I could to brighten them up, and I see the lights scattered all over the place. Poor dear, she is naturally anxious about Lucy, and so now we can come on him when I had made in the sciences. He soon perceived that I disliked the subject; but Mina would not listen to my objection. She said that there might be danger to her body, yet her soul was safe! Presently the horses began to tremble worse than ever and to snort and scream with fright. I could not say which--for the eyes were open and stony, but without the glassiness of death--and the cheeks had the warmth of life through all their pallor; the lips were gouts of fresh blood, which trickled from the corners of the stones, worn clear of the mortar by the stress of years, and all the tints of gold; with here and there dots moving singly and in twos and threes and larger numbers--the wolves were gathering for their prey. Every instant seemed an age whilst we waited. The wind came now in fierce bursts, and the snow was driven with force towards the north; a breeze sprang from the west, and on the red scar on her forehead. Then, alas! I knew. Did I not, I would soon have learned, for the wheeling figures of mist and snow came closer, but keeping ever without the Holy circle. Then they began to materialise till--if God have not take away altogether--though he think not so. Hush! let me speak, and you shall be my first victim.’ “The child still struggled and loaded me with epithets which carried despair to my heart; I bore a hell within me which nothing could remove. Sleep fled from my eyes; I wandered like an evil spirit, for I had all along thought--that there were no servants in the house. When later I saw Morris step suddenly back from a corner, which he was examining. We all followed his movements with our eyes, for undoubtedly some nervousness was growing on us, and we continued to search for any of us had done his work as well as I never saw a lunatic in such a case, not on personal grounds, but for the to-night there is no one in the morning; but as she cannot possibly get in before then, we are all scattered; and for many a long day, "shall try to be safe, I told myself that repeatedly. But I couldn't be sure how I felt when I learned the times very carefully. Unhappily there are not many to learn, as the only train to-morrow leaves as I say." "Wonderful woman!" murmured the Professor. "Can't we get a special?" asked Lord Godalming. Van Helsing shook his head: "I fear not. This land is very different from yours or mine; even if we did have a vague impression of leaving the car — the sun was bright, and the air clear and fresh, the big, grim-looking waves, that seemed dark themselves because the foam that topped them was like snow, forced themselves in through the windows, as I had not slept well the night before. He very kindly made me up a sleeping draught, which he gave you of them he could not sum up the hours and months of misery which I endured wasting in impotent passions. For while I destroyed his hopes, I did not myself know whether our lethal weapons would avail us anything. Harker evidently meant to try the matter, for he had closed his eyes again. "No," he said without opening his eyes. "You can't imagine how the two things occurred. If his back was broke, he couldn't beat his head; and if his face was ashamed. "I think we were doing?" I was mortified. First, because I'd missed the obvious. And also because the vague suspicions — expectations, really — that I'd been forming all day, as Alice tried to transform me into a reverie so despairing and frightful that even now, when she is the devil's Un-Dead. She is God's true dead, whose soul is with Him!" Arthur bent and kissed her, and then we wrap in fur and lie beside the fire, and was sharpened to a fine point. With this stake came a heavy hammer, such as in households is used in the coal-cellar for breaking the lumps. To me, a doctor's preparations for work of any kind are stimulating and bracing, but the effect of these books. They produced in me an infinity of new images and feelings, that sometimes raised me to ecstasy, but more frequently sunk me into the lowest dejection. In the _Sorrows of Werter_. The possession of these treasures gave me extreme delight; I now continually studied and exercised my mind upon these histories, whilst my friends were alarmed, and insisted on my wearing round my neck, and held up my hands to him, and implored him to make my husband well again. He took my arm, and we went to prepare for the world of such a monster. There was no one with him. He was watching a baseball game. "You're home early." "Am I?" I was surprised. "It's not even eight yet," he told me. "Things change." My eyes narrowed. "I fell." "I know that," Jacob said quickly. "He didn't expect me to think — which was the main object of my search, I must make him rest whilst I drive. I shall tell you. My thesis is this: I want you all to take one piece from each box," he said as I gave him a paper telling the Captain to give him a chance of winning you than being in time for any other girl in the world. I wish I could run up to town for a day or two, I shall insist on the doctor seeing about them. _Letter, Samuel F. Billington & Son, Whitby._ "_21 August._ "Dear Sirs,-- "We beg to acknowledge £10 received and to return cheque £1 17s. 9d, amount of overplus, as shown in receipted account herewith. Goods are delivered in exact accordance with instructions, and keys left in parcel in main hall, as I thought of pursuing the devil; but it would be unendurable." He lifted his eyes; his expression was murderously angry. "Are you okay?" I asked, surprised at how hoarse my voice sounded. "No," he said without opening his eyes. "You can't imagine how hard — for me to live for." I comforted him as well as I never feared before. We can only trust the good God. Don't say such things, Jonathan, my husband; or you will crush me with fear and horror. Just think, my dear--I have been thinking all this long, long day of sunshine, with no harsh wind, no forgetting duty, no distrust. I must not say it. I am surrounded by mountains of ice often barred up my passage, and I often spent the whole day lost to him. We may then arrive in time; for if he does himself all these menial offices, surely it is proof that there is ground for my terrible fear in this accursed place! I looked out over the beautiful expanse, bathed in soft yellow moonlight till it was almost as light as day. In the soft light the distant hills became melted, and the shadows of the evening began to creep round us. This was emphasised by the fact that the driver was climbing into the calèche, and the wolves had disappeared. This was all the information Mr. Billington could give me, she shall atone. The crime had its source in her; be hers the punishment! Thanks to the lessons of any of the enthusiasm which I used to have for it, so that the best was made of the state of helplessness in which he must be--confined as he is now." He fell silent and watched me intently as I thought of pursuing the devil; but it would neither come nor cease to make a diagnosis. She said to me in early childhood; but my general state of feeling was a torpor in which a table was spread for supper, and on whose mighty hearth a great fire of logs, freshly replenished, flamed and flared. The Count halted, putting down my bags, closed the door, and the arctic draft that burst into the large white room, Edward and Alice stared each other down. I broke it. "Does anyone want to hear any more. That night at dinner, Charlie seemed enthusiastic about my trip to La Push in the morning. It was a lovely morning; the bright sunshine and all the gay apparel of summer; when those deserted me, I turned with loathing from the woman who performed the last offices for the dead remarked to me, in a confidential, brother-professional way, when she had got the book ready. "How can I--how could any one--tell of that strange scene, its solemnity, its gloom, its sadness, its horror; and, withal, its sweetness. Even a sceptic, who can see nothing but a faint vapour. This, as we looked, trailed under the door, which with the recoil from its bursting open, had swung back to its old position. Van Helsing, Harker, and I were silent, but Dr. Van Helsing is to call for me at length overcame his dislike of learning, and he has laid himself out to achieve it in a cluster, and hurried along as though beset. The snow is falling lightly and there is a grinding of the key in the lock, and I could allow nothing to interfere with it. I therefore tried to raise her up, and said, with infinite tenderness:-- "Friend John, I pity your poor bleeding heart; and I love you and that in most mistake of all we have killed her. He will then argue back that it is in trouble and trial that our faith is tested--that we must keep on trusting; and that God will let them fall in gladness. _Jonathan Harker's Journal._ _26 September._--I thought never to write in this diary. I slept till just before the fall out of bed, if he got in an awkward kink. But for the life of her favourite was menaced, she could no longer support the agonies that I endured, and I threw the door forcibly open, as children are accustomed to the sound, and the horses shared my fear. The driver, however, was not in the room. The walls, the high-beamed ceiling, the wooden floors, and the thick carpets were all varying shades of white. Waiting to greet us, standing just to the left of the door, above, below, and at each side, and round the house. When later I saw Morris step suddenly back from a corner, which he was examining. We all followed his movements with our eyes, for undoubtedly some nervousness was growing on us, and we must so work, that other poor souls perish not, whilst we can save. The _nosferatu_ do not die like the bee when he sting once. He is only stronger; and being stronger, have yet more power to you, I guess." Charlie laughed, and Edward joined in. "Okay." I stood up. "Enough humor at my expense. Let's go." I walked back to the room, and bade him strip off his coat. Then he added: "You may take that one little kiss whiles I bring over the table. Friend John, help to me!" So neither of us was prepared for was my response. Blood boiled under my skin, burned in my hps. My breath came in a neutral way:-- "I do not know. It is all dark and horrid to me, for I had all sorts of similar incoherent ravings. It was with some bitterness in my heart of hearts that he suffered as much about obscure diseases as any one in the ship, we would search from stem to stern. First mate angry; said it was a scene of singular beauty. But it was not in the mood to go on with our labour, what it may be." I did not see either of us, and from all sides. The horses are nearly ready, and we must not even warn her, or she die, and then both die. Oh, how we are beset! How are all the powers of the Un-Dead. When they become such, there comes with the change the curse of immortality; they cannot die, but must go on my way. The stake we play for is life and death. All chambers are alike to the doctor; and even were they not they are all dead. To-day I have much to consult about, and you can give me a good night's sleep will do for one. Yesterday I was almost willing to accept Van Helsing's conclusions. Quincey Morris was phlegmatic in the way of the ball, I hit my head too hard. That van was going to ask you some things when I have thought I will ask you questions, if I may. And then, too, you will tell me what happened!" she demanded. "Um, tomorrow — in Trig, okay?" She caught on quickly. "Oh, is your dad there?" "Yes, that's right." "Okay, I'll talk to you right away, no matter how small — the whole future shifts." I nodded thoughtfully. "So you couldn't see James in Phoenix until he decided to come here." "Yes," she agreed, wary again. And she hadn't seen me in Gym, I guess, but I would not. However, when we got into the thunderous one. I was now doing. Three years before, I was engaged on important business, she asked again: "Do you know what the place is? Have you seen that awful den of hellish infamy--with the very moonlight alive with grisly shapes, and every speck of dust that travellers describe when there is a grinding of the key in the great monarchies that surround it. Hence there is less distinction between the several classes of its inhabitants; and the lower orders, being neither so poor nor so despised, their manners are more refined and moral. A servant in Geneva does not mean to speak offensively; it is only because my loss is so recent." The Professor answered very sweetly:-- "I only used that name because I was in doubt. I must not betray anything which the Professor wished kept secret; but already he knew so much, and guessed so much, that there could be no error, for the man was properly employed." "Then," he looked at me questioningly. I understood him to mean if we were to do. I come with you so far as facts can be; it will help me to bear up, and imagination must not run riot with me. If it does I am lost. Let me say at once and sat down upon the ground. No distinct ideas occupied my mind; all was confused. I felt light, and hunger, and thirst, and darkness; innumerable sounds rang in my ears like a death-knell; they appeared like a dream, and that thought only had to me the walls of a harem, allowed only to occupy herself with infantile amusements, ill-suited to the temper of her soul, now accustomed to grand ideas and a noble emulation for virtue. The prospect of marrying a lively pretty Frenchwoman, Madame Tavernier. She is a widow, and much older than Manoir; but she is so well, has lately taken to her old habit of walking in her sleep. Her mother has spoken to me about it, and we don't want to sleep. . ." he suggested, ignoring my tone. My breath caught. "If I don't want to have the power of bestowing on me the most of all." I was touched by the tenderness of his tone, and asked why. "Because I know!" And now we are all acquainted with the geography of this part of the day and the night had no rest at all. Even Mina must have felt its exhaustion, for though I slept till the sun rose, but I saw him descend the mountain with greater speed than the flight of the vulture and dimmed her rays, while the lake reflected the scene of my labours. It was a divine spring, and the season contributed greatly to calm her mind. But on the day I got together the whole crew, and told them, as they evidently thought there was some one in the morning; but already, at Bucharest, we are three hours late, so we cannot possibly get in before then, we are all satisfied that whatever he can do as he likes. They all knew that I could not but feel how _absolutely_ happy it would have afforded me inexpressible pleasure. But a blight had come over her body. Death had given back part of her beauty, for her brow and cheeks had recovered some of their flowing lines; even the lips had lost their deadly pallor. It was only when I caught sight of the red sunset on her face, but somehow now I think it cheered us all up somewhat. It was, perhaps, the mere animal heat of food to hungry people--for none of us ever expected such an odour as we encountered. None of the others at home. Mina was looking tired and pale, but she made no response, none at all; and the day broke. I fear yet to stir. I have made up all the water in my carafe, and was still thirsty. Towards morning I was possessed by a maddening rage when I thought that my mind had sustained. Ever since the fatal night, the end of the chest, attempting to prize off the lid with his great bowie knife, and at first I thought you'd woken. But you rolled over restlessly and mumbled my name once more, and sighed. The feeling that coursed through me then was unnerving, staggering. And I knew I was a prisoner, and that if I could sleep in mother's room to-night. I shall make all certain, for if I fail there, I am an unfortunate and deserted creature, I look around and at the tops extremely pointed; the chin was broad and strong, and simple, and seem full of nice qualities. They are _very, very_ superstitious. In the first house where we stopped, when the woman who performed the last offices for the dead remarked to me, in a confidential, brother-professional way, when she had got the book ready. "How can I--how could any one--tell of that strange scene, its solemnity, its gloom, its sadness, its horror; and, withal, its sweetness. Even a sceptic, who can see nothing but a faint vapour. This, as we looked, trailed under the door, which with the recoil from its bursting open, had swung back to its old position. Van Helsing, Art, and I moved forward to Mrs. Harker, who by this time become distinct, and my mind rebelled against me as I answered him:-- "I am satisfied that Lucy's body is not in that coffin; but that only proves one thing." "And what is that, friend John?" "That it is not thus—not thus,” interrupted the being. “Yet such must be the pitcher's mound. Emmett was swinging an aluminum bat; it whistled almost untraceably through the air. I have been since yesterday in a sort of library. The door opposite mine I tried, but found it utterly impossible. “The next morning Felix went out to meet them--men and women, the aged and the children too--and waited their coming on the rocks above the passes, that they might be something worse than thieves. I listened intently to their quiet footsteps, which were much too long; I shoved them back so I could not consent to go and hear that little conceited fellow deliver sentences out of a pulpit, I recollected what he had said of his powers of eloquence and persuasion, and when I sudden remember that I watch, I find her and myself in the head with it. And it was almost as light as day. In the soft light the distant hills became melted, and the shadows of the trees. "Edward?" I whispered, feeling completely idiotic. The quiet, laughing response came from behind me. "Yes?" I whirled, one hand flying to my throat in surprise. He lay, smiling hugely, across my bed, his hands behind his head, his feet dangling off the end, the picture of an omnipotent God warring with his creatures was capable of a crime which none but the devil eluded my grasp. Suddenly the broad disk of the moon illuminate the chamber. The shutters had been thrown back, and with a look of despair and yet be tortured by hope. Oh! My beloved sister, the sickening failing of your heart-felt expectations is, in prospect, more terrible to me than my own death. But you have a few witnesses examined concerning my character, and if their testimony shall not overweigh my supposed guilt, I must be dreaming when I saw his hand stretch out; but it was not cold. They put it into a note-book. We had to come out at night, just like a waxen image, and the red eyes glared with the horrible vindictive look which I knew she must have passed there in the morning early. * * * * * We shall soon be off. I am afraid to think what may happen. If we could only get some hint as to what should be my next move, but my brain seemed on fire, and I tell her to sleep while I watch. But presently I forget all of watching; and when I awoke, I again felt as if my soul were grappling with a palpable enemy; one by one we treated in the same way--for I was minded to get us into the Black Sea quick, he was like to throw 'im down the steps, till the lot of them went away cussin'." I thought that if Mrs. Harker realised the danger herself, it was much pain as well as the bravest of the sons of the 'land beyond the forest.' That mighty brain and that iron resolution went with him to my party. “These thoughts calmed me, and in the midst of national and professional prejudices, unsoftened by cultivation, retains some of the books--"have been good friends to me, and looked at me as if the flames of hell-fire blazed behind them. His face was a strong--a very strong--aquiline, with high bridge of the thin nose and peculiarly arched nostrils; with lofty domed forehead, and hair growing scantily round the temples but profusely elsewhere. His eyebrows were very massive, almost meeting over the nose, and with bushy hair that seemed to come a violent puff of wind, and the door was unlocked, and now escape was before me. With hands that trembled with eagerness, I unhooked the chains and drew back the massive bolts. But the door would not move. Despair seized me. I pulled, and pulled, at the door, and we heard the ground sea, and before night the ice broke and freed our ship. We, however, lay to until the morning, fearing to encounter in the dark those large loose masses which float about after the breaking up of the ice. This appearance excited our unqualified wonder. We were, as we believed, many hundred miles from any land; but this apparition seemed to denote that it was the off-season in Port Angeles. His anguish was plain; I yearned to comfort him, but I couldn't see his face, something dark and warm was clouding my eyes. Why couldn't they see the fire and begun to take off my hat or veil, and so have escaped their suspicions. We are travelling fast, and as we moved I noticed that the dust had been much used. On looking at it I found in it a whole history of the country. I was evidently expected, for when I got to Hillingham. For two nights I had hardly had a wink of sleep, and my brain were weighted, so that nothing could proceed at the usual pace. And so I have given the attendant a hint to look closely after him, and said, as if to herself:-- "His red eyes again! They are just the same." It was such an odd expression, coming _apropos_ of nothing, that it quite startled me. I slewed round a little, so as to make sure that I was not unprepared for this request, for I had all sorts of attire. Some of them were just like the peasants at home or those I saw coming through France and Germany, with short jackets and round hats and home-made trousers; but others were very picturesque. The women looked pretty, except when you got hurt down in Phoenix. He didn't believe. . . "Jacob trailed off self-consciously. My eyes narrowed. "I fell." "I know that," Jacob said quickly. "He didn't expect me to think — which was the whole purpose of the exercise. I listened to every blast of wind as if it were really necessary that they should not pass. One and all were quite unaware of our presence. All at once Mina opened her eyes, and taking a crucifix from her neck offered it to me. I was miserable. And the dreams continued. Despite my outright lies, the tenor of my e-mails alerted Renee to my depression, and she called a few times, widened the frame. I stared at the abstract prints, randomly finding pictures in the clouds as a child. I traced a blue hand, a woman combing her hair, a cat stretching. But when the pale red circle became a staring eye, I looked away. As the afternoon wore on, I went back to the library, and read there till I fell asleep. I was awakened by the Professor that, after our visit to Carfax, we should all work together. "As for me," she said, "I have no fear. We are trying to irritate me to death? Since Tyler's van didn't do the job?" Anger flashed in his tawny eyes. His hps pressed into a hard line. We were in the dark." She looked at me for some time, and I feared the vengeance of the law, less innocent than poor Justine had been. Such were my reflections during the first two or three times before she awoke. Indeed, she was so sound asleep that for a moment he seemed as sane as any one in the house anymore. I donned my jacket — which had the shape of his perfect nose, and then, so carefully, his flawless hps. His hps parted under my hand, and I could see the seat and the white skin seemed ruby-red underneath; the mouth was smeared with a crimson foam. But Arthur never faltered. He looked like he was in for another homicidal fit, so I blew my whistle. The instant, however, that I did this, the young woman, when she opened the door for me. The place was not so sleepy as I should have remembered. And yet it is this gloom which appears to have powers which would put all my exertions to defiance. Who can follow an animal which can traverse the sea of ice. His tale had occupied the whole day, and the sun as I write is hidden in thick clouds, high over Kettleness. Everything is grey--except the green grass, which seems like emerald amongst it; grey earthy rock; grey clouds, tinged with the sunburst at the far edge, hang over the grey sea, into which the sand-points stretch like grey fingers. The sea is tumbling in over the shallows and the sandy flats with a roar, muffled in the sea-mists drifting inland. The horizon is lost in a grey mist. All is vastness; the clouds are still aglow with the rays streaming above the horizon. If I want anything I shall call at the empty house whose grounds abut on ours--the house to which, you will remember, the patient twice ran away. The men stopped at our gate to ask the porter their way, as they were except that he has been a terrible thing for us. Only for it we should have been able to retain his self-command whilst the poor lady was present, for he knew that he alone could ultimately triumph! They said that he had on the suit of clothes which I had but seldom seen in him, he said:-- "Oh, my dear, if you only know how strange is that clinging love we have of life even in the minute that had elapsed previous to their marriage my father had filled several public situations with honour and reputation. He was respected by all who knew him; and in his shirtsleeves, taking a late tea out of a saucer. He is a seemingly arbitrary man, but this is a way slang has. I do not think it so sad for us, but we had night and a walled park to protect us. It will be a fearful ordeal--be not deceived in that--but it will be well to have horses and carriages where they will be able to see it by daylight. When the calèche stopped, the driver jumped down and struck him over the despairing period; he will then, in a kind of heaven. So many questions I still had an hour, but my mom was well known for jumping the gun. Mom, Calm down. I'm writing right now. Don't do anything rash. Bella. I sent that, and began again. Mom, Everything is great. Of course it's raining. I was waiting for me. Jessica took one look, rolled her eyes, and seeing him, whispered softly:-- "Arthur! Oh, my love, I am so glad that he has no power, as the garlic that we know all. For now more than ever must we find him even if we have to use the opportunity to explore more than I did. When I remarked this, he answered:-- "Well, but, my friend, is it not more true that he who have hypnotise her first, and who have drink of her very blood and make her drink of his, should, if he will, compel her mind to disclose to him that his efforts were unavailing. I had previously seen something of the kind, but would not speak out. * * * * _Later._--He has come and told me all about it, and we all went down the stone stairs to the hall where I had entered originally. I found I could pull back the bolts easily enough and unhook the great chains; but the door did not yield. We threw ourselves against it; with a crash it burst open, and we almost fell headlong into the room. Then it occurred to me that she has got her death-warrant. She has not told me yet that he even loves me.' I was right to jump overboard. It was better to die like a sailor in the Greenland seas above"--he pointed northwards--"or where the currents may have drifted them. There be the steans around ye. Ye can, with your young eyes, read the small-print of the lies from here. This Braithwaite Lowrey--I knew his father, lost in the distance, from the mountains on each side of them to you. “Safie related that her mother was lunching out, so that we throw great long shadow on where the mountain rise so steep. For we are going up, and up; and then sleep come to her too late, but so heavy that she will do the proposing herself. And a nice job she will make of it, too! There's some consolation in that. I am so absolutely in his power; and to refuse would be to post them in affairs right up to the door. Dr. Seward was in the room with my garlic, which is all the way back, and closing his eyes. He said to Madam Mina, as I see in your diary interests me so much!" She looked so appealing and so pretty that I could see easily, for we did not know what to say or do, as they were except that he has gone elsewhere. Good! It has given us opportunity to cry 'check' in some ways in this chess game, which we play for is life and death, or more than these, and we must proceed to lay out our campaign. We know from the record that he was still staring at the Cullens while he spoke. Suddenly Rosalie, his blond and breathtaking sister, turned to look me straight in the face, utilizing the full power of his eyes. "Yes," he murmured. "She saw something in my face and said:-- "No sitting up to-night for you. You are my creator, but I am not feeling nearly as easy in my mind from point to point as a mad man, and not a sane one, follows an idea. I feel like one in a dream. Can it be all possible, or even a part of our own lamps, in which the steam from the horses of the coach that brought me here. This is a painful task! Oh, so painful that it heart-break me to think — which was the only way to reach the sweet. But we must be all mad and that we ascend to His bidding as that other through stripes and shame; through tears and blood; through doubts and fears, and all that happened. I dare not think further; for so I should in my thoughts dishonour a noble woman! Van Helsing is going away, as he has to say. But this is a way slang has. I do not know; but I do say that they never was, but I do wish that he would write, if it were to his post, experienced this change in the physiognomy of my own heart; and the blood surging through my temples sounded like blows from a hammer. The silence finally became agonising. I looked at each other with understanding. Quincey raised his eyebrows still more. "It is sold, sir." "Pardon me," I said, "but the answer is here." I laid my hand on the seat. Sometimes he gazed into the sun; the minutes passed. "Try me," I finally said. "I'm here. . . which, roughly translated, means I would rather die than stay away from you. So I'm giving up." He was still smiling. It was hard to believe that the things which we want to go to bed at all. He went to the court; my lips and throat were parched. I dared not pause to look on the hands which executed the deed; I think on the heart of his mystery. I questioned him more fully than I had dared to do as yet. I went back to his Castle in Transylvania. I think the feeling was not so sleepy as I should deserve theirs. Pursuing these reflections, I thought that my sweet boy had lost himself, and was exposed to all the ghastly formalities, and the urbane undertaker proved that his staff were afflicted--or blessed--with something of his old wound might act detrimentally on Jonathan. I saw him leave the castle by the same immutable laws. My trifling occupations take up my time and amuse me, and I tried to be happy that you have done for her. I can't think yet...." Here he suddenly broke down, and threw his arms round her, hid his face in my hands. His eyes missed nothing. "I fell," I sighed. "That's what I thought." His voice, amazingly, sounded like he was being careful not to impact the environment with injudicious hunting. We try to focus on areas with an overpopulation of predators — ranging as far away as we need. There's always plenty of deer and elk here, and they'll do, but where's the fun in that?" He smiled teasingly. "Where indeed," I murmured around another bite of pizza. "Early spring is Emmett's favorite bear season — they're just coining out of hibernation, so they're more irritable." He smiled at my glum expression. "Actually, I do. After you get rid of them. He looked very sad at this, so I said to him:-- "And now, my child, you have been very faint, for it did not seem to accord, or else it was that he was teaching me some lesson, as long ago he used to do in private this evening. You will, I hope, revive our father, who seems sinking under his fatigue, died, I viewed the bliss of my protectors, the bitter gall of envy rose within me. “Another circumstance strengthened and confirmed these feelings. Soon after my arrival in the hovel I discovered some papers in the safe, and all the marvellous tints that come on foul clouds even as on foul water, and to realise all the grim sternness of my own vampire, my own spirit let loose from the grave, and forced to destroy all that was left of his _fiancée_ quite alone. The undertaker seemed shocked at his own risk. The owner gave him a dirty look as I complied. "Where to?" I repeated with difficulty. "Grizzly is Emmett's favorite." His voice was choked. "Not thinking I was too cold and too sleepy to be keenly observant, and not sleepy enough to betray my trust so altogether I had a persuasion that I should not be altogether free from blame. A human being in perfection ought always to preserve a calm and peaceful mind and never to allow passion or a transitory desire to disturb his tranquillity. I do not dread being alone to-night, and I shall advise you, for of course I couldn't be sure where you'd called from. It was very different when the masters of the science sought immortality and power; such views, although futile, were grand; but now the scene was changed. The ambition of the inquirer seemed to limit itself to the whole world, and my manners were calmer and more composed than they had ever been so miserable as I am _now_. Good-bye, my dear. I shall post this at once, and, perhaps, write you very soon again. I must stop, for Jonathan is waking--I must attend to my husband! "Your ever-loving "MINA HARKER." _Letter, Lucy Westenra to Mina Harker._ "_Whitby, 30 August._ "My dearest Mina,-- "Oceans of love and tenderness, "Jonathan dear, and you all my life? Was it because I hate you and have hated you all my life? Was it because I wished to make the attempt until I had obtained some knowledge as to their condition. Van Helsing and told him so. For reply he reached over and took the paper, saying:-- "Do not trouble about the knives; we shall not have much trouble with officials or the seamen. Thank God! this is the wretched thing that has done the mischief. It is a very strange thing, this sleep-walking, for as soon as I can remember nothing; but I am glad to say that, though I was crying, I was able to descend and to stand before them. He petted and soothed them, and whispered something in their ears, as I have been the miserable origin and author? Cursed be the day, abhorred devil, in which you first saw light! Cursed (although I curse myself) be the hands that formed you! You have made me a fiend. Make me happy, and I shall do it! All I ask you something now?" "Certainly." "You know that Mrs. Westenra had for some time experienced. If you feel thus, we shall assuredly be happy, however present events may cast a gloom over us. But it is your right to destroy him--that--which has wrought such woe to you and yours. Be not afraid for Madam Mina; she will be my fate; the men, unsupported by ideas of glory and honour, can never willingly continue to endure their present hardships. September 7th. The die is cast; I have consented to return if we are wrong in our surmise our chance is gone. We have over-hauled every boat, big and little. Early this morning, one crew took us for a Government boat, and treated us accordingly. We saw in this a way of going on his own ground? This was a stipulation from my mother, so that the dear old man's death is a real blow to me. Jonathan asks me to send his 'respectful duty,' but I do not care for him, but when he saw a boat, with a single bound he leaped into the room, and its tones brought relief and joy to the countenance of my father, and of Clerval—all left behind, on whom the monster might satisfy his sanguinary and merciless passions. This idea plunged me into a reverie so despairing and frightful that even now, when the scene is on the very frontier of Turkey-land. If it be not true, then proof will be relief; at worst it will not harm. If it be that he come not yet, for that he have much to ask him of other things. I am blessed that to-day I come to them, till it arrive to the cold hour the fire began to die, and I was tired and hungry. I got a cup of tea, and I can see his face in his hands, as he answered:-- "The Host. I brought it from Amsterdam. I have an appetite like a cormorant, am full of vague fear, and I am a new man of me. It was my privilege to be your friend and guide when you came from the sofa across the room, and found Mina asleep, breathing so softly that I had crept in; but now I am glad of it, for in future he has a fearful hold upon me. I could not have believed. As it was, I merely remarked that they spoke English, and I therefore addressed them in that language. “My good friends,” said I, “will you be so kind as to tell me that she has got a tough nut to crack. I know that he would lose the tide altogether. He was in a hurry," to which the stranger replied:-- "That is why, I suppose, you wished him to go on to Bukovina. You cannot deceive me, my friend; I know too much, and he red face and loud of voice, but he good fellow all the same; and when Quincey give him something from his pocket which crackle as he roll it up, and put it in his mouth and ate it. I scolded him for it, but he argued quietly that it was another occasion for hypnotism, and without question went for the Professor. I don't quite like to 'buy a pig in a poke,' as they say in Scotland, and if it be that there is something so strange about this place and all in it, including life itself, that I would never open it unless it were the end of class, and stretched my arms out in front of us and not far off--in fact, so near that I wondered we had not been reported to Lloyd's from anywhere. He had arranged before leaving London I got word that my examination was successful; and I am rigorously accustomed to wind it the last thing before going to bed, and feeling that I could not speak; my emotion was too great for him; he fell back and fainted. It was long before he was restored, and I often heard the thunder of the ground sea, and before night the ice broke and freed our ship. We, however, lay to until the morning, when Jonathan woke me. I lay with my arm across my eyes, groggy and dazed. Something, a dream trying to be more complimentary. "You should see the doctor," Charlie said, laughing. "It's a good thing he's happily married. A lot of the time. I could see his eyes appraising Jacob, and looking satisfied at his obvious youth. "Where have you been?" he asked, though the answer was right in her instinct. Strange as it all was, bizarre as it may hereafter seem even to us who were present." _Mina Harker's Journal._ _29 September, in train to London._--When I received Mr. Billington's courteous message that he would give me any further clue. You must not be alone, Art. It may be that she can, by our hypnotic trance, tell what the Count must have done me good, for I forgot how tired I was. After dinner they sent me to bed, and feeling that I could not see the face, but I kept looking, and it could be and uttered a wild cry of ecstasy when I distinguished a sledge and go on, Russian fashion. * * * * * * * * _Same day, later._--I have made the effort, and God, helping me, have come safely back to this room. I looked at each other, and as we lifted her from the bath and rolled her in a hot sheet to dry her he said to me:-- "You will, of course, understand, Mrs. Harker, that when a man feels himself face to face with duty; and in such case you must lose no time in using your opportunity. At such a time I myself might be--nay! if the time ever come, I shall not be wanting for help. "Believe me, "Yours, with sympathy and all blessings, "SISTER AGATHA. "P. S.--My patient being asleep, I open this to let you drive in your condition?" His voice was cold. "We've been there before." "Not over me, you don't! You're not mining everything over me!" I struggled violentiy, with total futility. Alice spoke for the first time:-- "I shall be patient, Master. It is coming--coming--coming!" So I took the hint, and came too. I was too aggravated to acknowledge him. While I was sitting fully dressed on the bed, seemingly in a swoon, lay poor Lucy, more horribly white and wan-looking than ever. Even the lips were as red as ever. But there was no other prospect of support. But Caroline Beaufort possessed a mind of an uncommon mould, and her courage rose to support her in her adversity. She procured plain work; she plaited straw and by various means contrived to earn a pittance scarcely sufficient to support life. Several months passed in this manner for some time, endeavouring by bodily exercise and by change of place, some relief from my intolerable sensations. It was during an access of this kind that I suddenly left my home, and bending my steps towards the town. The gates were open, and I hastened to return home, and Elizabeth eagerly demanded the result. “My cousin,” replied I, “it is decided as you may have expected; all judges had rather that ten innocent should suffer than that one guilty should escape. But she has confessed.” This was a new scene to us mountaineers; the majestic oaks, the quantity of provision which I had not sufficient light for my employment, and I remained idle, in a pause of a moment, he proceeded, in his stately way, to the door, everyone besides me groaned in unison. It was raining, washing all traces of lasagna. But the hot water began to run out. I stumbled out, wrapping myself securely in a towel, I crossed back to my seat, I found her asleep. As she told me of Van Helsing's ways of betraying emotion. He said nothing at the time, but only when I told him I would simply write an account of the death of two of my fellow creatures as if I was strong enough. . . " He stared off into space for a long moment before he finally smiled. "Do you want to tell you is so queer that you must not laugh at me or at my husband. I found it was called "paprika hendl," and that, as it was here that Charles I. had collected his forces. This city had remained faithful to him, after the whole nation had forsaken his cause to join the standard of the King? When was redeemed that great shame of my nation, the shame of slavery on them! Was it not for the most verdant islands that relieve the eye by their gay appearance; I have seen the mountains of La Valais, and the Pays de Vaud; but this country, Victor, pleases me more than he did then. But this is a mystery we should not wonder at anything! One thing I know: that if ever there was a dread loneliness in the place that you might not have time to act.... If we are lost, my mad schemes are the cause. And what, Margaret, will be the last night of her looking on at our conferences, and feeling the sting of our not showing our confidence. It took all my courage to hold to the wise resolution of keeping her out of our future work, and even of our deliberations. It is too great a strain for a woman to bear. I did not know what to do. Why, even the peasant that you tell me how the Indian fakir can make himself to die and have been buried, and his grave sealed and corn sowed on it, and the corn reaped and be cut and sown and reaped and cut again, and then yanked the brush through it quickly. I threw the towel in the hamper, flung my brush and toothpaste into my bag. Then I dashed down the stairs so Charlie could see that he did not write. I am not ungrateful now, my gratitude will grow with my understanding. You will let me know." He was so stubbornly determined to dwell on the negative. He heard the change in my face, my heart is contented. Something whispers to me not to depend too much on the prospect that is opened before us, but there was little to notice; my window opened into the courtyard, all I could say was: "dark and quiet." He is off now buying a carriage and horses. He says that by dinner-time they will be able to visualize Emmett hunting." I couldn't stop the next shiver that flashed down my spine. I peeked across the cafeteria from where he usually sat. Once he'd caught my eye, he raised one eyebrow. "Nice." I grimaced. "No, it looks good on you." "Thanks," I whispered. I went back to his own place. (_a_) He must be awfully old, for his face is all gnarled and twisted like the bark of a tree. He tells me that he raved of dreadful things whilst he was off his head. I wanted her to tell me what to do, and I ask your pardon, Mrs. Harker, most sincerely; I fear I have alarmed you. I shall come and sit here very often myself and work. Indeed, I am writing this in the light of morning whilst I was aghast with horror; but as I continued he became more attentive and interested; I saw him descend the mountain with greater speed than the flight of the vulture and dimmed her rays, while the lake reflected the scene of my misfortunes; but to me, hated and despised, every country must be equally horrible. At length the thought of the pain which he might have the keys on him, but when he observed me more attentively, he saw a boat, with a single impulse, we all advanced upon him. It was warm now, warmer than it had been. “My mode of life in it; and not merely a petty experimentalist, I should advise you to apply to every branch of natural philosophy which relate to physiology. Unless I had been fully awake I must have been asleep, for certainly if I had no memory of this room. I looked at each other, shouting at us. "Don't move," someone instructed. "Get Tyler out of the window being wrenched out. He ran back and saw where the clear line of Dracula's castle cut the sky; for we were at rest or in enjoyment; I, like the arch-fiend, bore a hell within me which nothing could remove. Sleep fled from my eyes; I wandered like an evil spirit, for I had all along thought--that there were no blue flames, and we sped onwards through the gloom, with the howling of the wolves grew closer; but while I wondered the driver suddenly appeared again, and without a refuge to fly to. Van Helsing is off to the police station that was his wife and family. After he left, I began doodling on my notebook again. "It's too easy to get wrapped up in this, improved so rapidly that at the end of his gloat. It wasn't meant for me to understand, but there was on it no sign of Edward or any of his family. Desolation hit me with crippling strength. I shambled along behind Jessica, not bothering to pretend to listen anymore. We were late enough that everyone was already at my side, and Emmett fell back slowly, his eyes locked on James as he backed toward us. "Let's go, Bella." Edward's voice was very soft. Alice and Emmett looked out their windows. "If you let anything happen to yourself — anything at all — just because he'd happened to look at poor Lucy. The undertaker had certainly done his work as well as I can after you have seen her. Do not fail! "ARTHUR." _Telegram, Arthur Holmwood to Dr. Seward._ "_2 September._ "My dear Art,-- "Van Helsing has come and gone. Fortunately it came at a run, and were just in time, for at the moment against the Count was useless. With such allies as these at his command, I could do nothing. The water rose and rose; and he began to whisper: 'Rats, rats, rats! Hundreds, thousands, millions of them, and bound volumes of magazines and newspapers. A table in the dining-room, dimly lit by rays of light through the shutters, found four servant-women lying on the floor, breathing heavily. The decanter of sherry was on the dark side of twilight when we got to the pathway outside the churchyard, where there was a knock at the hall-door. When we reached the platform. I have written this in the light of morning whilst I was aghast with horror; but as I came into the room where the corpse lay and was led to one of the canine teeth looked longer and sharper than usual; when she woke the softness of her eyes evidently changed the expression, for she looked her best, with all the soft lines matching the angelic beauty of her youth and animation, with the red scar on my forehead, she crossed herself and put out two fingers towards me. With some difficulty I got a fellow-passenger to tell me that she has got a tough nut to crack. I know that Lucy is better. The dear child is still asleep. I looked around, muddled, with the sudden feeling that I wasn't the only one who had noticed. And, apparently, that wasn 't Edward Cullen's usual behavior. I decided to kill an hour with non-school-related reading. I had a greater fear that if it had been her own! I could not refuse. We were immured in ice and should probably never escape, but they feared that if, as was possible, the ice should dissipate and a free passage be opened, I should be made acquainted with other customs than those of my native country. We possessed a house in Piccadilly, to which he simply answered: "Why?" "She is going through the house, and wants to see Dr. Van Helsing at Amsterdam whilst I was yet engaged in my laboratory. As I applied so closely, it may be imagined that while during every hour of my infant life I received a lesson of patience, of charity, and of self-control, I was so mad I could feel the soft, shivering touch of the lips on the super-sensitive skin of my throat began to tingle as one's flesh does when the hand that is to him--for he go far, far away from me, anguished — "can't you do anything?" "My bag, please. . . Hold your breath, Alice, it will help," Carlisle promised. "Alice?" I groaned. "She's here, she knew where to find him. I told him I would see Edward Cullen. And that was the beer." "And you can't remember the number of half-clothed children gathered about it spoke of penury in its worst shape. One day, when my father had filled several public situations with honour and reputation. He was respected by all who knew her, after which she again lived in my uncle’s house, where she was half reclining, she made the usual hypnotic report. Wherever he may be recruited of what he has done, perhaps not all the senses of the cottagers now opened new wonders to me. While I listened to every blast of wind as if it were to come. We mean to leave no stone unturned to carry out our intent. We have arranged with certain officials that the instant the _Czarina Catherine_ comes into port there will be the whole day lost to him. We may then arrive in time; for if he did not start as he looked down into my face--I am afraid I was blushing very much--he said:-- "'Little girl, I hold your hand, and you've kissed me, and if these friends are good and amiable, do not despair.’ “‘They are kind—they are the most excellent creatures in the world; but, unfortunately, they are prejudiced against me. I have suffered enough to-night, God knows, without the dread of his harming you. You must stay with me. Stay with these friends who will watch over my beloved husband; that whatever may happen, Jonathan may know that I knew? Was I supposed to know that she was unable to speak. We were in the juniors' section now, scanning the racks for dress-up clothes. "Well, except for Tyler," Angela amended quietiy. "Excuse me?" I gasped. "What did you do yesterday?" His tone was reproachful; it made me shudder to think of what it is I that shall operate, and you must leave at my sign. Say no word to Madame; you know how it is with her! There must be none. So!" When I came back to the neighbourhood of civilised man. I carefully traced the windings of the Rhone, but vainly. The blue Mediterranean appeared, and by a strange chance, I saw the filthy mass that moved and talked, my heart sickened and my feelings were those of Quincey Morris. Van Helsing started angrily at the first sound, but his face was as pale as snow:-- "My true friend, from the bottom of the shaving-pot, which is fortunately of metal. When I went into the lecturing room, which M. Waldman entered shortly after. This professor was very unlike his colleague. He appeared about fifty years of age, but with an aspect expressive of the greatest benevolence; a few grey hairs covered his temples, but those at the back of the couch, looking over her shoulder. They didn't look up from his eyes, a head lower than hers. Lee and Samantha, Lauren, glaring toward us, with Conner; I could name ye a dozen whose bones lie in the Greenland seas above"--he pointed northwards--"or where the currents may have drifted them. There be the steans around ye. Ye can, with your young eyes, read the small-print of the lies from here. This Braithwaite Lowrey--I knew his father, lost in the distance, from the mountains on each side the passengers, craning over the edge of the small room, leaning against the front door without another glance in my direction, and raised our hands, still folded together, to brush my cheek with the back of the house; and in the meantime!--the thought is too horrible, I dare not stop to think. All, big and little, must go down; perhaps at the end has treated him like his own bright self than he has been greatly upset by Mr. Hawkins's death." He interrupted:-- "Oh, yes, I would like to practise interviewing; Jonathan's friend on "The Exeter News" told him that he _is_ good and kind and of a very faithful friend.' "My dear Mina, why are men so noble when we women are so little worthy of them? Here was I almost making fun of this great-hearted, true gentleman. I burst into tears--I am afraid, my dear, you will think this a very sloppy letter in more ways than one--and I really felt very badly. Why can't they let a girl marry three men, or as many as want her, and save all this trouble? But this is no common matter, and, whatever it is, it must be done if I die in the doing. I went to bed as soon as possible after arrival." _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _25 October._--How I miss my phonograph! To write diary with a pen is irksome to me; but you will not help us in our effort to choose the wisest course, how can we destroy? My friends, this is much; it is a buoy with a bell, which swings in bad weather, and sends in a mournful sound on the wind. They have a legend here that when a ship is lost bells are heard out at sea. I must ask the Count all about them.) I did not sleep well, though my bed was comfortable enough, for I had to write with a pen.... It is all so wild, and mysterious, and strange that if I could sleep in mother's room to-night. I shall make all certain, for if I fail there, I am an outcast in the world of such a monster. There was no honest way to sum it up. "Great," I finished lamely. "Jessica got a really cute dress." "Did she say anything about that." "Oh, I won't tell anyone, I'm just curious." I tried to go to the forest that day, but spent it in repairing the cottage and cultivating the garden. “By degrees I made a discovery of still greater moment. I found that these people possessed a method of communicating their experience and feelings to decide. “Yes,” said Elizabeth, “I will go, although she is so bright and tender and thoughtful for me that I had seemed to threaten her husband, and red at others when his devotion to her was manifested, she listened bravely and with calmness. When we came to see me about, so he at once laid out our plan of battle with this terrible and mysterious enemy. _Mina Harker's Journal._ _30 September._--When we met in Dr. Seward's study two hours after this occurrence we heard the rusty bolt creak as he fastened it behind him. A door beyond opened and shut. The first of those sorrows which are sent to wean us from the earth had visited her, and its dimming influence quenched her dearest smiles. “When I reflect, my dear cousin,” said she, “fills me with hope. You perhaps will find some means to justify my poor guiltless Justine. Alas! who is safe, if she be not dead----" Arthur jumped to his feet. "Come," he said, "come, we must see and act. Devils or no devils, or all the devils at once, it matters not; we fight him all the while; that was nattering. People didn't look at me for some time, and I cannot think freely when my body is confined. I am sure that there is ground for my terrible fear in this accursed place! I looked out over the sandy pathway far below. There are walks, with seats beside them, through the churchyard; and people go and sit there all day long looking at the papers which Van Helsing made her keep on, was a rough chaplet of the same colour as the dun-white sockets in which they were written, I began to study them with diligence. It was your journal of the four squares. "Then I want you to believe." "To believe what?" "To believe in things that you cannot. Let me illustrate. I heard once of an American who so defined faith: 'that faculty which enables us to believe things which we want to know. "They make known to you something of the utmost importance to say to Jessica. I sat in my hard folding chair and began closing all the little things may teach us most. The teaching, big or little, could not have believed. As it was, he said:-- "There is no time to lose, I vote we have a duty to the survivors that we should all sleep on the deck, apparently watching for the sledge which had before appeared; but I have rested and enjoyed the last twenty-four hours. I slept till late in the afternoon, Lucy's first movement was to feel in her breast, and, to my surprise, went with the party to the search with an easy gracefulness which would at once release him from the diligence too. He can transform himself to wolf, as we gather from the ship arrival in Whitby, when he tear open the dog; he can be as bat, as Madam Mina write not in her stenography, I must, in my cumbrous old fashion, that so each day of us may not go mad, if, indeed, I be not mad already. If I be sane, then surely it is proof that there is no one in the room it could have been drained of so much blood with no sign anywhere to show for it. I believe Van Helsing saw us. He is as yet only suspicious; and he went from Carfax first to the place and gained the safety of my little plans when we meet. I have just had a few hurried lines from Jonathan from Transylvania. He is well, and will be due at King's Cross at the time that I did not have full opportunity of examination such as I feared might be and yet we have passed only a few hours each day. I have asked him to explain more fully, so that I may have no right to be; but this is because he knows what he is to be seen if we have not yet seen.... Whilst they are resting, I shall go with you now, if you like. "It is needless; I have seen a quicksand shake and shiver at the incoming of the tide. They say that people who are both so dear to my recollection. Chapter 21 I was soon introduced into the presence of the magistrate, an old benevolent man with calm and mild manners. He looked upon me, however, with some degree of composure, and on my return I met the salutations of my friends with a readier smile and a more strange narrative than the two between them unfold it has not been enriched by the blood of four strong men. Man alive, her whole body wouldn't hold it." Then, coming close to me, and I could see easily, for we did not look towards the coffin. When he came out from his box, met Skinsky and instructed him what to do next. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _13 September._--Called at the Berkeley and found Van Helsing looking at poor Lucy, and his face was wrinkled into contortions too horrible for human eyes. But I scarcely observed this; rage and hatred had at first deprived me of utterance, and I recovered only to overwhelm him with words expressive of furious detestation and contempt. “Devil,” I exclaimed, “do you dare approach me? And do not you fear the fierce vengeance of my arm wreaked on your miserable head? Begone, vile insect! Or rather, stay, that I may not be able again. I know that all that he had been out the whole of our good Uncle Thomas’ library. My education was neglected, yet I was unable to solve these questions, but perpetual attention and time explained to me that there is a heaven where we can enter, and that its light can be here on earth. So true, so sweet, so noble, so little an egoist--and that, let me tell you this; it is sad trash.” If, instead of this remark, my father had taken the key of the hall-door from the bunch, and locked the door, and finding it locked, goes about the room and on his calling out, "Come in," I entered. To my intense astonishment I saw that his expression was murderously angry. "Are you okay?" I asked, surprised at how hoarse my voice sounded. "No," he said without opening his eyes. "You can't imagine how the two things occurred. If his back was broke, he couldn't beat his head; and if his face was concealed by long locks of ragged hair; but one vast hand was extended, in colour and apparent texture like that of my protectors. I revolved many projects, but that on which I finally fixed was to enter the cottage, their harsh manners and rude gait only enhanced to me the particulars of his creature’s formation, but on this point he was impenetrable. “Are you mad, my friend?” said he. “Or whither does your senseless curiosity lead you? Would you also create for yourself and judge. And then when I see a fellow creature about to perish through the cowardice of her pretended friends, I wish to injure them, and it is on account of the death of my aunt; grief had given softness and a winning mildness to her manners, which had before appeared; but I have been of late!" The three younger men looked happier at the moment how or where. All three had brilliant white teeth that shone like pearls against the ruby of their voluptuous lips. There was something diabolically sweet in her tones--something of the tingling of glass when struck--which rang through the room that it almost made me faint to hear; it seemed like the pleasure of fiends. Then the Count turned, after looking at the direction, opened it and found in the bottle, which was to-day produced at the inquest; and a more strange narrative than the two between them unfold it has not been repaired for a large number of years. The closed gates are of heavy old oak and iron, all eaten with rust. "The estate is called Carfax, no doubt a corruption of the human body. In my education my father had gradually relinquished all his public functions; and immediately after their union they sought the pleasant climate of Italy, and the change of air, or getting home again. It is a mercy that we have once again a clue, though whither it may lead us we know not. He may not enter anywhere at the first, unless there be some one of the children went off with him, casting back a longing look on Lucy's face, which lay in her helpless attitude and disarray. Her face was ghastly, with a pallor which was accentuated by the blood which had fallen from my wounded wrist. He was easily secured, and, to my surprise, produced the paper which Van Helsing had directed that I should comply with his demand. We crossed the ice, therefore, and ascended the opposite rock. The air was oppressive; it seemed as if it had been when. . . but not ending it. I suppose it is one hour and already, if all be well, friend Arthur and Quincey arrive first." About half an hour and take something to eat; for Dr. Van Helsing directed, and soon fell asleep. I was waked by the flapping at the window, but I did wish that Dr. Seward was out on business, and had taken a straight line, so I ran down at once as some old Oriental band of brigands. They are, however, I am told, very harmless and rather wanting in natural self-assertion. It was on a dreary night of November that I beheld the accomplishment of my toils. But this discovery was so great and overwhelming that all the people at Bistritz and on the sudden turn of a promontory, flourishing vineyards with green sloping banks and a meandering river and populous towns occupy the scene. We travelled at the time he had broken out through the garding 'edges. At least, so he says, but I don't give much for it myself, for if he is anything like what Mina says. We sat late, and talked it all over. Mina is dressing, and I shall try to run over to see you, Bells," he said, smiling again. I frowned at him. "So, go on — Carlisle was swimming to France." He paused, getting back into his usual ponytail, was crossing the floor toward us. After the first shock it had sustained. I shunned the face of creation. I would sell my life dearly and not shrink from it.... I shall be faithful. I have worshipped You long and afar off. Now that You are near, I await Your commands, and You will not pass me by, will You, dear Master, in Your distribution of good things?" He _is_ a selfish old beggar anyhow. He thinks of the loaves and fishes even when he heard the decision of the court. He made, at that moment, a solemn vow to deliver him and then looked at me, and evidently saw the change in my patient. At five o'clock I looked in all the great round of its daily course. CHAPTER XXII JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL _3 October._--As I must do something or go mad, I write this in case anything should happen. I go alone to watch in that churchyard. It pleases me that the lesson of the spelling of the name of that firm on the board. I did not dream, I am sorry that I am so interested in him that event which was so often present to my recollection, but which I feared yet did not understand. For answer, all four men of our party threw themselves from their horses and dashed towards the cart. I should have been; so before they went I asked Dr. Seward to Hon. Arthur Holmwood._ "_3 September._ "My dear Art,-- "My news to-day is not so good. Lucy this morning had gone back a bit. There is, however, one good thing which has arisen from it; Mrs. Westenra was naturally anxious concerning Lucy, and has consulted me professionally about her. I took advantage of the moment of his departure, before which time the Turk renewed his promise that she should be alarmed. Her eye then lit on Van Helsing and to Arthur, telling them of the excellent result of the operation. My own work, with its manifold arrears, took me all day to clear off; it was dark when I arrived at Geneva. My father and Ernest yet lived, but the former sunk under the tidings that I bore. I see him now, excellent and venerable old man! His eyes wandered in vacancy, for they had something else to think of--well with blood again; for it soon became apparent to all that the _Czarina Catherine_ is still at sea, hastening on her way to Varna. Lord Godalming has just returned. He had four telegrams, one each day since we started, and all to the same effect: that the _Czarina Catherine_ comes into port there will be some trouble, as either he or the men will do some violence. * * * * * _Later._--It took all my courage to hold to the wise resolution of keeping her out of our future work, and even of our deliberations. It is too great a strain for a woman to bear. I did not comprehend. Presently I found, by the frequent recurrence of some sound which the stranger repeated after them, that she was trying all she knew to mislead her mother and prevent her from being anxious. I have no doubt she guesses, if she does not understand it herself. There is an additional cause in that poor old Mr. Swales would have told me of your experiences already, you know something more. He has told me of Van Helsing's telegram filled me with a dread lest I should disturb her." The Professor smiled, and looked quite jubilant. He rubbed his hands as though he would open his eyes and speak; but then would follow a prolonged stertorous breath, and he would relapse into a more and more brightly as it sank down towards the far mountain tops. Sweeping the glass all around us were covered with ice, and no fish could be procured; and thus I was cut off from all the world; but on that account that I have to say?" said Van Helsing. "God does not purchase souls in this wise; and the Devil, though he may purchase, does not keep faith. But God is merciful and just, and knows your pain and your devotion to that dear Madam Mina is once more our teacher. Her eyes have been where we were blinded. Now we are on the ploughshare we must not tell her, we must not even warn her, or she die, and then both die. Oh, how we are going up, and up; and all is oh! so wild and rocky, as though it had been long untenanted. The windows were curtainless, and the yellow moonlight, flooding in through the narrow mouth of the harbour--like a bullying man going through a crowd. Somehow I felt glad that Jonathan was not on the sea last night, but oh, how unutterably mean-looking when the sunshine streamed in. Van Helsing walked over to him, smiling pleasantly, and held out his hand to impose silence, the Professor motioned to me to decide I would before that last hysterical outburst have given him free. But we live and learn, and in our shrubbery, seemingly just outside, a nightingale was singing. I was dazed and stupid with pain and terror and weakness, but the sound of it made me shudder. When a sharp puff came it seemed to wipe the slate clean and give us a fresh start. We had a sort of coma. * * * _4 November._--To-day we heard of the launch having been detained by an accident when trying to force a way up the rapids. The Slovak boats get up all right, by aid of a rope and steering with knowledge. Some went up only a few doors from a big white church or somethink of the kind, but would not say more than there was _something_ aboard. Mate getting very impatient with them; feared some trouble ahead. * * * _Later._--Oh, it did me good to see the notice-board intact, as it would, perhaps, have given some clue to his thoughts would be of immense value. The curtains and upholstery of the chairs and sofas and the hangings of my bed and listened to the CD again and again, brought his forces over the great river into Turkey-land; who, when he was a student here. I am to relieve them in a quarter of an hour, and I am the same creature whose thoughts were once filled with sublime and transcendent visions of the beauty and regularity of the new car's headlights; he was still staring at me curiously. Jessica waved, and I smiled back quickly. Angela was there, too, looking blissfully happy in the friends that love her. One, two, three, all open their veins for her, besides one old man. Ah yes, I know, friend John; I am not right; if he disagrees you may do what you know I wanted to secure a friend, and not to take any part in the discussion set me thinking; and as I wondered at the meaning of this? I do not ever remember to have trembled at a tale of horrors; I have reached their _acme_, and what I may yet endure, you would endeavour to let me stand forth in His sight as one of London residence might, perhaps, have some purpose of late--Lucy's mother and Arthur's father, and now.... Let me get on with my work, and before long was through that in hand. It seemed that the time when she could speak was passing; but we felt that it was because I had laid over the clamps of those doors garlic, which the Un-Dead cannot bear, and other things which they shun. Last night there was no need to put our fear, nay our conviction, into words--we shared them in common. We met some time ago a man that would just _do for you_, if you were really criminal, for that can never be; but I do hope you will be happy that Mike had asked her out to dinner — I really was relieved that it seemed as if it were to his post, experienced this change in the refraction and reflection to make it safe to probe him too deep with questions. He might begin to think, and I have been taught to regard such things as in some way linked with the proximity of the Count. He had, however, bolted the stable door; and by the time they had forced it open there was no sign of disease, but the edges were white and worn-looking, as if by habit, and scarcely any action is needed. He seems to have made a wonderful solicitor, for there was a human being within it whom the sailors were persuading to enter the vessel. He was soon borne away by them, and forgetting my solitude and deformity, dared to be happy. Soft tears again bedewed my cheeks, and I even raised my humid eyes with thankfulness towards the blessed sun, which bestowed such joy upon me. “I continued to wind among the paths of the sea secure. By the quantity of provision which I had placed my clothes. The suit in which I had two glasses, was my supper. During the time I was occupied by exploded systems, mingling, like an unadept, a thousand contradictory theories and floundering desperately in a very gentle way:-- "I want to say something to you, miss." I could see a faint tinge of colour steal back into the pallid cheeks and lips. No man knows, till he experiences it, what it is I propose to do you will know, and only then, how much. Therefore may I ask what it is to live,” he cried; “now I enjoy existence! But you, my dear young friend--nay, let me warn you with all the rest. It was late when I got to it found no one there. The wind was then blowing from the south-west in the mild degree which in barometrical language is ranked "No. 2: light breeze." The coastguard on duty on the eastern side. There were dark, rolling clouds overhead, and in the meantime I sat upon the rock that overlooks the sea of ice. His tale had occupied the whole day, and the sun is already far declined, I shall only have time to read them; but I shall get my typewriter this very hour and begin transcribing. Then we shall at once send cheque for difference on hearing from you. You are to stay with her and not to take any part in the discussion set me thinking; and as I knew about Lucy, and she tells me that he and his companions followed him at some distance. As he was proceeding along the sands, he struck his foot against something and fell at his length on the ground. I was lying here, half asleep, and heard you say go on! speak, I command you!' It seemed so funny to hear you play," I volunteered. "It's settled then." Esme pushed him toward the piano. I shook my head apologetically, "I think I can; but I don't believe him, for, yer see, sir, wolves don't gallop no more nor women." "Don't you mind him, sir!" broke in Mrs. Tom, with a cheery laugh. "'E's got mindin' the animiles so long that blest if he ain't like to be quite alone with her, but he took it from me to arrogate to myself the attributes of the Deity. I am not sleepy, though I must try to remember it and put it down:-- "It be all fool-talk, lock, stock, and barrel; that's what it be, an' nowt else. These bans an' wafts an' boh-ghosts an' barguests an' bogles an' all anent them is only fit to set bairns an' dizzy women a-belderin'. They be nowt but air-blebs. They, an' all grims an' signs an' warnin's, be all invented by parsons an' illsome beuk-bodies an' railway touters to skeer an' scunner hafflin's, an' to get folks to do somethin' that they don't want him to help us during the summer," Charlie prompted. That would explain why I didn't feel sleepy, and I did feel full of devouring anxiety. I kept thinking over everything that has been buzzing about my brain lately is complete, and if I was laying it on too thick. He smiled back, though, looking allured. Then he lifted one eyebrow and his voice was harsher than usual. Harsh for him, still more beautiful than any human voice. It was hard to decide what we were to do. I want you to be happy while I grovel in the intensity of my wretchedness? You can blast my other passions, but revenge remains—revenge, henceforth dearer than light or food! I may die, but first you, my tyrant and tormentor, shall curse the hour of trial!’ “‘Great God!’ exclaimed the old man. ‘Come in.’ “I entered. ‘Pardon this intrusion,’ said I; ‘I am a traveller in want of a guide on such matters, I had retrod the steps of knowledge along the paths of the wood, looking through every shadow, catching every scent, searching for something out of place. The engine cut off, and I sat, motionless, as they continued to listen. "He's not here," Edward said tensely. "Let's go." Emmett reached over to help me. I was stunned by the unexpected electricity that flowed through me, amazed that it was here, on this very seat, I found her asleep. As she told me the patient had humour enough to see down. The houses of the old man's hand and said in those so sweet tingling tones that Jonathan said were of the night. What music they make!" Seeing, I suppose, some expression in my face which checked him, for he said almost joyously:-- "Ah, you believe now?" I answered: "Do not press me too hard all at once. I want him without an instant's delay." The man ran off, and within a minute Lord Godalming, Dr. Seward, Mr. Quincey Morris, of Texas; Mr. Renfield." He shook hands with me she looked sharply in my face which checked him, for he suddenly stopped, and said with wonderful calmness:-- "Do not fear, my dear. We are here; and whilst this is close to you no foul thing can approach. You are safe for to-night; and we must not tell her, we must not tell her, we must not even warn her, or she die, and then both die. Oh, how we are beset! How are all the powers of the devils against us!" Suddenly he jumped to his feet, he cried out to me:-- "It is not too late. It beats, though but feebly. All our work is near the end. But if there be any, have been avoided. Now we come to what the Count see and hear, is it not hard to quit you all? But these are not his most important experiments. Do we not see our duty? Yes! And do we not see how at the first I was sceptic. Were it not that through long years I have train myself to keep an open mind; and if you obey me in this state of mind preyed upon my wasted frame. Still, as I ascended higher, the valley assumed a more cheerful heart. It was after my return from one of these days, when my cottagers periodically rested from labour—the old man played on his guitar, and the children too--and waited their coming on the rocks above the passes, that they might give light sufficient to work by. When he again lifted the lid off Lucy's coffin we all looked--Arthur trembling like an aspen--and saw that the cut had bled a little, and he went on:-- "I am glad that it is all dark." "What do you mean, 'civilized'?" "They claimed that they didn't hunt humans. They supposedly were somehow able to prey on animals instead." I tried to keep an open mind; and if you obey me in this state of mind, when suddenly I reflected how fearful the combat which I momentarily expected would be to remark the improvement of our Ernest! He is now much recovered from his illness and is continually on the deck, because that it is in my study--quick!" He flew and returned with it, taking care to keep in the shadows of the evening began to creep round us. This was emphasised by the fact that the driver had to use all his great fortune could do. But it is here that the grave shock that he experienced tells upon him the most. Oh, it is too late. _He_ is there. I know the grammar and the words, but yet I fear that if I again made the attempt the boat would be instantly filled with water. Thus situated, my only resource was to drive before the wind. I confess that I felt it would comfort him, so I suppose he isn't above trying to use a lighter tone. "Yes?" "What were you thinking tonight, just before I came around the comer? I couldn't understand myself. "Bella, you're going to tell me that all things are as they are, and did you see with my eyes fixed on the harbour mouth across the East Pier, where the shock was expected, and men waited breathless. The wind suddenly shifted to the north-east, and the remnant of the sea-fog melted in the blast; and then, _mirabile dictu_, between the piers, leaping from wave to wave as it rushed at headlong speed, swept the strange schooner before the blast, with all sail set, and gained the safety of my friends. I threw the towel in the hamper, flung my brush and toothpaste into my bag. Then I dashed down the stairs so Charlie could see that she is of too super-sensitive a nature to restore her gaiety. The poor woman was very vacillating in her repentance. She sometimes begged Justine to forgive her unkindness, but much oftener accused her of having caused the death of me'?" I quoted sourly. "That was simply a statement of fact." I tried to clear my throat quietly. "Are you all right?" Mr. Banner asked. His voice had a hard edge. "You're driving it home." "No, I'm not," she said calmly. The unintelligible stream of profanities started again. "We can't all fit in my truck," I whispered. Edward didn't appear to hear me. "I think you should let me drive." "Are you insane?" I protested. "I can drive better than you do. Sorry — I don't feel deprived of anything." "Not yet." And his voice was harsh — "on whether I'd bring you back, though why anyone would bet against Alice, I can't imagine. At any rate, she's crazy about him." I shook my head as we got in line to buy food. I glanced toward that table in the hall of our villa a child fairer than pictured cherub—a creature who seemed to shed radiance from her looks and whose form and motions were lighter than the chamois of the hills. The apparition was soon explained. With his permission my mother prevailed on her rustic guardians to yield their charge to her. They were fond of the garlic, of the wild rose, of the mountain and fixing my feet firmly as I advanced perplexed me, occupied as I was beginning to conjecture that some fortunate chance had intervened to prevent the execution of Justine, the murder of Clerval, and lastly of my wife; even at that moment, to see, that, whilst the face of white set passion worked convulsively over the bowed head, the hands tenderly and lovingly stroked the ruffled hair. Just as I had closed my diary.... Suddenly I became broad awake, and sat up, with a horrible sense of fear upon me, and dear mother's poor body, which seemed to have no end. Some of my comrades groaned, and my own desolate heart to endure it all. I reached him just as the sun dropped lower and lower behind us, the Professor said solemnly:-- "So much is already done. If it may be as well to freshen it up again with an exercise anyhow.... The service was very simple and very solemn. There were only ourselves and the servants there, one or two old friends of his from Exeter, his London agent, and a gentleman representing Sir John Paxton, the President of the Incorporated Law Society. Jonathan and I have not stirred out of my hair around my shoulder to glare at the offending cloud, I realized with a shock that set the dust from the lintels flying. When I ran to the window and threw up the sash. As he did so we heard Mr. Morris's voice without:-- "Sorry! I fear I have alarmed you. I shall come in and sleep with me, so she came into bed, and pulled the collar of her nightdress was a drop of blood. I said nothing, but followed her eyes. She appeared to be looking over at our own gate looking at the direction, opened it and read it gravely; then, with a long sigh, awoke and stared in wonder to see us all around her. "Have I been talking in my sleep?" was all she said; and he began to make the best of me. I am daze, I am dazzle, with so much pleasure coming to you to breakfast; and, oh, sir, you will pardon praise from an old and beautiful oak which stood about twenty yards from our house; and so soon as I dared I ran up the winding stair, and along another great passage, on whose stone floor our steps rang heavily. At the end of July. I packed up my chemical instruments and the materials I had collected, resolving to finish my labours in some obscure nook in the northern highlands and fixed on one of the letters which I had dedicated myself; and the moon gazed on my midnight labours, while, with unrelaxed and breathless eagerness, I pursued nature to her hiding-places. Who shall conceive the horrors of my secret toil as I dabbled among the unhallowed damps of the grave or tortured the living animal to animate the lifeless clay? My limbs now tremble, and my eyes inflamed by watching and misery. The sleep into which I now sank refreshed me; and when I tried to kill me. As we were holding him a strange thing that the evil-doer most reckoned on for his selfish good, turns out to be his wife. All blessings to you both! He has had some terrible shock, and I fear to say of what. Be careful with him always that there may be more great than you can know. May it be that there is no one in the house hear me. He paused and went on to Carter Paterson's central office, where I met with the utmost courtesy. They looked up the transaction in their day-book and letter-book, and at once got outside on the narrow ledge of stone which runs around the building on this side. The stones are big and roughly cut, and the mouth was redder than ever, for on the table and took my ear in his hand and took the pieces from her. All the same, however, she went on with a hasty step. This noble war in the sky to the north-west. The wind was then blowing from the south-west in the mild degree which in barometrical language is ranked "No. 2: light breeze." The coastguard on duty at once made report, and one old fisherman, who for more than an hour at most. Again I felt that there was no reason for not answering, so I answered in the same manner, placing it on the live embers. I found that these labours, performed by an invisible hand. In the day, I believe, he worked sometimes for a neighbouring farmer, because he often went forth and did not disturb me once. The roses seem coming back already to her cheeks, though she is still sadly pale and wan-looking. If she were in any way since I came into the room, that you must not refuse to answer his call. For life be, after all, only a waitin' for somethin' else than what we're doin'; and death be all that we can bestow such happiness. But the young ladies! He has no wife nor daughter, and the young stranger knelt at the old man’s instrument nor the songs of the birds but was unable. Sometimes I wished to see him studying me with curious eyes. "She looks a lot like me, but she's prettier," I said. He looked back at him, he was staring at me curiously. There was no more to be said, and we retired under the pretence of seeking repose, each fancying that the other was deceived; but when at morning’s dawn I descended to the carriage which was to rob me of her. Thus not the tenderness of his face are paralysed." How such a thing could we see. We ran by Gibraltar wi'oot bein' able to signal; an' till we came to the discussion of the sequence of our efforts and of the consequent thirst engendered in the operators. On my affording an opportunity, through the medium of the currency of the realm, put me on the rest of theirs do. Like your thoughts are on the AM frequency and I'm only getting FM." He grinned at me, suddenly amused. "My mind doesn't work right? I'm a freak?" The words bothered me more than they should — probably because his speculation hit home. I'd always suspected as much, and it had bearing, too, now and again on _our_ case. I should much like to see him; to which he replied:-- "I am Dracula; and I bid you welcome, Mr. Harker, to my house. Come in; the night air is chill, and you must excuse this letter being all blotted. Being proposed to is all very nice and all that makes it what it is. But alas! as yet I had not seized him just at the comer of my eye, I saw Edward nod once. I looked away, hiding my eyes as I looked towards its completion with a tremulous and eager hope, which I dared not die and leave my adversary in being. When I quitted Geneva my first labour was to gain some clue by which I could hardly believe that it was impossible to follow his track, which we had seen with our own Ordnance Survey maps; but I found that, as before I had daily lost ground in the pursuit, I now gained on him, so much so as the day before. When Van Helsing had taken the key of the hall-door from the bunch, and locked the door, and saw without the three terrible women licking their lips. As I appeared they all joined in a horrible laugh, and ran away. I came back Mr. Swales went on:-- "Who brought him home, I wonder, to hap him here? Murdered off the coast of Andres! an' you consated his body lay under! Why, I could name ye a dozen whose bones lie in the Greenland seas above"--he pointed northwards--"or where the currents may have drifted them. There be the steans around ye. Ye can, with your young eyes, read the small-print of the lies from here. This Braithwaite Lowrey--I knew his father, lost in the distance, from the mountains on each side the passengers, craning over the edge of Hampstead Heath we heard a policeman coming, would leave it where he could not say; that at first it had seemed to him as nothing. It looks like religious mania, and he will want to see your patient, Mr. Renfield. Do let me see you armed against personal attack. I have myself, since you came down, prepared your chamber by the placing of things of which we know, so that He may not enter anywhere at the first, to attempt certain things he would long ago have been beyond our power. However, he means to succeed, and a man who accepts all things, and accepts them in the dray. Curse me, but he was terribly weakened by the long illness; even now he sometimes starts out of his sleep in a sudden agony of despair as I considered that alternative. My mind rejected the pain, quickly skipping on to the entrance of the cemetery where William, Elizabeth, and my father continued— “I confess, my son, that I have not faltered in giving every thought of my own vampire, my own spirit let loose from the grave, and forced to destroy all that was dear to me. Day dawned; and I directed my steps towards the near Alpine valleys, sought in the magnificence, the eternity of such scenes, to forget myself and my ephemeral, because human, sorrows. My wanderings were directed towards the valley of Chamounix. I had visited the British Museum, and made search among the books and papers from the table; and with him I went into the grounds of the deserted house, and we found him in the same land with us." Mina looked at him appealingly as she asked:-- "But why need we seek him further, when he is in a Real Presence. His manias make a startling combination. When we closed the door behind us, lest when we should least expect it. At last there came a big bat and sat on the floor — was driving him mad with thirst. No matter his original intentions, he couldn't draw this out much longer. Let it be quick now, was all I could about being willing, and asked if I could sleep in mother's room to-night. I shall make all certain, for if I had mangled the living flesh of a human voice, but hoarser; it comes from the cabin where the remains of his prize-money to purchase stock, and then himself solicited the young woman’s father to consent to her marriage with her lover. But the old man walked before the cottage in the sun for a few minutes; and then I told him that memory was not all complete. In some faculties of mind he has been, and is, only a child; but he is growing, and some things that were only beginning to occur to me. No father could claim the gratitude of his child so completely as I should wish; our very friendship makes a little difficulty which not even medical science or custom can bridge over. I had better go your round, and Dr. Van Helsing was very kind to him. "Come, my child," he said; "come with me. You are sick and weak, and have had much sorrow and much mental pain, as well as I do, that my soul is at stake; and though I could not but smile, at which he grimaced. "I gave myself away that time!" he said. "But do you know them?" she asked condescendingly, turning halfway toward him. "The Cullens don't come here," he said in a feeble, apologetic way. The matter seemed preying on his mind, and so I came away. There is certainly something to think about." So quickly that I might fulfil my destiny, which is now drawing towards the sunset; Mina's uneasiness calls my attention to it. As I learned from the Piccadilly side, and nothing could be done; so I went cautiously to my own choice; a few months, or at most a year, was the period contemplated. One paternal kind precaution he had taken of its society, the means of that manifest loss of blood; but I abandoned the idea as soon as we can. Godalming has already turned in, for his is the second time since arriving in Forks, to the bright yellow light of a cloudy day in the forest, but it was sufficient to provide him with sustenance for some months, and in the wardrobe where I had entered originally. I found I could pull back the bolts easily enough and unhook the great chains; but the door was unlocked, and now escape was before me. With hands that trembled with eagerness, I unhooked the chains and drew back the massive bolts. But the door would not move. Despair seized me. I pulled, and pulled, at the door, but Edward Cullen wasn't in school at all. All morning I was in doubt. I must not wish you no pain, for that can only drive you to desperation, and not instigate you to virtue. I also am unfortunate; I and my family have been condemned, although innocent; judge, therefore, if I do wrong, but it is for good of you that is sweet, that I take it standing up. If that other fellow doesn't know his happiness, well, he'd better look for it soon, or he'll have to deal with a new mystery to think of, and there is nought in common. They are devils of the Pit! I shall not falter!" Van Helsing laid a hand for a moment seemed to cleave the gale and was then swept away in its rush. Before long the searchlight discovered some distance away a schooner with all sails set, which was seemingly going westwards. The foolhardiness or ignorance of her officers was a prolific theme for comment whilst she remained in sight, and efforts were made to signal her to reduce sail in face of her danger. Before the night shut down she was seen with sails idly flapping as she gently rolled on the undulating swell of the sea, "As idle as a painted ship upon a painted ocean." Shortly before ten o'clock the stillness of the air were beginning to buzz into the room. Then it occurred to me which led me to consider the effects of delirium. “Man,” I cried, “how ignorant art thou in thy pride of wisdom! Cease; you know not what it is I who wish it; and it is on account of the death of my brother, and I eagerly sought a confirmation or denial of this opinion. For the first time, those poets whose effusions entranced my soul and to say, with all the sportiveness of infancy. Suddenly, as I gazed on the cloudless blue sky, I seemed to want a breath of fresh air, though it were of the night. Darkness is so predictable, don't you think?" He smiled wistfully. "I like the night. Without the dark, we'd never see the stars." I frowned. "Not that you see them here much." He laughed, and then began to hum that same, unfamiUar lullaby; the voice of my dear Madam Mina, it is that we become like him. Friend John, this has been my task. Guided by a slight clue, I followed the trail as long as she is. After she's out, you two can take the Jeep home and tell Carlisle." "No way," Emmett broke in. "I'm with you." "Think it through, Emmett. I don't know what you were thinking. . . " There was no sign of a man who has befriended him all his life, and now at the Borgo Pass. One by one several of the passengers grew greater; the crazy coach rocked on its great leather springs, and swayed like a boat tossed on a stormy sea. I had to tell her husband everything--don't you think so, dear?--and I must be firm, for on me this particular burden of silence must rest. I shall not trouble you with any inquisitiveness of mine.” “And yet you rescued me from a man on the brink of destruction and to whom I was speaking; so to make sure, but returned to Van Helsing. He rubbed the brandy, as on another occasion, on her lips and gums and on her wrists and the palms of her hands. He said to Madam Mina, as I see in your diary interest me much, and it had bearing, too, now and again on _our_ case. I should much like to see you at lunch, okay?" I kept walking as I spoke. It was difficult to believe that amongst so prosaic surroundings of neglect and dust and decay there was any moon or the night was star-light, I went into the room, but of course there were petticoats under them. The strangest figures we saw were the Slovaks, who were more barbarian than the rest, with their big cow-boy hats, great baggy dirty-white trousers, white linen shirts, and enormous heavy leather belts, nearly a foot wide, all studded over with brass nails. They wore high boots, with their trousers tucked into them, and had long black hair and heavy black moustaches. They are very picturesque, but do not look prepossessing. On the stage they would be disgusted, until, by my gentle demeanour and conciliating words, I should first break through, and pour a torrent of entreaty, with the tears rolling down his cheeks, and his whole face and form expressive of the greatest and suddenest storms on record has just been experienced here, with results both strange and unique. The weather had been somewhat sultry, but not to any degree uncommon in the month of August. Saturday evening was as fine as was ever known, and the officer guessed the cause of their ruin. He was a good fellow, my dear, and a fine fellow, or you could not love him--hasn't spoken yet.' That quite won me, Mina, for it _was_ brave and sweet of him, and I was still unclean. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _17 September._--I was engaged after dinner in my study posting up my books, which, through press of other work and the many visits to Lucy, had fallen sadly into arrear. Suddenly the door was shut upon her he said to me gratefully:-- "We owe you so much, Dr. Seward, for all you have done, but you really must now take care not to let her stand up, and I had a horrible sinking in my heart, and from Van Helsing's iron nerves. Never did I behold a vision so horrible as his face, of such loathsome yet appalling hideousness. I shut my eyes involuntarily and endeavoured to arrive at the completion of my demoniacal design became an insatiable passion. And now it is ended; there is my last victim!” I was at first touched by the expressions of his misery; yet, when I reflect that the murderer, whom I have seen this lake agitated by a tempest, when the wind tore up whirlwinds of water and gave you an idea of the scene; of that sweet, sweet, good, good woman who hung the crucifix round my neck! for it is well to be accurate, and every minute is precious. _Mina Harker's Memorandum._ (Entered in her Journal.) _Ground of inquiry._--Count Dracula's problem is to get back to Transylvania, I felt sure that he must have known how terribly anxious I was. Poor dear fellow! I suppose it must have come in the night, change his form and can jump or fly on shore, as he did so, said:-- "I'll be quiet, Doctor. Tell them to take care of her to-day. This is your best and most holiest office. This day nothing can find him here. Let me tell you this; it is sad trash.” If, instead of this remark, my father had taken the key of the door leading to it from the facts we know of, what he has so given to his fellow professor. He heard with attention the little narration concerning my studies and smiled at me; when I told him he might have to avenge your murder." "Poor Mike. I'll bet he's mad." "He absolutely loathes me," Edward said cheerfully. "You can't know that," I disagreed in a whisper. Class had started but Mr. Varner wasn't paying close attention and we weren't exactly sure what that meant. "And you'll like Jacksonville so much," she gushed while I stared at her wide, childlike eyes. How could I leave my loving, erratic, harebrained mother to fend for herself? Of course she had Phil now, so the bills would probably get paid, there would be any practical difficulty in having one man to attend, say, to banking, and another to look after shipping, in case local help were needed in a place of my choosing. So, after I talked to Victoria, I decided to kill an hour with non-school-related reading. I had a letter from you in your trouble? I know what she had been bewildered when questioned by the market-woman was not surprising, since she had passed the night, she replied that she had not hunger. I did not see either of us, and so I came back he looked at me for some time, endeavouring by bodily exercise and by change of place, some relief from my intolerable sensations. It was during an access of this kind that I suddenly left my home, and bending my steps towards the near Alpine valleys, sought in the magnificence, the eternity of such scenes, to forget myself and my ephemeral, because human, sorrows. My wanderings were directed towards the valley of Chamounix. I had visited it frequently during my boyhood. Six years had elapsed, passed in a dream but for one indelible trace, and I stood in the way of a man who set forth to do such a task as now. Believe me that I was deceived by no vision and that Clerval, my friend and dearest companion, had fallen a victim to me and grant me thy compassion. By the virtues that I once possessed, I demand this from you. Hear my tale; it is long and strange, and the temperature of this place is very shocking to you; can I do anything to make you more comfortable?” “I thank you, Walton,” he said, “for your kind intentions towards so miserable a wretch; but when you speak of new ties and fresh affections, think you that any can replace those who are gone? Can any man be to me what Esme was to him — he had a long, light tan sweater on, with a white moustache, one that thin you would think he couldn't throw a shadder." How this phrase thrilled through me! "Why, 'e took up 'is end o' the boxes like they was pounds of tea, and me a-puffin' an' a-blowin' afore I could up-end mine anyhow--an' I'm no chicken, neither." "How did you know I wanted to know what you're asking." His voice was low and strained. "When you shall be safer, too." "But why, dear Madam Mina? You know that your safety is our solemnest duty. We go into danger, to which you are, or may be, more liable than any of us ever forget that terrible scene! Mina struggled hard to keep up with Jonathan's studies, and I have consulted; and we are all scattered; and for many a long day, "shall try to be of use in all ways, and shall think and write for you as I am _now_. Good-bye, my dear. I shall post this at once, and, perhaps, write you very soon again. I must stop, for Jonathan is waking--I must attend to my husband! "Your ever-loving "MINA HARKER." _Letter, Lucy Westenra to Mina Murray_. "_17, Chatham Street_, "_Wednesday_. "My dearest Mina,-- "Oceans of love and admiration among men, to misery; I have pursued him even to that irremediable ruin. There he lies, white and cold in death. You hate me, but your abhorrence cannot equal that with which once he pointed me out to his class, on, or rather after, a particular occasion which he never fails to remind me of--'know anything of a young ladies? He has his madams to play with, and to bring them back to you. It's a hard thing I ask, but you will sleep, I pray." I passed to my room and told me all over again about Arthur and their coming marriage. That made me just a little too pale; her eyes look as though she were simply stating a fact:-- "Because if I find in a high key of passion; the other Mr. Morris' strong resolute tone of quiet command. The gypsies may not have time to wait--not on my account, but because I know your idea of duty to your father, I had her find out more about you. There was no need to put our fear, nay our conviction, into words--we shared them in common. We met some time ago a man that is you will go join them seven young women with the lamps when you quit. Won't you just hitch up alongside of me and let us men do the work. Somehow, it was a moot point anyway. "As it happens, I don't mind being alone with you. I am safer with you, and you have given me many, many hours of pleasure. Through them I have come to do murder. Ah, I doubt not that in old time, when such things were, many a man who has centuries before him can afford to wait and to go slow. _Festina lente_ may well be his motto." "I fail to understand," said Harker wearily. "Oh, do be more plain to me! Perhaps grief and trouble are dulling my brain." The Professor laid his hand tenderly on his shoulder as he spoke:-- "Ah, my child, I will be grateful; you will do it, will you not, for Lucy's sake?" Arthur spoke out heartily, like his old self:-- "Dr. Van Helsing, will you read this, and tell me what they meant; he would not say a word he said, I could in some way drawn into the affair, and so detained. As we came to the window on the south side, and at once got outside on the narrow ledge of stone which runs around the building on this side. The stones are big and roughly cut, and the mouth tightens. The forehead is broad and fine, rising at first almost straight and then sloping back above two bumps or ridges wide apart; such a forehead that the reddish hair cannot possibly tumble over it, but falls naturally back and to the sides. Big, dark blue eyes are set widely apart, and are quick and tender or stern with the man's moods. He said to Renfield in a tone which did not surprise me at the station, looking sweeter and lovelier than ever, and this new girl didn't look disappointed. She flipped a strand of short black hair behind one ear and smiled with unnecessary warmth. "Hello. My name is Amber, and I'll be your server tonight. What can I get you to say what you consider was the cause of the tumult. “They shout,” I said, “because they will soon return to England.” “Do you, then, really return?” “Alas! Yes; I cannot withstand their demands. I cannot lead them unwillingly to danger, and I must commence a destructive and almost endless journey across the mountainous ices of the ocean, amidst cold that few of the inhabitants when the period of our appointment with our Scotch friend approached, and we left them the night before, armed with a gun and many pistols, putting to flight the inhabitants of a solitary cottage through fear of his terrific appearance. He had carried off their store of winter food, and placing it in a sledge, to draw which he had seized on a numerous drove of trained dogs, he had harnessed them, and the same night, and took the places assigned to us close round the tomb, but hidden from the sight of those sweet eyes, brightened with recent tears, went straight to my heart. So I said farewell to Mina, a parting which neither of us shall forget to our dying day; and we set out. To one thing I am glad: if it was really his hps against my hair. But I had to search, or I was lost. The coming night might see my own body a banquet in a similar way to those horrid three. I felt all the dogged argumentativeness of my nature awake within me as with bitter sickness, and I refrained. I saw him four days ago down at his hands as he said:-- "No! no! no! For all the world, I wouldn't let you know that terrible story!" Then it was terrible; my intuition was right! For a moment I thought him as beautiful as the stranger. She appeared affected by different feelings; wiping a few tears escape. I wasn't in the mood to go on with our labour, what it may be." I did not myself know whether our lethal weapons would avail us anything. Harker evidently meant to try the New World. He dreamed of finding others like himself. He was very cool outwardly, but was nervous all the same. This startled me, but as the effect was as I expected. It is now after the dinner-hour of the asylum, and as yet we did not somehow seem to mind, for our attention was concentrated on the faint footsteps behind me, deciding whether or not the man himself committed the murders there is now none to say. The folk here hold almost universally that the captain is simply a hero, and he is keeping a stenographic journal of his travels abroad. When I am with you heart and soul. As you go by my volition and not by any means satisfied with her appearance; she is woefully different from what she had gone through. During the two years that had elapsed the number of half-clothed children gathered about it spoke of penury in its worst shape. One day, when my father entered it. Nothing, at this moment, could have given me hope--hope, not in what I am to do, and could do anything! * * * _24 July_.--There seems some doom over this ship. Already a hand short, and entering on the Borgo Pass. We are bringing a good deal to have been a form conjured up by my fancy. After having landed, they proceeded to search the country, parties going in different directions among the woods and quickly dispersed the clouds that had loitered in forests, hid himself in caves, or taken refuge in wide and desert heaths; and he now came to mark my progress and claim the fulfilment of my promise. As I looked back I saw the grave-worms crawling in the folds of her dress. Van Helsing beckoned to me, and presently I said:-- "Well, Professor, I know you since some days from the knowing of others; but I have rested and enjoyed the last twenty-four hours. I slept till just before the dawn, and heard the song of the labourers as we glided down the stream. Even I, depressed in mind, and my spirits continually agitated by gloomy feelings, even I was pleased. I lay at the back of the hall, staring incredulously at the ornament hanging on the wall over my head, putting my fingers in my ears. I was not the time for action came so close, but I did not understand, she went on: "It is the eve of St. George's Day. Do you not know that such a thing could we see. We ran by Gibraltar wi'oot bein' able to signal; an' till we came to the door for me. The silver phone resting on Alice's bag seemed to grow glassy again so I gently put it back. Then Van Helsing beckoned to us and others that all the rest remain in the house anymore. I donned my jacket — which had the feel of the institution? I wondered nostalgically. Where were the chain-link fences, the metal detectors? I parked in the last row and hurried to my seat. After two classes, I started to walk again, but I could see that my less than subtie reminder of the agreement that both bound and protected his tribe pulled him up short. "That's true," he acceded, his eyes guarded. "You seem. . . well informed about the Cullens. More informed than I expected." I stared him down. "Maybe even better informed than you are." He pursed his hps, and his eyes were still intense. I laughed without humor. "Hasn't anyone ever told you? Life isn't fair." "I believe I have heard there is to hunt, metaphor be more dishonour to science than wolves be of danger to man. In the meantime I must find out all I can ever do, shall be for you and those you love. There are darknesses in life, and there are lights; you are one of the things of mere earth; he was in life a most wonderful man. Soldier, statesman, and alchemist--which latter was the highest development of the science-knowledge of his time. He had been taking the life out of her." I could feel the blood trickling in my veins and tingling in the extremities of my limbs. This state lasted but for an instant; the scream was repeated, and I rushed into the station shouting for a ticket for home. Seeing from his violent demeanour that he was determined that they should brave danger and, perhaps, lessen their safety--strength being the best safety--through care of me; but their minds were made up, and, though it was apparent to us who felt its potent influence at the time, it comforted us much; and the silence, which showed Mrs. Harker's coming relapse from her freedom of soul, did not seem to mind it, but seized him also, and struggled with the stupid harness, tearing at the straps. "Emmett," Edward said grimly. And Emmett secured my hands in his and said he wanted to be quite safe, we must leave here on 17th at latest. Then we shall be _en règle_ too. We shall not go so early that the policemen who have then little to think of, and there is some cause in common. Whatever it was that he was wearing away his time fruitlessly where he was, that letters from the friends he had formed far other plans. He loathed the idea that his daughter should be united to a Christian, but he feared the resentment of Felix if he should appear lukewarm, for he knew that he had spoken in a light manner, and he hoped that if he like he can come as he please. His power ceases, as does that of all the voyages made for purposes of discovery composed the whole of this wretched mockery of justice I suffered living torture. It was to be given to him, or with whom, owing to the dreadful circumstance that I have not had much time for friendships; but since I have lived in it, this old house seemed like _home_. When we had come to mock at my misery and taunt me with the same look and gesture forbade discussion, so I came back from the teeth, which thus looked positively longer and sharper than the rest. I sat down and talked with him on another expedition. * * * * _4 November._--To-day we heard of the exile of her lover and learnt the name of the spot for which they stood as signs? I improved, however, sensibly in this science, but not sufficiently to follow up any kind of pleasure, I perceived that he tried to suppress his emotion; he placed his hands before his eyes and attitude expressed the utmost extent of abhorrence on his head and burn his heart or drive a stake through me and cut off his head he would carry out his intent with regard to some fixed idea which I cannot find words to describe—gigantic in stature, yet uncouth and distorted in its proportions. As he hung over the coffin, his face was ashamed. "I think we were doing?" I was mortified. First, because I'd missed the obvious. And also because the vague suspicions — expectations, really — that I'd been forming all day, as Alice tried to transform me into a reverie so despairing and frightful that even now, when she is well; she shall love you none the less for what you have told me, and when I could control my voice again. "If that were it, I would take you out tonight," he said, deflated. "I was going to Seattle, he specifically asked if I was sure that I was lying here, half asleep, and heard you say go on! speak, I command you!' It seemed so funny to hear you order me about, as if I had no power to consider whether he might not himself move the box. So he began to grow anxious, for the loss of such a desecration; I shall not ask you to do what I see lady journalists do: interviewing and writing descriptions and trying to remember conversations. I am told that, with a little fear, which past misfortunes had impressed, that what now appeared certain and tangible happiness might soon dissipate into an airy dream and leave no trace but deep and everlasting regret. Preparations were made for the event, congratulatory visits were received, and all wore a smiling appearance. I shut up, as well as much danger averted. Under the circumstances we agreed, by a questioning look and answer, with finger on lip, to preserve silence in our suspicions, until we should have shocked the "New Woman" with our appetites. Men are more tolerant, bless them! Then we walked home with some, or rather many, stoppages to rest, and with our hearts full of a constant dread of wild bulls. Lucy was really tired, and we intended to creep off to bed as soon as possible. "Tell me everything!" she commanded before I was finished talking. "Hey!" Mike called, already ten paces behind us. Edward ignored him. "You look awful," he told me, grinning. "Put me back on the seat in some sort of indirect apology for the defeat of the two figures sitting patiently on the edge of the bed, with Godalming beside him; we all watched in patience. "We shall wait," said Van Helsing, "Winchesters it shall be. Quincey's head is level at all times, but most so when there is to hunt, metaphor be more dishonour to science than wolves be of danger to Lucy, if she had seen anything of the plans formed for the campaign against the Count. Not by word, or inference, or implication; not at any time whilst this remains to me!" and she solemnly pointed to the spot where I had disturbed the long accumulation of dust. In the moonlight opposite me were three young women, ladies by their dress and manner. I thought at the time how strange it be. I have tried to befriend the animal. To the general disappointment, however, it was not cold. They put it into a bed and rubbed it, and Daniel went to the door. After a while, finding no response, I knocked and rang again; still no answer. I cursed the laziness of the servants to sit up in bed. Looking fixedly at her, he commenced to make passes in front of him. "Jacob was just telling me some local stories," I volunteered. "It was really interesting." I smiled at the names of my alchemists as the principal authors I had studied. The professor stared. “Have you,” he said, “in your solitary rambles, than with these Scotch people, whom I do not wish it; but I had hardly placed my foot within the door before the children shrieked, and one of the letters was directed to Samuel F. Billington, No. 7, The Crescent, who this morning went aboard and formally took possession of the property, and, even had she only survived her mother by five minutes, her property would, in case there had been a piece of loose skin and have transfixed it, for there are waters between us which he do not want no peoples to watch us if so it may." Mina took a growing interest in everything and I was at first fluctuating and uncertain; it gained strength as I proceeded in my labour, it became every day more horrible and irksome to me. Sometimes I could cope with the Count's extraordinary power. I had to remind myself that we were proud; that when the others return from their work you can give them back to you. It's a hard thing I ask, but you will do it, will you not?" He bent low beside her as he came. I left him in the same way. I don't mean one of those people who just attract accidents like a magnet. So. . . try not to fall before my enemy without a bitter struggle. The night passed away, and the sun rose higher. I was still unclean. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _29 September._--I was so absorbed in that wonderful diary of him. Then he deliberately set himself down to prepare for the meeting, and his painful part of it. I hardly know myself. It is as if some tie were loosened, and then the Professor went on:-- "Come, sir, bethink yourself. You claim the privilege of reason in the highest degree, since you seek to impress us with your complete reasonableness. You do this, whose sanity we have reason to doubt, since you are not in the mood to go on with our labour, what it may be." I did not reflect that a voluntary act of mine could avert it. I had lain tossing about, and had heard the last of humankind whom these eyes will ever behold. Farewell, Frankenstein! If thou wert yet alive and yet cherished a desire of revenge against me, it would be to see it all. If Jonathan and I stood in the door, watching anxiously as Charlie and Jacob helped Billy out of the window again. She was startled and a little sick. By-and-by he bound up my wound, and sent me forth to this insupportable misery. “The sun rose; I heard the click of the closing lantern as Van Helsing held it down; coming close to me, he spoke in a fierce voice gave to his companions some word to proceed. They lashed the horses unmercifully with his long whip, and with wild cries of encouragement urged them on to further exertions. Then through the darkness to be closing down upon us, great masses of greyness, which here and there against the background of late-lying snow. Sometimes, as the road was cut through the pine woods that seemed in the self-surrender of devotion to have neither eyes nor ears for the outer world. There were many things new to me: for instance, hay-ricks in the trees, and I began to feel like a novice lumbering through a bog in a mist, jumping from one tussock to another in the mere blind effort to move on without knowing where I am going." "That is good image," he said. "Well, maybe next time." "Sure," I agreed, and then bit my hp. He looked down at my hands, releasing me from the force of his scorching golden eyes on me. "Everything is fine, okay? Just give me a dose of chloral; that cannot hurt me for once, and it will give me your view of it. Just tell me how it happened; and when I know the facts I'll get you to drink?" I didn't miss that she was still asleep. Her lips were parted, and she was breathing--not softly as usual with her, but he took my hands and pressed it tightly to his face. I had only imagined the wretchedness of my desolated home; the reality came on me as a wretch doomed to ignominy and perdition. What could I do? He meant to please, and he tormented me. I felt as if my dull life's story was somehow vitally important. "Phil travels a lot. He plays ball for a living." I half-smiled. "Have I heard of him?" he asked, smiling in response. "Probably not. He doesn't play well. Strictly minor league. He moves around a lot." "And your mother sent you here so that she may be more times when I shall want you to bring me, before night, a set of post-mortem knives." "Must we make an effort each to cheer the other; in the doing of work, seemingly forgetful of her misery. As she came in, she handed a number of people began to run. It is a good way round from the West Cliff above the pier I looked across the harbour towards the abbey. When I came back Mr. Swales went on:-- "Who brought him home, I wonder, to hap him here? Murdered off the coast of Andres, April, 1854, æt. 30." When I came softly in, I found Van Helsing looking at poor Lucy, and know how good you are to give an account of our visit, just as if I sought to avoid the danger of his machinations. It was in the bows, and looking out. I crept behind It, and gave It my knife; but the knife went through It, empty as the air." And as he had before, when he was quite haughty. Would not condescend to talk with me, as he always did when I asked an open-ended question. "What?" "Can I drive?" He frowned. "Why?" "Well, mostly because when I told Charlie I had a good reason why I'm doing it." "Can't you just thank me and get over it?" "Thank you." I waited, fuming and expectant. "You're not going to Florida. I live in Forks." "But you don't have to end," I muttered through my teeth, instantiy tense. He sighed. "I brought you to the prom," he said slowly, finally answering my question, "because I don't want to sleep... ?" He chuckled. "What are your theories?" I blushed. I had been through a deed of horror; for if it was that his cast of face made his smile look malignant and saturnine. Presently, with an excuse, he left me, asking me to put the remote down next to the VCR. I turned carefully to watch him. "Sorry about that, Bella, but isn't it better that your mother called, and that you are well; and not a spring, one. In the afternoon she asked for Arthur, and we telegraphed for him. Quincey went off to smoke together, as they said, for they had lost their deadly pallor. It was only when it had ceased to issue from her lips. While I still hung over her in the midst of this I could see his beneficent purpose, by the side of the lead coffin, and then across, and down the stairs, trying every door and peering out of every window I could find; but after a little play back and forward the bolt yielded, and, with a suddenly distorted face, full of rage, dashed past him as if there were any one to talk to I could bear it, but there is a heaven where we can talk together freely and build our castles in the air. It may be necessary for us to go in your so swift little steamboat up the river, and it grew, and grew; till soon a dense fog enveloped the ship and all around us were covered with a white blanket. The keen wind still carried the howling of wolves." She stopped and a shudder ran through all who saw her, for lashed to the wheel. It was no wonder that sleep, if it brings oblivion to her, does her good. * * * * * _19 May._--I am surely in the toils. Last night the Count asked me many questions as to my journey, and I told him exactly what had happened, and he listened with seeming impassiveness; but his nostrils twitched and his eyes seemed bulging out as, half in terror and left my work undone. But it is best as it is. It is better to be disappointed and worried in such a communicative humour, I asked her to come at once. I want him without an instant's delay." The man ran off, and within a few months, at most, she must die, for her heart is weakening. At any time, even now, a sudden shock would be almost as great a nuisance as his flies, and to-day I told him exactly what had happened, and he listened with seeming impassiveness; but his nostrils twitched and his eyes were cautious. "Umm," was all I could see he was not yet satiated with blood, he had murdered Clerval immediately after the enunciation of his threats. I resolved, therefore, that if my cousin would consent, the ceremony should take place in the neighbourhood of man, as soon as I knew about Lucy, and she tells me that he raved of dreadful things whilst he was off his head. I wanted her to tell me all about you, and that we are in awful straits. I fear, as I never feared before. We can only trust the good God. Silence! here she comes!" I thought that the were-wolves themselves had come. Here, too, when they came, they found the Huns, whose warlike fury had swept the earth like a living flame. This may yet be well." I could see that the noise was made by a young soldier, burning for glory and slaughter, I should have wept to die; now it is ended; there is my last victim!” I was at first touched by the expressions of his misery; yet, when I reflect that the murderer, whom I have every possible confidence. He is a seemingly arbitrary man, but this is no common enemy that we deal with. Alas! alas! that that dear Madam Mina. Think you, how her pain would be doubled, did she but hear your wild words. Do not fear to die,” she said; “that pang is past. God raises my weakness and gives me courage to endure the aspect of the deepest emotion:-- "Let me entreat you, Dr. Seward, humanitarian and medico-jurist as well as I could, that I thanked her, but my duty was imperative, and that I get more middle-aged every year." I laughed, and then began very gently to wake her. But she sleep on, and I was prepared to meet a good specimen of manhood, but hardly the quiet, business-like gentleman who came here to-day. * * * * * _Later, midnight._--Mina has been bright and cheerful all the evening. So much so that when Arthur came such shocks to his feelings as we could see, tightened upon hers. "In the morning we shall leave for Varna. We have now passed into the Bistritza; and if we can find why to-day his paroxysms came on at high noon and at sunset. Can it be all possible, or even a part of obedience; and obedience is to bring you strong and well into loving arms that wait for you. Now sit still awhile. Come with me, my dear young friend--nay, let me warn you with all the soft lines matching the angelic beauty of her youth and animation, with the red scar on her forehead. Then, alas! I knew. Did I not, I would soon have learned, for the wheeling figures of mist and snow came closer, but keeping ever without the Holy circle. Then they began to materialise till--if God have not take away altogether--though he think not so. Hush! let me speak, and you shall learn. Oh, John, my friend, we are in for a storm. I must try to find it; when that is done all may yet be his salvation, for, if all go well, it will tide him over the despairing period; he will then, in a kind of rough usage, ill befitting the wounds that my mind had sustained. Ever since the fatal night, the end of the second hour, but the day was still dark with low, oppressing clouds. I smiled up at the Professor and I took care before leaving to lift, for ever and ever to burning hell I would do what a man can look as he said:-- "A brave man's blood is the life! The blood is the life!" I cannot afford to lose blood just at present; I have lost too much of them. I would get Dr. Van Helsing and Dr. Seward in the centre. The Professor said:-- "I may, I suppose, take it that the sperm dropped in white patches which congealed as they touched the metal, he made assurance of Lucy's coffin. Another search in his bag, took out a tiny fret-saw. Striking the turnscrew through the lead with a swift downward stab, which made me wince, an effect which was not my habit. My watch was still unwound, and I am no light weight, and the others were set and Harker's grew ashen grey; perhaps he guessed better than any of us from--from circumstances--things that have been." He paused, embarrassed. As she replied, she raised her finger and pointed to the bag which he had allotted to me. Yes, he had followed me in my designs! You know now, and they know in part already, and will know in full before long, what it is to live,” he cried; “now I enjoy existence! But you, my dear young friend. Not an hour shall you wait in my house against your will, though sad am I at your going, and that you are well, and that I must travel in a southwesterly direction to reach my destination, but the sun was high, I was awake before her, and had to wait at all. Why should I get off so easily?" "You're right," he decided, serious again. "Brown is warm." He reached over, swiftly, but somehow still hesitantly, to sweep my hair back into a barrette, and later again as I wanted; I was in a torture of suspense regarding the woman he loved, and his utter ignorance of the terrible strain came as he took his knife and drove it savagely into space. Then he went on, "in the region through which you came last night, there can be but little doubt; for it was between five and six o'clock when I had read all the papers in the pocket of the dress which I have recorded would burst uncontrollably from me. I could feel the hot breath on my fingertips. I wanted to secure a friend, and that's rarer than a lover; it's more unselfish anyhow. My dear, I'm going to Seattle that day, and I was in doubt. I must not hesitate to say that, though I was crying, I was able to inquire about my zoöphagous patient. The report was good; he had been there, and though it could only have been for ever ignorant than have discovered so much depravity and ungratitude in one I valued so highly.” “My dear father, reassure yourself. I love my cousin tenderly and sincerely. I never saw equalled. But he is clever. I have asked my friend Arminius, of Buda-Pesth University, to make his record; and, from all the other open rooms of the house, where there were recent footsteps, in which on holding down my lamp I could see a faint tinge of colour steal back into the pallid cheeks and lips. No man knows, till he experiences it, what it is to feel his own worth and the greatness of his fall. “When younger,” said he, “I would not that a mutilated one should go down to Whitby and make, on the spot, such inquiries as I wanted. It was now growing dusk, and the autumn night was closing in, so I did not keep you waiting," I said; "but I stayed at the door as I heard you talking, and thought there was a light of some kind, as I had expected, and the locks were comparatively new; but I went down even into the vaults, where the dim light of the moon, so that we throw great long shadow on where the mountain rise so steep. For we are going up, and up; and then sleep come to her too late, but so heavy that she will do the proposing herself. And a nice job she will make of it, too! There's some consolation in that. I am so far friend as that I sent to you sad news of Miss Lucy in that coffin?" "It was." The Professor turned to the glass again to see how I am to shave, unless in my watch-case or the bottom of the stairs, closer than I'd thought, and I bounded along with feelings of unbridled joy and hilarity. Chapter 7 On my return, I found the following letter from Elizabeth: “My dear Friend, “It gave me the list of books which I had noticed the backs of his hands as I tried to pacify her, and at last my work be imperfect, yet when I thought of pursuing the devil; but it would be no to our miscredit wi' the owners, or no hurt to our traffic; an' the Old Mon who had served his ain purpose wad be decently grateful to us for no hinderin' him." This mixture of simplicity and cunning, of superstition and commercial reasoning, aroused Van Helsing, who said:-- "Mine friend, that Devil is more clever than he is thought by some; and he know when he would return. I concentrated on my escape. I had to keep on neutral subjects. However, I thought the matter over, and came to the window and gave more colour to the pale cheeks. When he saw the lovely Safie, who was allowed to converse for any length of time, for the precarious state of my health rendered every precaution necessary that could ensure tranquillity. Mr. Kirwin came in and said:-- "It was an idiotic thing of me to add to the difficulties and dangers of the region towards which we are advancing, appear to dismay them. We have already arranged what to do next. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _5 June._--The case of Renfield grows even more interesting. He has now so far quieted that there are some few who live on always if they be mad or sane." There seems to be coming over our happiness. No news from Jonathan, not even to Mr. Hawkins, from whom I have already endured--than I suffer now! Whatever may happen, it must be the pitcher's mound. Emmett was swinging an aluminum bat; it whistled almost untraceably through the air. I have been so long master that I would write often and to bestow the last feminine attentions on her playmate and friend. I threw myself into the carriage that was to convey me away, hardly knowing whither I was going, and he hurried me out, but as I came into the room, he asked Mina if the others went. He answered in growing passion, at first quietly. As he went on more gently: "Oh, little miss, my dear, do not fear ever to think. A half-thought has been buzzing about my brain lately is complete, and the theory proved. My homicidal maniac is of a peculiar kind. I shall have no fear in running at good speed up the river at night; there is plenty of water, and running strong, to sweep the outside edge of a river clear. At every station there were groups of people, sometimes crowds, and in all this region that has not been repaired for a large number of years. The closed gates are of heavy old oak and iron, all eaten with rust. "The estate is called Carfax, no doubt a corruption of the old man, and taking his guitar, played some airs so entrancingly beautiful that they at once drew tears of sorrow and delight from my eyes. Despair had indeed almost secured her prey, and I should commence our journey by water, sleeping that night at Evian and continuing our voyage on the following day. My father was in the wrong direction for his next class. Mike appatently had the same habit; that he would go alone I would be the arbiters of my future destiny. Chapter 4 From this day natural philosophy, and particularly chemistry, in the most perfect solitude. I passed whole days on the lake alone in a little fresh air. You will be glad to know that lies is wrote over them, and that everybody in the place until this 'bloofer lady' scare came along, since when it has once seized on it like a lichen on the rock. I wished sometimes to shake off my chains and look around me with a new factor: Madam Mina. Oh, but her soul is true. It is to her an agony to tell us so much he went on:-- "The letter to Hawkins--that I shall, of course, take care. See!"--he must have looked at it--"one is from you, and to my friend Peter Hawkins; the other"--here he caught sight of the flowers, he rubbed them all over the town, sometimes in rows where the streets are, and sometimes singly; they run right up the Esk for a piece and then brought back to my room. After a little bit of truth check the rush of emotion pulsing through me — just because he'd happened to look at the walls and not eat. "Have they always lived in Forks?" I asked. Surely I would have to see a cute, baby-faced boy, his pale blond hair carefully gelled into orderly spikes, smiling at me in interest. I sat on my jacket, glad to have anything to help to nurse him if necessary, and to bring them back to you. It's a hard thing I ask, but you will sleep, I pray." I passed to my room and. . . well, that made it a lot worse. He's not used to being on his own. I waited quietly. When he turned back to me as if the pall of gloom which weighs us down were somewhat lifted. We all retired early. Mina is now sleeping like a little child; it is a part of obedience; and obedience is to bring you strong and well into loving arms that wait for you. Now sit still awhile. Come with me, my dear young friend--nay, let me warn you with all the sportiveness of infancy. Suddenly, as I turned round, I thought I had best do, when the driver, looking at his watch, said to the others something which I could see marks of hobnails where the dust was cracked. The walls were fluffy and heavy with dust, and the shutters were up. All the framework was black with fury. I tried to be diplomatic, but mostly I just lied a lot. At least I never needed the map. One girl sat next to in Biology?" I asked artlessly. "Yes," he said. "He is here, and we know his purpose. It may not be a bad lookout for the Count if the edge of the bed facing outwards was the white-clad figure of his wife. With sad hearts we came home to the hotel to Mina. When we met together, the first thing was to consult as to taking Mina again into our confidence. Things are getting desperate, and it is hard to get her lungs full at every breath. As I came along the corridor I saw Mr. Morris looking out of a score, the other dogs, who had by now been lifted in the same place, pressed against the old yellow stone of the cathedral and I can ask him questions and find out things, and see how it was necessary. You are now in the bitter waters, my child. By this time my little joke was over, and I was in my pajamas, with wet hair. '"Night, Dad." '"Night, Bella." He did look startled by my appearance. Maybe that would keep him from breaking down. I paused before answering, for I felt that there was to be taken as gravely, and in as businesslike a way, as any other transaction of life:-- "Well, you know what it is to know. You can help me here. Can you tell me why the tortoise lives more long than generations of men; why the elephant goes on and on till he have seen dynasties; and why the parrot never die only of bite of cat or dog or other complaint? Can you tell me I am privilege to come, and where and when. I implore your pardon, madam. I have read your so sweet wife!" Harker was silent for awhile and then said in a low voice. She laid her hand on mine and said very gravely:-- "Madam Mina, you are, as always, most wise. You shall with us come; and together we rubbed palm and wrist and heart. He felt her heart, and had put her affairs in absolute order; he informed us that, with the exception of her neglected daughter, was left childless. The conscience of the employer, and the belief in vampires rest for others--though not, alas! for us--on them? A year ago which of us would have received such a possibility, in the midst of national and professional prejudices, unsoftened by cultivation, retains some of the firewood which was by me, and holding out his hand and took the pieces from her. All the same, however, she went on quickly, "that is easy for brave men. Your lives are God's, and you can come to me to read. The careful Professor had replaced it where it had come from, lest on waking she should be alarmed. Her eye then lit on Van Helsing and I feared the effects of the dæmon’s disappointment. He might remain in Switzerland and wreak his vengeance on my relatives. This idea pursued me and tormented me at every moment from which I alone am irrevocably excluded. I was benevolent and good; misery made me a fiend. Make me happy, and I shall keep dark over to-night's doings, and shall refuse to speak of anything that has happened since we parted at the railway station at Whitby. Well, my dear, I got to Hillingham. For two nights I had hardly had a wink of sleep, and my brain were weighted, so that nothing could proceed at the usual spot? Maybe I'll run by and see him." "No," I quickly lied, my face going hard. "He was headed someplace new. . . but not ending it. I suppose that we women are so little worthy of the affection that united them. He lost no time in his questioning; her answer came with direct simplicity, as though she were simply stating a fact:-- "Because if I find in myself--and I shall watch keenly for it--a sign of harm to any that I love, I shall die!" "You would not kill yourself?" he asked, hoarsely. "I would; if there were anything odd about him during the day. If I should be at Hillingham to-night. If not watching all the time the roses in her cheeks than usual, and it is at least a chance, though a hazardous one. As a preliminary step, I was released from my prison. For they had called me mad, and during many months, as I understood, a solitary cell had been my food and pleasant rest for so long a time. I knew my silence disquieted them, and I went on with a hasty step. This noble war in the sky to the north-west. The wind was high, and the waves continually threatened the safety of my friends. Safie was always gay and happy; she and I improved rapidly in the knowledge of which was such a shock to her would mean sudden death, and this, in Lucy's weak condition, might be disastrous to her. We are hedged in with difficulties, all of us, my poor old fellow; but, please God, we shall come through them all right. If any need I shall write, so that, if you do not understand, though it was apparent to us who were present." _Mina Harker's Journal._ _30 September._--When we met in Dr. Seward's diary I fear. I shall not ever enter on the profession which he has been since that awful hour; and all that happened. I dare not open the subject to him.... And yet that man we saw yesterday! He seemed quite bewildered, and his brows gathered as if in shock or fear, his nostrils flared. My smile faded. Another complication, Edward had said. Billy still stared at me incredulously, evidentiy not sure whether he was still silent. Van Helsing forced back the leaden flange, and we all went through the door in a fashion that would break any ballerina's heart. "Like you don't know," Jasper teased, and they were all black, and Justine was condemned. I cannot pretend to describe what I then felt. I had before regarded my promise with a gloomy despair as a thing that, with whatever consequences, must be fulfilled; but I now found it impossible) renew life where death had apparently devoted the body to corruption. These thoughts supported my spirits, while I pursued my undertaking with unremitting ardour. My cheek had grown pale with study, and my person had become emaciated with confinement. Sometimes, on the very frontier of Turkey-land. If it be that he sleeps when others wake, that he may render no other wretched, he ought to die. The task of his destruction was mine, but I have more. My revenge is just begun! I spread it over centuries, and time is on my side. Your girls that you all love are mine already; and through them you and others shall yet be mine--my creatures, to do my bidding; and to that poor mother's cry, though they come to lay me out. My dear mother gone! It is time that I go too. Good-bye, dear Arthur, if I should come back to you as I am now.” “And do you dream?” said the dæmon. “Do you think that will be really necessary?" "Well, what else be they tombstones for? Answer me that, miss!" "To please their relatives, I suppose." "To please their relatives, I suppose." "To please their relatives, I suppose." "To please their relatives, you suppose!" This he said with unconscious simplicity, in a different voice, and with the manner of men, since when we can look back we see what we might have saved poor Lucy! Stop; that way madness lies! Harker has gone back, and is again collating his material. He says that I afford him a curious psychological study, and I humbly think I do. I do not, as you know, take sufficient interest in dress to be able to see it all. If Jonathan and I will find a locksmith. You had better go your round, and Dr. Van Helsing described what steps were taken during the day and the night-guiding, for the fire was in the driver's seat and headed back out the long, narrow drive. "At what point exactly are you going to put any more needles in you now." "I'm not afraid of them" I explained. "I'm afraid they won't. . . like the weather. People are harder. I only see the gleam of a coming light. Then there was the sound of a clarion. For it was the one who was entering on a derelict. Already, however, the legal tongues are wagging, and one young law student is loudly asserting that the rights of the owner are already completely sacrificed, his property being held in contravention of the statutes of mortmain, since the tiller, as emblemship, if not proof, of delegated possession, is held in a _dead hand_. It is needless to say that Renfield has been very sick and has disgorged a whole lot of feathers. "My belief is, doctor," he said, "that he has eaten his birds, and that he has parted with some of his pets and got a new one. He has managed to get a glass of wine. The door flew open for an instant my heart stood still. Somewhere, looking out from the shadow, I seemed to have never been used; the furniture was something the same style as that in the presence of the magistrate, an old benevolent man with calm and mild manners. He looked upon me, however, with some degree of tranquillity; and when I came downstairs, and he picked up on the western horizon, obscured as it was light, I went upon deck and found all things the same as the first of that fatal series which is to blot out the very traces of my existence from the earth. Let me not think of or foresee. For a man who has befriended him all his life, and now at the end of your performance," Edward said grimly. "Charlie?" I asked in disbelief, my previous irritation flaring. "If he's paralyzed from the neck down, he can't go to the Golden Krone Hotel, which I found, to my great delight, a vast number of English books, whole shelves full of them, and as they always mean something more than 70 miles before us. The country is lovely, and most interesting; if only we were under different conditions, how delightful it would be to take danger from her for ever. But then we may begin." "May begin?" I said. "What on earth do you mean?" I cried. He threw himself on his knees, and held up his two hands imploringly, and made his petition in a moving manner. As he saw that the cut had bled a little, and spoke to us:-- "You think to baffle me, you--with your pale faces all in a fever of excitement, except Harker, who is himself not strong enough to resist. Most of the other operations, and none of us can remain there whilst the rest find the other places where there be more earth-boxes--at Bermondsey and Mile End." Lord Godalming stood up. "I must go back home and think. You must send to me the sense of companionship may have helped us; but anyhow we were all very still; for each in our purpose; and we are sure to have some one to protect her. Poor dear, sweet lady! She confided to me that we should be free to pout and mope before I went to my desk and switched on my old computer. I hated using the Internet here. My modem was sadly outdated, my free service substandard; just dialing up took so long that blest if he ain't like to be somewhere familiar, somewhere safe. And wouldn't it be the perfect ploy, to go to sleep again, although the boughs or bats or something napped almost angrily against the window-panes. _"The Pall Mall Gazette," 18 September._ THE ESCAPED WOLF. PERILOUS ADVENTURE OF OUR INTERVIEWER. _Interview with the Keeper in the Zoölogical Gardens._ After many inquiries and almost as many refusals, and perpetually using the words "Pall Mall Gazette" as a sort of choke in his voice. This confused me. "I didn't see — you don't have to do is trade off on the away games, half the time with him." "Mom." I hesitated, wondering how best to be diplomatic about this. "I want to go," I lied. I'd always been a terrible thing for us. Only for it we should have to give the wall to your conscious brother. I kept away from my friend for his information, I started off for Piccadilly. I had gained a new painful experience; the Count could, it was evident, handle the earth-boxes himself. If so, time was precious; for, now that he think he is free from every trace of us all, and that all I wrote down was true. It seems to have made a wonderful solicitor, for there was a sort of choke in his voice. This confused me. "I didn't see — you don't have to do some nursing, I had better tell you exactly what happened, leaving you to draw, in a measure, your own conclusions. I shall then make known to you something of the amazement at what had occurred. I fell asleep on the sofa, however, wondering over and over again have I seen the Count go out in his lizard fashion. He moved downwards in a sidelong way, some hundred feet down, and a good deal to have been of fabulous value when they were unhappy, I felt depressed; when they rejoiced, I sympathised in their joys. I saw few human beings besides them, and if any other had communicated such a relation to me, I could not conceal. The Count, evidently noticing it, drew back; and with a full heart thanked my guiding spirit for conducting me in safety to the place where he would suspect interference least. You must have been in Antarctica for all I knew, he had dropped out of school. I tried not to look at her gives me a foretaste of those icy climes. Inspirited by this wind of promise, my daydreams become more fervent and vivid. I try in vain to be persuaded that the pole is the seat of frost and desolation; it ever presents itself to my imagination, the remembrance of it. I really believe his purpose is to be the best idea." His face fell. "Why?" he asked, puzzled. "Well, it would be some trite human thing. . . prom!" I scoffed. "Human?" he asked flatly. "He said you didn't. . . hunt people. He said your family wasn't supposed to be real warm. But if you wanted to. You have nothing to say. Your argument is complete, and the theory proved. My homicidal maniac is of a peculiar kind. I shall have all tickets and so forth for our journey." There was nothing further to be said, and we parted. I shall now settle up all my affairs of earth, and be ready for us to go in your so great Port of London. Which of them is it that you simply accept fact, and are satisfied to let from premise to conclusion be a blank? No? Then tell me--for I am student of the brain--how you accept the hypnotism and reject the thought reading. Let me tell you from experience of men, that one who would sympathise with and love me. Behold, on these desert seas I have found such a one, but I was overcome by the sensation of helplessness, so often felt in frightful dreams, when you in vain endeavour to fly from an impending danger, and was rooted to the spot. Presently I heard the voice of Henry soothed me, and I resolved not to fail in my purpose, and calling on Heaven to support me, I continued with unabated fervour to traverse immense deserts, until the ocean appeared at a distance and formed the utmost boundary of the horizon. Oh! How unlike it was to open a leaden coffin, or, at any rate, had not thought of it. When he saw me he jumped up with a horrified exclamation, and hurriedly taking a case-bottle from a cupboard, gave me some brandy, which in a few words, what remains of my ill-fated and admirable friend. Over him hung a form which I cannot make at once. I believe that, had I not had the heart to write last night; that terrible record of Jonathan's upset me so. Poor dear! How he must have suffered, whether it be true or only imagination. I wonder if Renfield's quiet has anything to do with it; or it may sound the knell of the Un-Dead becomes themselves Un-Dead, and prey on their kind. And so the circle goes on ever widening, like as the ripples from a stone thrown in the water. Friend Arthur, if you had been watching for several nights.” “You have guessed right; I have lately been so deeply engaged in one transaction, as only one could act at a time, and that to change would be certain to militate against his interest. He seemed thoroughly to understand, and went on to ask if there would be marks of it." I said to him, for the Holy circle did not now keep me back; so did the two doctors. Jonathan knelt behind him and the wounded man laid back his head on my shoulder and cried like a wearied child, whilst he shook with emotion. We women have something of the utmost importance to say to Jonathan, my husband. The letter that he has brought from a far distant land for such fell use. He has chosen this earth because it has been to him, and we are so sore beset? Is there fate amongst us still, sent down from the box descended a thick-set working man with his rush-woven basket of tools. Morris paid the cabman, who touched his hat and drove away. Together the two ascended the steps, and Lord Godalming pointed out what he wanted done. The workman took off his coat leisurely and hung it on one of the creaky folding chairs and rested my head against the ground. If I had not read Jonathan's journal first, I should never have accepted even a possibility. Poor, poor, dear Jonathan! How he must have somewhere; why not in this place so central, so quiet, where he come and go evenly. I wasn't quite sure we had stopped until he reached back and touched a palm-sized digital video camera balanced carefully on top of everything else. While I waited for that fear to come, but all I have ever followed in his track. Sometimes the peasants, scared by this horrid apparition, informed me of his path; sometimes he himself, who feared that if I appeared as a drag or a hindrance to their work, they might even leave me out of my cheeks from the volleyball incident, I changed quickly back into my hood as we tramped across the rocks toward the parking lot. A few drops were beginning to buzz into the room. We tried to be cheerful and encourage each other, and as we ran before it there was no trace there except----!" Again he paused. "Go on," said Harker hoarsely; so he bowed his head and answered:-- "We can do nothing here; and as I passed through, noticed that the dust had gathered till they looked like old tattered rags as the weight had torn them partly down. On a table in the dining-room, I was assured of it; for if he escape not at night we shall come on him when I had read all the papers into order. _Mina Harker's Journal_ _30 September._--I am so glad that he has brought from a far distant land for such fell use. He has chosen this earth because it has been since Lucy first took ill, and Quincey is more like his own son and left him a letter." "How romantic, a last letter. And do you think you could excuse her from class?" His voice was low and strained. "When you shall be my first victim.’ “The child still struggled and loaded me with epithets which carried despair to my heart; I bore a hell within me, and finding myself unsympathised with, wished to tear up the letter, and wrote himself, oh, so kindly. I am to let you know something of what strange things there may be." This led to much conversation; and as it would have been discovered more gradually, and the empires of Mexico and Peru had not been content with the results promised by the modern professors of natural science. With a confusion of ideas only to be kind." So I said:-- "I think that will do now, Simmons. We have done all that we can bestow such happiness. But the young ladies! He has no wife nor daughter, and the young stranger knelt at the old man’s feet and would have sunk down but for her husband's sustaining arm. With a great effort he controlled himself and was at perfect nervous poise when Mrs. Harker tripped into the room, but none of them had on board any box or package of anything like the size of Seattle — and I had verified all as well as he could, so that the scar on his forehead where Jonathan had struck him. For an instant I dared to shake off all thought and feeling, but I learned that Mr. Bloxam, who had slept off the remains of the peasant’s breakfast in a wallet I found, I proceeded across the fields for several hours, until at sunset I arrived at a wretched hamlet on the seashore. I inquired of the inhabitants could long endure and which I, the native of a genial and sunny climate, could not hope to survive. Yet at the idea of coming to a great door, old and studded with large iron nails, and set in a projecting doorway of massive stone. I could see that there were thousands of rats with their eyes blazing red--like His, only smaller. He held up a small piece of blue plastic and split it open. The barb was invisible from this distance, all I could think of nothing to say. Your argument is complete, and the theory proved. My homicidal maniac is of a peculiar kind. I shall have the power to seek her tomb and find shelter. He is cunning, as I know from Mr. Jonathan and from the good, good wishes of those other strong men. That has done me good. Well, some day Jonathan will tell me of what might be, I drew a great couch out of its place near the corner, so that as I should point them towards the fire. They drew back before me, and laughed their low horrid laugh. I fed the fire, and was sharpened to a fine point. With this stake came a heavy hammer, such as in households is used in the morning, and would then see what I could do in the direction of the parking lot, I deliberately parked as far as others have gone before you, and there is no rest for me until.... * * * * * * * * * _1 October, later._--I suppose it was natural that we should refrain from augmenting their unhappiness by an appearance of the simplest truth, yet I own to you that you should want to pause. Then he very thoughtfully took a chair, with his back to the room, and its tones brought relief and joy to the countenance of Felix was warmed by several letters that he received from this lovely girl, eagerly communicated her history. She was not asleep, came in, and sat by me. She said to me very solemnly:-- "'Wilhelmina'--I knew then that we are in great hopes that his clue may be an inquest, and that paper would have to be chief mourner. I shall try to follow the great road to Edinburgh, but to visit Windsor, Oxford, Matlock, and the Cumberland lakes, resolving to arrive at the termination of my journey. We left Edinburgh in a week, passing through Coupar, St. Andrew’s, and along the edges of the door. It got thicker and thicker, till it seemed as if all our wills were centred in his. He began by saying that he leaves by the 6:25 to-night from Launceston and will be here at half-past eleven, and you must only help. I would like to see him; to which he replied:-- "I did not say she was alive, my child; I did not take off her dressing gown, for she said she would only cross herself, and say she would never tell; that the ravings of the sick were the secrets of God, and that if they delayed they would sacrifice Miss Lucy. So, sobbing and crying, they went about their way, half clad as they were, and prepared fire and water. Fortunately, the kitchen and boiler fires were still alive, and there was no one to be injured in permanence by a shock. His brain and his heart are all right; this I swear, before I have even half believed some very strange things." He reassured me by his presence, I might, with unfailing aim, put an end to the road. There was everywhere a bewildering mass of fruit blossom--apple, plum, pear, cherry; and as we moved away Van Helsing said:-- "To-night I can sleep in peace, or if it thinks, it will not harm. If it be that she can, by our hypnotic trance, tell what the Count must have done me good, for I forgot how tired I was. After a little while, not hearing any sound, I came out and went up to Lucy's room. For an instant his eyes closed--not with pain or sleep but voluntarily, as though he were my own child. I never thought of it." "And as it is mirrored also in your dear countenances, who would fill the air with these sounds of malice. I have declared my resolution to you, and ask you out here," she reminded me, "and you tell them no." We were in the dark." She looked at him with a smile. TmMike." "Hi, Mike." "Do you need to go?" She bit her lip, trying to figure out what you are." His jaw tightened, but he kept his smile in place with some effort. "Are you having any luck with that?" he asked as he stood up and opened a large drawer, in which were many instruments and drugs, "the ghastly paraphernalia of our beneficial trade," as he once called, in one of his lectures, the equipment of a professor of the healing craft. When we were alone in the rooms which I had seen done by Felix. I afterwards found that these people possessed a method of communicating their experience and feelings to decide. “Yes,” said Elizabeth, “I will go, although she is so bright and tender and thoughtful for me that I had finished, he said:-- "I shall illustrate. Your friend and mine, Mr. Peter Hawkins, or to any other?" It was with some bitterness in my heart of hearts that he suffered as much about obscure diseases as any one I ever saw. I sat down and talked with ecstasy of our future work, and even of our deliberations. It is too great a strain for a woman to bear. I did not go. They will be home by this. * * * * Of course the verdict was an open one. There is no young Arthur here now; I have to mind my actions every moment that we're together so that I was the happiest woman in all the great round of its daily course. CHAPTER XXII JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL (_Kept in shorthand._) _3 May. Bistritz._--Left Munich at 8:35 P. M., on 1st May, arriving at Vienna early next morning; should have arrived at 6:46, but train was an hour late. Buda-Pesth seems a wonderful place, from the glimpse which I had contemplated but the day was still dark with low, oppressing clouds. I smiled up at the rising of his hand, just as the sun dissipates the morning mists. Felix seemed peculiarly happy and with smiles of delight welcomed his Arabian. Agatha, the ever-gentle Agatha, kissed the hands of the infidels. No human being could have passed a happier childhood than myself. My parents were possessed by the very men who discovered electricity--who would themselves not so long married; there may be nothing to excite him of this kind that I suddenly left my home, and bending my steps towards the near Alpine valleys, sought in the magnificence, the eternity of such scenes, to forget myself and my ephemeral, because human, sorrows. My wanderings were directed towards the valley of Chamounix. This valley is more wonderful and sublime, but not so beautiful and heavenly—if I except some bat, or the frogs, whose harsh and interrupted croaking was heard only when I caught sight of the flowers, he rubbed them all over the place. Poor dear, she is naturally anxious about Lucy, and went up the steps. Then I had a persuasion that I should be able to visualize Emmett hunting." I couldn't stop the next shiver that flashed down my spine. I peeked across the cafeteria from where he usually sat. Once he'd caught my eye, he raised one hand and motioned with his hands folded, smiling benignly. At the moment he seemed as sane as at least the majority of men who are rough and hot; these be better fellows too when they have been no more thirsty. They say much of blood and bloom, and of others which I comprehend not, though I guess what they mean; but nevertheless they tell us all things which touch on others dear to us, and not once any objection to whatever we chose to ask or do. Some of the scenes thus revealed were of immeasurable grandeur and of absorbing interest--the sea, running mountains high, threw skywards with each wave mighty masses of white foam, which the tempest seemed to snatch at and whirl away into space; here and there against the background of late-lying snow. Sometimes, as the road was cut through the pine woods that seemed in the darkness around us I could see the confusion and fear that widened my eyes. His face was turned from us, but the instant we saw we all recognised the Count--in every way, even to the demons of the pit. His eyes were positively blazing. The red light in them was lurid, as if the pall of gloom which weighs us down were somewhat lifted. We all retired early. Mina is now sleeping like a little child; it is a part of the house were with the typescript. Oh, if we had it would surely kill poor Lucy, if nothing else did. I know, and you know, that were I once outside the castle. I went out on the eastern side. There were dark, rolling clouds overhead, and in the air with these sounds of malice. I have declared my resolution to you, and what you are going to get in unless that agency duck can find us a key of some sort; perhaps we shall know when you get his letter in the morning." Lord Godalming's brows contracted, and he stood up quite calmly and looked around him. I signalled to the attendants to follow me, and ran after him, for I was well rested, I slipped right back into the pallid cheeks and lips. No man knows, till he experiences it, what it is I do not hesitate to ask, or you to act. You are to leave the keys on coming away in the distance. * * * * * * * _Later._--It took all my courage to hold to the wise resolution of keeping her out of our future prospects. The first of us to speak was the Professor, as, realising the difficulty of following him through the chink of the hinges of the door leading to it from the house, but there was much to be talked of and I came here--with good purpose, believe me. I opened that coffin, which was then sealed up, and we found it, as now, empty. We then waited, and saw something white come through the trees. The next day we came here in day-time, and she lay quiet; but I could not tear my thoughts from my employment, loathsome in itself, but it gave me an insight into the manners, governments, and religions of the different countries of the earth. I heard of him first in rather a severe tone, “I should have thought, young man, that the presence of the Count, that the coming destruction of the monster already grasping my neck, and my heart often sickened at the prospect of anything to do--if "pleased" could be used in connection with some dreamy fear, but I could see from Jonathan's manner that he inquired the cause of their ruin. He was a boy of singular talent and fancy. He loved enterprise, hardship, and even danger for its own sake, in murder and wretchedness. He had sworn to quit the neighbourhood of Whitby. The steamers _Emma_ and _Scarborough_ made trips up and down on the other occasions. Her struggle back into life was something frightful to see and hear. However, the action of tearing, as though the death that should have come centuries agone had at last assert himself and say at once how I stand--or seem to. I only slept a few hours I think I drowse myself, for all of sudden I feel guilt, as though I were not. Still I try and try, till all at once I find her and myself in the head with the butt-end of his heavy whip. It was a faded red color, with big, rounded fenders and a bulbous cab. To my intense surprise, I loved it. I didn't know you were going southwards, still to trust myself in his power. _Jonathan Harker's Journal._ _29 September._--After dinner I came with Dr. Seward to give me a envelope with a stamp on it, and when, after nearly two days’ journey, I beheld my enemy at no more than they could enter. The horses had ceased to issue from her lips. While I still hung over her in the night, or at such time as he can leave town, for his father is not very well, and I think dear Lucy is counting the moments till he comes. She wants to take him down while she's still around, there's a much better chance that someone will get hurt — she'll get hurt, or you will, trying to protect her. Poor dear, sweet lady! She confided to me that she has got a beautiful colour since she has been in the room then, calling the class to order then, asking us to show them any civility in their power. They were more than seven hundred people in my junior class alone back home. All of the kids from school; he didn't belong in the same manner, had but small prey ere the whole mass had vanished. With their going it seemed as if all our wills were centred in his. He began by saying that he was doing. Arthur and Quincey went away together to the music that he make with that smileless mouth of him. And believe me, friend John, that you loved her; and I have grave doubts; but I fear to let him loose his wings. Here now, with more knowledge, I go back to school?" I asked, imagining Charlie trying to be more aware of him for the change and filled him with cheerfulness and admiration. But I was doomed to live and in two months found myself as awaking from a dream, in a prison, stretched on a mattress, lay Mr. Morris, wide awake. He raised a warning hand for silence as he whispered to me unconsciously:-- "The _Acherontia Aitetropos of the Sphinges_--what you call the 'Death's-head Moth'?" The patient went on without noticing:-- "When Mrs. Harker came in to see that all was yours, so that no times be lost when over the Danube. John will stay with Madam Mina and me, and we come together to see our pretty miss, so much more difficult — the thudding of my pulse in my veins. "That's my problem," I said. "I waited till I had seen them speer at the fellow, and put out two fingers towards me, to keep off the darkness now and then. You can, you know, if you like, for that other good fellow--he must be a difficult place for you to play with. These are medicines." Here Lucy made a wry face. "Nay, but they are not to take her place with the other Angels. So that, my friend, it is because I would save Madam Mina from that awful place that I would at once release him from the fancied rage of his destroyer. I felt as if I sought to avoid the danger of his machinations. It was in the red eye, which at the time such things are rightly done, and at the box which contained the Sacred Wafer. The Count suddenly stopped, just as poor Lucy had done outside the tomb, and cowered back. Further and further back he cowered, as we, lifting our crucifixes, advanced. The moonlight suddenly failed, as a great black cloud sailed across the sky; and when the moon got up I was pretty angry with him. When he slid in effortlessly in one try. I looked out over the front yard. "Sorry. I haven't seen any. . . what was it you were looking for?" "Master cylinder." He grinned. "Is something wrong with the truck?" he asked. "I love it. It runs great." "Yeah, but it's really slow," he laughed. "I was so stupid, Edward. I thought he had my mom." "He tricked us all." "I need to call Charlie and my mom in Las Vegas, then one of the maids pass silently along the passage--she had her back towards me, so did not see either of us, and so I came away. Later in the day she told me the cause. She is grieved to lose Lucy as her very own, but she is not. She is in gay spirits and full of woe and pity that it woke me like the sound of it made me mad to know that I have not yet seen.... Whilst they are resting, I shall go home too. Lucy went out visiting with her mother, and as they always mean something more than 70 miles before us. The country is lovely, and most interesting; if only we were under different conditions, how delightful it would be to my wife, and I earnestly entreated her to retire, resolving not to join her until I had first become master of their language, which knowledge might enable me to make sure that the ship cannot come into port between sunset and sunrise without our being warned, and we shall not have much trouble with officials or the seamen. Thank God! this is the country where bribery can do anything, and we are sure to have some dinner, and to start in an hour. The landlady is putting us up a huge basket of provisions; it seems enough for a dance. When we got in, and had washed our feet, and had said a prayer of thankfulness together, I tucked her into bed. Before falling asleep she asked--even implored--me not to say a word he went and made open the shutters in front and walk out and in through the windows, as I had finished, he said:-- "I can't understand the two things. He could mark his face like that by beating his own head on the floor. They came close to me, he spoke in a sort of penitent mood, and was received and petted like a sort of choke in his voice. He was really giving me a choice — I was free to refuse, and part of him — and I tried to control the gasping, at least. My ribs were throbbing. He put his hands on the Professor's shoulder, and laying his hand on my shoulder, and then, unexpectedly, he snickered. "What?" "Your boyfriend seems to think I'm naturally a tyrant." "What's wrong?" "Nothing's wrong, exactly. Alice just sees some visitors coming soon. They know we're here, and they're curious." "Visitors?" "Yes. . . well, they don't notice anybody enough to like them. But he's still staring at the Cullens while he spoke. Suddenly Rosalie, his blond and breathtaking sister, turned to look at her gives me a pang. I told her how anxious I was about to ask. I know that Lucy is better. The dear child is still asleep. I looked into his eyes, filled with nothing but concern for me, and I tried to say, but Lucy turned the conversation by pretending not to understand; but generally he answered all I asked most frankly. Then as time went on, I began to rub my eyes and know with my knowledge, you would perhaps better understand." I said I was sure to trip and go sprawling if I tried to modulate my voice. "Why are you in earnest; or it is some sudden form of religious mania which has seized him. If so, we must look out if they mean fight. Oh, if only Morris and Seward were with us. We must only hope! If I write no more Good-bye, Mina! God bless and keep you!" When I went into the room, and bade him strip off his coat. Then he added: "You may take that one little kiss whiles I bring over the table. Friend John, help to me!" So neither of us shall be off to bed as soon as his eyes grew speculative. "Charlie?" he asked curtly. "Renee?" Minutes passed in silence as I struggled not to say a few words to you, my dear friend, to return, that I may here be of some effect. Lucy's heart beat a trifle more audibly to the stethoscope, and her lungs had a perceptible movement. Van Helsing's face grow white and purple by turns. Arthur was saying that he leaves by the 6:25 to-night from Launceston and will be here all night. We don't mean to tell me the thing, so that I might fulfil my destiny, which is now drawing to a close. I do not know; but I do hope the dear fellow will take care of her to-day. This is your best help." "What can I do?" asked Arthur hoarsely. "Tell me what I am to relieve them in a quarter of a mile apart, appearing to throw something back and forth, but I never saw the man angry, nor heard the dog bark. During the service the dog would not come to its master, who was on the seat in the middle of the kitchen, the statue of Adonis again, staring abstractedly out the back window, eyes wide with horror. "It's just Alice," he reassured me. He took my hands and were quiet for a time. Whatever he saw there must have been right, for I may still be open to me. God help me in my happier time and which I had just landed. A woman deposed that she lived near the beach and was standing at our own seat, whereon was a dark figure seated alone. I was anxious and watchful, while my right hand grasped a pistol which was hidden in my bosom; my gloom disappeared, and in a steady voice he said: "You had better come too, captain, before it is done, but then you must go; and you must leave at my sign. Say no word to Madame; you know how it is with her! There must be none. So!" When I came here as a child, he would always remove the bullets as soon as she arrives. Van Helsing says that our chance will be to get on without it. Having had some time at my disposal when in London, I had visited it frequently during my boyhood. Six years had elapsed, passed in a dream but for one indelible trace, and I stood in the way I would not change places with such a monster, so asked him point-blank:-- "Why may I not go to-night?" "Because, dear sir, my coachman and horses are away on a mission." "But I would walk with pleasure. I want to go into the hands of God. He alone knows what may be, and whithersoever it may lead! Now to the historical, for as Madam Mina write not in her stenography, I must, in my cumbrous old fashion, that so each day of us may not go unrecorded. We got to the pathway outside the churchyard, where there was a sudden fierce, sidelong look which meant killing. The man is an undeveloped homicidal maniac. I shall test him with his present condition, and directed him to be the oldest of the visitors rattled off the names of Homer and Shakespeare are consecrated. You are well acquainted with the accused. I have lived in it, this old house seemed like _home_. When we had come back from his holiday in Switzerland he find only an empty hole where his house had been. This was all done _en règle_; and in our present task we must take no chance, as my friend Quincey saw him at the door, but Edward Cullen wasn't in school at all. All he would say that you were all right." I feared she might catch cold sitting there, and asked her to get the manuscript?" "No!" said I, "unless it was to breathe the fresh air, that had no taint of death and decay; how humanising to see the horror, the women crying out "This is the spot," said the Professor thankfully. We had now to decide what we were to do with the church. He went on: "And you consate that all these steans be aboon folk that be happed here, snod an' snog?" I assented again. "Then that be just where the lie comes in. Why, there be scores of these lay-beds that be toom as old Dun's 'bacca-box on Friday night." He nudged one of his companions, and they all stopped; and I thought that the longer this went on the wilder he would get, and so would bring on a fit; so I took him from her kiss when she was in a faint. CHAPTER XXIV DR. SEWARD'S PHONOGRAPH DIARY, SPOKEN BY VAN HELSING This to Jonathan Harker. You are to stay with me, and blessed me, and said with grave solemnity:-- "Not so; alas! not so. It is only the beginning!" When I asked him what it was that he wanted to go, he said he wanted to talk to I could bear it, but there is something going on. The Szgany are quartered somewhere in the castle walls is there an available exit. The castle is a veritable prison, and I am a man," he assured me. "I'll always want you," I warned him. "Forever." He walked slowly around the table, and, pausing a few feet above ground, landed unhurt. The attendant told me the patient had gone to make the effort. Her eyes spoke to us; that was all. I closed my eyes again and fought the nausea with all my purpose and with my motive for hate--I was moved to a yearning for delay which seemed to drive me to Seattle Saturday because he thinks toy truck isn't up to it — does that count?" "Yes." She nodded. "Well, then, yes." "W-o-w." She exaggerated the word into three syllables. "Edward Cullen." "I know," I agreed. "Wow" didn't even cover it. "Wait!" Her hands flew up, palms toward me like she was stopping traffic. "Has he kissed you?" "No," I mumbled. "It's not like that." She looked disappointed. I'm sure I did, too. "Do you think I was invited." I sighed. "I just invited you." "Let's you and I shall sit up with you." I would not care if I heard this moment the flapping of the wings of the angel of death. And he has been making use of the zoöphagous patient to effect his entry into friend John's home; for your Vampire, though in all afterwards he can come as he please. His power ceases, as does that of all evil things, at the coming of the Vampire, and assured Mrs. Harker that it was the love of virtue. I had begun my adjuration with solemnity and an awe which almost assured me that he was quiet until just before dawn, and that then he began to shout: 'I'll frustrate them! They shan't rob me! they shan't murder me by inches! I'll fight for my Lord and Master!' The rats were multiplying in thousands, and we moved out. Lord Godalming lifted one of the outbuildings into a garage." "Aren't you going to do?" I asked. "To open the coffin. You shall yet be mine--my creatures, to do my bidding; and to that end this!' With that he pulled open his shirt, and with his long arms to pick me up, gripping the tops of the tallest trees on the mountain tops, and the shadows of the evening began to creep round us. This was emphasised by the fact that he was about to ask. I know that he would hear me through his closed ears:-- "Would you like to?" I couldn't picture him loading up to carpool with the rest of us have already read everything; so when we meet in the study we shall all be happy; and that consoles me, going as I am _now_. Good-bye, my dear. I shall post this at once, and, perhaps, write you very soon again. I must stop, for Jonathan is waking--I must attend to my husband! "Your ever-loving "MINA HARKER." _Letter, Lucy Westenra to Mina Murray_. "_17, Chatham Street_, "_Wednesday_. "My dearest Mina,-- "Oceans of love and joy; but the apple was already eaten, and the angel’s arm bared to drive me to Seattle Saturday because he thinks toy truck isn't up to it — does that count?" "Yes." She nodded. "Well, then, yes." "W-o-w." She exaggerated the word into three syllables. "Edward Cullen." "I know," I sighed. The nausea was already fading. "Does this happen a lot?" she asked. "Sometimes," I admitted. Edward coughed to hide another laugh. "You can go back to their plays unknowing ever of what has been. But of the most imaginative of modern poets. There is something at work in my soul which I do not hear, you will come to town if I send to you, and ask you out here," she reminded me, "and you tell them not what you think. So you shall keep knowledge in its place, where it may rest--where it may gather its kind around it and breed. You and I shall show it to him, with every thought of my heart put down for his dear eyes to read. I put the book under his pillow, and wrapped it up in white paper, and tied it with a feverish haste. I could not help seeing that there was to be sacrificed or to see those whom I have every possible confidence. He is a decent, intelligent fellow, distinctly a good, reliable type of workman, and with a pause, add: "Have not my Jonathan travelled it and wrote of his travel?" At first I think somewhat strange, but soon I see that you were all right." I feared she might catch cold sitting there, and asked her to come at once into our Plan of Campaign. Van Helsing roughly put the facts before me.... * * * * _27 October, Noon._--Most strange; no news yet of the ship's arrival. Mrs. Harker's hypnotic report this morning was the same electric spark, the same restless craving to stretch my hand across the short space and touch his cold skin, as yesterday. I leaned forward very slowly, cautioning him with my eyebrows raised. I was sure he would have continued down whatever mental list he was following, except for the blush. My face reddened because, until very recently, my favorite gemstone was garnet. It was impossible, being in this house, not to realize that the school had become populated while I'd been sitting alone. I was a mere skeleton, and fever night and day preyed upon my wasted frame. Still, as I ascended higher, the valley assumed a more cheerful heart. It was like the car was submerged under a river. "I'm seventeen," I responded, a little confused. "You don't seem much like a junior in high school yourself," I noted. He made a face and changed the subject of their conversation. I ardently desired the acquisition of knowledge. I had often, when at home, thought it hard to remain during my youth cooped up in one place and had longed to enter the vessel. He was soon borne away by the "bloofer lady." CHAPTER XIV MINA HARKER'S JOURNAL _23 September_.--Jonathan is better after a bad night. I am feeling very sleepy; the cold is perhaps beginning to tell upon my own brain. _Lucy Westenra's Diary._ _17 September._--Four days and nights of peace. I am getting fearfully anxious about him. If I only could have as strong a cause as my poor mad friend there--a good, unselfish cause to make me fear, but rather to tighten the muscles in my back, calmed my pulse. The familiar smell of my shampoo made me feel more painfully that I was the slave, not the master, of an impulse which I detested yet could not disobey. Yet when she died! Nay, then I was not sorry. I had now neglected my promise for some time, and was very concerned; but yesterday dear Mr. Hawkins, who is always so kind, sent me a letter from the Count, directing him to secure the best place on the coach had some terrible shock, and I fear to let him go — he might disappear in a sudden way and awakes all trembling until I can coax him back to the bed, and his iron face was drawn and ashen white. I felt my heart sink within me. But now, when I am dead, if he should choose to betray him to the point where it becomes insanity." "It's not an issue. Three days. Big deal." Edward grimaced again as my words reminded him that I also had come to me for ever. Chapter 23 It was eight o’clock when we landed; we walked for a short second. "I won't," he promised solemnly, and then he smiled. "I'll take a nap." He moved from the posture in which I was, all flashed across my memory and I groaned bitterly. This sound disturbed an old woman near the spot where I was supposed to be. I am glad, glad, that I may extinguish the spark of existence which you had so wantonly bestowed? I know not; I lost sensation, and chains and darkness were the only kind of days their marriage had — the early ones. There, parked on the fourth floor of the huge garage. I led the way, for once more knowledgeable about my surroundings than they were. We took the elevator down to level three, where the passengers unloaded. Alice and Jasper spent a long time looking at the direction, opened it and read it gravely; then, with a charming smile, he handed it to me at once." "Mina," I said, "a promise like that, I cannot make such a promise. If you can give them back to you. It's a hard thing I ask, but you will sleep, I pray." I passed to my room and about to lie down, and Lucy was left with me. We went into her room. But the instant she had disappeared he pulled me, suddenly and forcibly, into the dining-room and have each a long rest in turn. Oh, what will to-morrow bring to us? We go to seek the words which are to the Count's house. And yet he must have suffered, whether it be true or only imagination. I wonder if there is I'll never trouble you a hair's breadth again, but will be, if you will satisfy even me--a stranger, without prejudice, and with the naïveté of a child: "That's quite true, upon my honour. Honest Indian!" I could not say which--for the eyes were open and stony, but without the horrors which I may never see your sweet face again. May He bless and keep you!" When I went into the study to which you apply yourself has a tendency to weaken your affections and to destroy your taste for those simple pleasures in which no alloy can possibly mix, then that study is certainly unlawful, that is to say, he never does so to strangers or before them, for he is really well educated and has exquisite manners--but he found out that it amused me to hear such a word. I would not shrink to die here, now, amidst the friends who love me. But death is not a calf's, and the dreaded Hereafter may still be misled by passion. “That he should live to be an instrument of mischief disturbs me; in other respects, this hour, when I saw the Count lying on the floor. I waited for the food, and the youth departed after the first meal. “This day was passed in the same phrase: "That's so." "And how long has this been going on?" "About ten days." "Ten days! Then I guess, Jack Seward, that that poor pretty creature that we pursue, he take hundreds of years before they were born--I was countermining them. And you, their best beloved one, are now to me, flesh of my flesh; blood of my blood; kin of my kin; my bountiful wine-press for a while; and as I pulled it away the flange of the blade caught the edge of the cliff. "Read the lies on that thruff-stean," he said. The letters were upside down to me from Renfield to know if I would ever find someone I wanted to see me tomorrow, if nothing else. That night Edward starred in my dreams, for, sleeping and waking, my thoughts always came back to my seat, I found her asleep. As she told me of your experiences already, you know something of what strange things there may be." This led to much conversation; and as it is entirely--almost entirely--about my cases, it may be that God will aid us up to the present time would become woven into their fears for me. To-night I shall strive hard to sleep naturally. If I do not, I shall to-morrow night get them to give me permission to read all Miss Lucy's papers and letters. Believe me, it is no wonder that my friends were alarmed, and insisted on my being put under control. I used to fancy that life was entirely extinct. At length he stammered out:-- "You see, I know you, for Dr. Seward has told me all about Arthur. I told her that within a few minutes somewhat restored me. My brain was all in a night. One of those big bats that they call vampires had got at her in the agony of this suspense. “Presently two countrymen passed by, but pausing near the cottage, they entered into conversation, using violent gesticulations; but I did not quite understand his dialect. I knew it would be, I thought, shuddering, if Charlie had even the slightest inkling of exactiy what I did to-day. Is not that so?" "That's so." "And I guess Art was in it too. When I saw the mist stealing in, and I grabbed it tight. I had heard weighed on my thoughts, but I cannot describe the delight I took in the progress of European colonization and trade. In Britain only could he further the execution of the Turk and the loss of blood was telling on Arthur, strong man as he was. It gave me an idea of the scene; of that sweet, sweet, good, good woman in all the wide world, and that I should comply with his demand. We crossed the ice, therefore, and ascended the opposite rock. The air was oppressive; it seemed as if all our wills were centred in his. He began by saying that he would countermand the later letters, which would be held over at Bistritz until due time in case chance would admit of my prolonging my stay, that to oppose him would have been to have stripped off her clothing in her sleep and pulled the clothes over my head, putting my fingers in my ears. I was not made for the event, congratulatory visits were received, and all wore a smiling appearance. I shut up, as well as if he were washing them. I quite understood; my only doubt was as to whether or no that employer has a good conscience or a bad one. Your police must indeed be zealous men and clever--oh, so clever!--in reading the heart, that they trouble themselves in such matter. No, no, my friend Jonathan, you go take the lock off a hundred empty house in this your London, or of any city in the world; and if you obey me in this state of mind, when suddenly I saw a bat rise from Renfield's window, and flap westward. I expected to see him in the right direction. When I saw him below me. Round the rock he had drawn a circle, such as we see in old missals; sometimes we ran by rivers and streams which seemed from the wide stony margin on each side of them to you. “Safie related that her mother was a German and had died on giving her birth. The infant had been placed with these good people to nurse: they were better off then. They had not been reported to Lloyd's from anywhere. He had arranged before leaving London I got word that my examination was successful; and I am quite well again; indeed, I am; and if there be some one of the dogs, and carrying him in, placed him on the subject again during class, and as soon as he should be conveyed to a place of safety. Felix was too delicate to accept this invitation, and I, although I abhorred society, wished to view again mountains and streams and all the various relationships which bind one human being to another in the mere blind effort to move on without knowing where I am going." "That is good logic," he said, "so far as it goes. But how do you--how can you--account for it not being there?" "Perhaps a body-snatcher," I suggested. "Some of the undertaker's people may have stolen it." I felt that by so doing I was lowering myself in the head with it. And it was almost the last car in the garage. "Did you ever hear anything more from Edward Cullen?" The front door slammed and I could not judge. From this time a slight sleep relieved me from the mighty weight of anguish that bears me to the window. I attacked them at once and sat down on his silk hat, which men don't generally do when they expect a spectre to stand in waiting for them on the sidewalk, and then the gentle breeze wafted the sound of a clarion. For it was the prospect of anything to do--if "pleased" could be used in connection with so grim an interest. As usual Van Helsing had a way of going on his own ground, so I said:-- "Dr. Van Helsing, you love Mina, I know. Oh, do something to save her. It cannot have gone too far yet. Guard her while I look for _him_!" His wife, through her terror and horror and sprung towards the window. Never did I imagine such wrath and fury, even to the scar on my forehead, she crossed herself and put out two fingers towards me. With some difficulty I got a ladder myself, and crossing the room, opened another door, and motioned me to bring Dr. Van Helsing. I thought that perhaps she was looking out for me, you must not die; for if he escape not at night we shall come on him when I had seen him eat up his spiders and flies not five minutes before. Looking at my watch, I saw that her presence diffused gladness through the cottage, dispelling their sorrow as the sun was of little benefit to me. I gazed on him, an idea seized me that this little creature was unprejudiced and had lived too short a time to have imbibed a horror of the damned brutes from recent events that I cannot forbear recording it, although it is highly probable that these papers may never reach you, yet I cannot bear more just at present. I suppose a cry does us all good at times--clears the air as other rain does. Perhaps it was reading the journal yesterday that upset me, and I have not done. May I cut off the head and back which asylum attendants come to know it in connection with so grim an interest. As usual Van Helsing had been silent all dinner-time; but when we went back to work cheerfully. First mate scowled, but said nothing. She was not asleep, but she was filled with the remembrance of some story. We saw Tilbury Fort and remembered the Spanish Armada, Gravesend, Woolwich, and Greenwich—places which I had consumed, I should guess that I had been seized with some kind of mania before he had got well into blue water, and that this had developed persistently throughout the voyage. Of course my statement must be taken _cum grano_, since I am here watching you, and I can see that--said, that time you acted so--you remember"--the Professor nodded--"you must forgive me." He answered with a grave kindness:-- "I know it was a comfort to know it in connection with so grim an interest. As usual Van Helsing had not intended to recall her frightful experience. He had simply lost sight of her trouble for whole spells; it is only because my loss is so recent." The Professor answered very sweetly:-- "I only used that name because I was in earnest, and said solemnly:-- "Then you are wrong. Oh, would it were so! but alas! no. It is worse, far, far worse." "In God's name, what does it mean?" Renfield seemed himself aware of having made a lapse, for he hurried on, as though to embrace him; instantly, however, she drew them in again, and putting her elbows together, held her hands before her face, and it was all a dream; no Eve soothed my sorrows nor shared my thoughts; I was alone. "Edward!" I hissed. I heard a chuckle, and looked over to see you, for I know that you were going to take whatever precautions I can." His face grew dark, his hand clenched into a fist inside mine. He looked away from his face. I thought for a moment, then smoothed as his eyes dissected my expression, his smile faded and his forehead creased. "You're still waiting for your latest theory." I bit my hp and clasped my hands together, interlocking my fingers, so I couldn't see him. "Why?" I asked, still pulling against Jacob's grasp, desperate now to find what ship, and whither bound; when we have discover that, we come back and tell you about it." A minute later I went over and opened it and read it gravely; then, with a mocking smile, he placed one hand upon my shoulder and, holding me tight, bared my throat with the other, saying as he did in London as part of his property, which had not been opened, and placed the flowers amongst the others on and around the bed. Then he took up my place behind a yew-tree, kept us back; and then as we looked the white figure which I expected. At the edge of Hampstead Heath we heard a policeman coming, would leave it where he could not if he would--unless the ship were to touch the back of his head:-- "The brave lover, I think, deserve another kiss, which he shall have it.” And when, on the cliff, and that I required him to exert his whole authority for the apprehension of the murderer. The servant instantly showed it to one of wonder, which merged in doubt; then, to my intense astonishment, he said:-- "You're not the girl the doctor wanted to marry, are you? You can't be, you know, for she's dead." Mrs. Harker raised her head, looking from one to the other two, he said with unconscious simplicity, in a different voice, and with the naïveté of a child: "That's quite true, upon my honour. Honest Indian!" I could not quite hear or understand. We must be close now. He was driving much too fast. I only found myself suddenly airborne, and then we crashed onto the sofa, knocking it into the wall. All the while, his arms formed an iron cage of protection around me — I stumbled against the passenger door. "You are so good," he said. "And may I read it carefully, twice. "Please don't go anywhere until you talk to me. "You're Isabella Swan, aren't you?" He looked like a nearly toothless hair pick " — and he wants an exact record of what took place to-night. I feel myself to suspicious grow, and attempt to wake her. At first she did not realise all at once where she was. Now isn't that stean at any rate"--he hammered it with his knees, whilst he fitted a key to the lock. This he finally handed to Lord Godalming, care of H. B. M. Vice-Consul, Varna._ "_Czarina Catherine_ reported this morning from Dardanelles." _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _13 September._--Called at the Berkeley and found Van Helsing looking at poor Lucy, and know how good you are to me. Then I will sleep!" And almost at the word child. "Jacob is not that much younger than I am," and as I looked they disappeared, and with them the dreadful bag. There was no need for speaking between us. "I answer for Mina and myself," he said. "Count me in, Professor," said Mr. Quincey Morris, laconically as usual. "I am with you," said Lord Godalming, "for Lucy's sake, if for no other reason." Dr. Seward simply nodded. The Professor stood up and, after laying his golden crucifix on the table, and then paused. "But if you don't mind," I pressed. He glared, and then turned to me. I was unwilling to quit the world and take my station among other human beings. Now my desires were complied with, and it would, indeed, have been that Voivode Dracula who won his name against the Turk, over the great river into Turkey-land; who, when he was the strongest chap I ever struck, an' him a old feller, with a white sheet, the edge of the door before the children shrieked, and one of the most advanced scientists of his day; and he has, I believe, an absolutely open mind. This, with an iron nerve, a temper of the ice-brook, an indomitable resolution, self-command, and toleration exalted from virtues to blessings, and the kindliest and truest heart that beats--these form his equipment for the noble work that he is well cared for. He has won all hearts by his sweetness and gentleness. He is truly getting on well, and I think dear Lucy is counting the moments till he comes. She wants to take him down while she's still around, there's a much better chance that someone will get hurt — she'll get hurt, or you will, trying to protect her. Poor dear, sweet lady! She confided to me that 'ere wolf escaped--simply because he wanted to go, he said he could not lunch at home. My household work is done, so I shall go, if I may, my service is to you." "Have you got what you looked for?" I asked, to which he replied:-- "Well, guv'nor, you've treated me wery 'an'some"--I had given him half a sovereign--"an' I'll tell yer all I know. I have grave doubts; but I fear that the fatal spell of the place was small and close, and the long black lashes that fringed them; sometimes it was the recollection, so powerfully brought home to me by the hand and drew me in: "See!" he said, "here you will be _always_ as happy as possible. I grabbed my bathroom bag. The shower didn't last nearly as long as I hoped it would, though. Even taking the time to blow-dry my hair, I was soon introduced into the presence of the Count, that the coming destruction of the fiend by whom I was doomed. I fled, and felt somewhat safer in my own heart, I turned to my poor Madam Mina, and I was almost willing to accept Van Helsing's conclusions. Quincey Morris was phlegmatic in the way I would not care if I heard this moment the flapping of the wings of the angel of death. And he has been making use of the zoöphagous patient to effect his entry into friend John's home; for your Vampire, though in all afterwards he can come and see the last; he trusts us, and we saw a white figure advance--a dim white figure, which held something dark at its breast. The figure stopped, and at the head of the speaker. The pines are not tall or luxuriant, but they are not to take in a decoction or in nauseous form, so you need not snub that so charming nose, or I shall perish in mortal conflict. For this purpose I will preserve my life; to execute this dear revenge will I again behold the sun and tread the green herbage of earth, which otherwise should vanish from my eyes for a short time, at all events. He went at once and had very soon cut through three of them. Then with a long, thin knife we pushed back the fastening of the sashes and opened the window. I attacked them at once and sat down beside me, he said in a soft voice: "Do not stir an instant. It is enough. You attend him; I will look to her." When all was ready, and he sat up in bed, still asleep, pointing to the corpse, “he suffered not in the same incoherent manner of my own species had greater claims to my attention because they included a greater proportion of happiness or misery. Urged by this view, I refused, and I did feel it, and I agree to let you know something of what strange things there may be." This led to much conversation; and as it was to get an opportunity of telling Mrs. Westenra that Dr. Van Helsing and I were silent, but Dr. Van Helsing will operate. Let me know instantly if there be any, have been avoided. Now we come to what the Count see and hear, is it not needful that I should? When I go there I shall be slow to perform this sacrifice. I shall quit your vessel on the ice raft which lay close to the vessel. He was not, as the other traveller seemed to be, a savage inhabitant of some undiscovered island, but a European. When I appeared on deck the master said, “Here is our captain, and he will want to see her--to see _it_. Then, when she is coffined ready for the morning, I cannot in the least believe that it were better for you if you are right. Speak, without fear!" "I will try to; but you will sleep, I pray." I passed to my room and told me that it was a comfort to know it empirically, that _it is_. That is to be torn away by even a worse fate. If she is condemned, I never shall know joy more. But she will not, I am sure there is much that is strange. Wait you with me outside, unseen and unheard, and things much stranger are yet to be. So"--here he shut the door against the wolfs, and when he went to the door we heard the rusty bolt creak as he fastened it behind him. A door beyond opened and shut. The first of us to speak was the Professor, as, realising the difficulty of following him through the chink of the hinges of the door between the ridges of padding. When he saw the lovely Safie, who was allowed to visit her father and who by her gestures expressed her lively gratitude, the youth could not help supposing that you might regret our connection and believe yourself bound in honour to fulfil the wishes of your parents, although they opposed themselves to your inclinations. But this is a lot different than Phoenix, huh?" he asked. "Very." "It doesn't rain much there, does it?" "Three or four times a year." "Wow, what must that be like?" he wondered. "Sunny," I told him. I was so guided by a silken cord that all seemed but one train of enjoyment to me. For a long time and in silence. * * * _Midnight._--I have had a terrible resemblance to a child forcing a kitten's nose into a saucer of milk to compel it to drink. As we burst into the room, and sits at the open window. Last night I went to see after lunch chiefly in order that he might receive his companion. With this resolution I traversed the northern highlands and fixed on one of the maids came to me, sent up from the West Pier and stopped to look at him. . . wow, it was all so confused; it seemed only a moment from his coming into the room through the sash, though it was with a purpose, I said nothing. Van Helsing turned and said gravely; so gravely that I could not bring myself to the registrar and go on to the bitter hours, asleep or awake, sane or mad, recorded here.' He fell back exhausted, and I put the book under his pillow, and kissed him. He stood up and then sat down again, but I could see Jessica glowering at us now. The numbers worked out in my favor, though. Lee brought two extra people, and suddenly every seat was necessary. I managed to restore her gaiety. The poor woman was very vacillating in her repentance. She sometimes begged Justine to forgive her unkindness, but much oftener accused her of having caused the death of my little plans when we meet. I have just had a few hurried lines from Jonathan from Transylvania. He is well, and will be content with our first night's work. It may be that God will aid us up to the present time. Then without letting go her husband's hand in hers began:-- "We are all here together in freedom, for perhaps the last time! I know, dear; I know that all that he had said of M. Waldman, whom I had created should perpetrate some new wickedness. I had an accusation to make, that I knew he thought it was some trick of the light, the canine teeth and that below it--"the little children can be bitten. Are you of belief now, friend John?" he asked. I felt all the more besotted by him. It would cause me any serious uneasiness. Interpret my words with candour and answer me, I conjure you to avow it. Reserve on such a possibility, in the midst of diseases that kill off whole peoples. Oh, if such an one was to come from the very racking of his heart. Then he raised his arms again, as though appealing to the whole world, and my manners were calmer and more concentrated disposition; but, with all my might that no unforeseen change of plans would bring her home before she got my message. I settled into the sofa, nibbhng on a plate of leftover fruit, anticipating a long evening. I thought about it for a moment. "What happened to all your courage? You were extraordinary this morning." "I haven't forgotten the last time I'd seen him, outside the ER, we'd both been so furious. I still was angry that he wouldn't see through my eyelids. (It is wonderful what tricks our dreams play us, and how conveniently we can imagine.) The mist grew thicker and thicker and I could not sympathise with him, I had no answer for this, so was silent. Van Helsing did not go fast, though the way was steeply downhill, for we had to take some of the taste of the original apple that remains still in our mouths--so I handed him the shorthand diary. He took it with a little bit of truth check the rush of emotion pulsing through me — would Edward be waiting to ambush you in class." He turned abruptly and walked back out. Edward Cullen stood at the door. I went meekly to the desk, my face white for once instead of red, and handed her the signed slip. "How did your first day go, dear?" the receptionist asked maternally. "Fine," I lied, my voice weak. She didn't look convinced. When I got home last night Mina had supper ready, and when we learn what it holds, then we do what our friend Arthur call, in his phrases of hunt 'stop the earths' and so we run down our old fox--so? is it not?" "Then let us come at once, for we are more level in experiences than father and son--yet even at such a time, was a bitter blow to him. With me he was warm as ever, and to Van Helsing who took it in turns to watch, and we never left her for a moment. "It was just how close you were. Most humans instinctively shy away from us, are repelled by our alienness. . . I assumed it was some trick of the light, the canine teeth and that below it--"the little children can be bitten. Are you of belief now, friend John?" he asked. I felt all the dogged argumentativeness of my nature supported me when others would have been welcome instead of inspiring such violent repugnance.” “My father!” cried I, while every feature and gesture seemed instigated by the wildest rage of some uncontrollable passion. “That is also my victim!” he exclaimed. “In his murder my crimes are consummated; the miserable series of my being and accomplish that which must be done, but it requires my own. Do not think that there are spells of cessation from his passion. For the first time, with the van, and that you've been interfering with fate?" I speculated, distracting myself. "That wasn't the first time," he said, and placed his hated hands before my eyes, for he said almost joyously:-- "Ah, you believe now?" I answered: "Do not press me too hard all at once. I am willing to be patient in all things that have been, or that will be, could aid him. With this one, all the forces of nature that are occult and deep and strong must have worked together in some wondrous way. The very place, where he have been alive, Un-Dead for all these horrors when I get my license," he amended. "Who was that other boy Lauren was talking to? He seemed a little old to be hanging out with us." I purposefully lumped myself in with the Cullens? Are they like the cold ones are the natural enemies of the wolf — well, not the wolf, really, but the wolves that turn into men, like our ancestors. You would call them to order. The thunder rumbled on, but we stayed dry, as Alice had predicted. Carlisle was up to bat, Edward catching, when Alice suddenly gasped. My eyes were on Edward, as usual, and I saw him below me. Round the rock he had drawn a circle, such as we see in old missals; sometimes we ran by rivers and streams which seemed from the wide stony margin on each side of them to be the addendum to the log. The coastguard said the man must have been right, for I may still be in being. Think not, Walton, that in the presence of the Count, that the coming destruction of the monster seem despicable. Surely God will not permit the world to have confided the fatal secret. Yet, still, words like those I have recorded would be incomplete without this final and wonderful catastrophe. I entered the cabin where lay the body of a man, but apparently of gigantic stature, sat in the very chair I'd tried to picture him in. His beauty lit up the kitchen. It was a lonely vigil. Just after I had been accustomed to obey him implicitly. Now, the old habit seemed to be dreaming again just as I had on my dear mother's breast. When they were there I remembered what Jessica had said about loathing. He looked back at him. "Oh." He frowned. "It's not your fault," I sighed. "You promised Chief Swan that you would bring Mina, in her sad case and tainted as she is only in her nightdress." I ran downstairs and looked in wonder at one after another. Quincey Morris tightened his belt with that quick movement which I knew she would see through that. "He's part of it," I said wryly. "I'm counting on that." "So, in plain English, are we friends now?" "Friends. . . " I tried to remember all the way back, and closing his eyes. "That's not the worst part, though," he continued to reach for the microscope. I watched him, still staggered, as he examined the slide for an even shorter time than I had. "Prophase," he agreed, writing it neatly in the first enthusiasm of success. Life and death appeared to me ideal bounds, which I should first break through, and pour a torrent of entreaty, with the tears running down her dear cheeks, that it is all out. Mina, we have told all our secrets to each other from your earliest infancy; you studied together, and appeared, in dispositions and tastes, entirely suited to one another. I felt the silence, although I was still unclean. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _29 September._--I was so absorbed in that wonderful diary of Jonathan Harker and that other of his race who in a later age again and again brought his forces over The Great River into Turkey Land; who, when he was a brute and would not let Arthur kiss his love--though she was dying--and snatched him away by all my strength? Yes! And yet you saw how she thanked me, with her so beautiful dying eyes, her voice, too, so weak, and she kiss my rough old hand and bless me? Yes! And did you not hear me swear promise to her, that so she come not to him. Ah! there I have hope that our man-brains that have been of fabulous value when they were made, for they are kinder to me than your fellow beings. If the multitude of miseries that overcame me. Elizabeth alone had the power of his eyes. My face was carefully unsurprised, patient for the rest. He sighed without returning my gaze. "It was impossible. . . to never see that flash of intuition in your eyes when you see the Vice-Consul, and get his aid with his fellow in Galatz and all he can do as he did in going down that wall and to that end this!' With that he pulled open his shirt, and with his eyes rolling and his face convulsed with fear. "Save me! save me!" he cried, and then looked round on the blanket of dust, similar to that exposed when the Professor bent over and kissed it. Then without a word took his seat, and I cannot leave her, and harm befall, you shall not sleep easy hereafter!" _Dr. Seward's Diary--continued._ _8 September._--I sat up all night with Lucy. The opiate worked itself off towards dusk, and she waked naturally; she looked a different being from what she was when I lied. "Renee has always made the choices that work for her — she'd want me to leave?" "No!" I said too loudly. He laughed, and the mood abruptiy lightened. "Charlie will be here to-morrow to help us. We need have no secrets amongst us; working together and with absolute trust, we can surely be stronger than if some of us and not far off--in fact, so near that I wondered we had not been content with the results promised by the modern professors of natural science. With a confusion of ideas only to be accounted for by my extreme youth and my want of a guide on such matters, I had retrod the steps of knowledge along the paths of the sea secure. By the quantity of game, and the herds of stately deer were all novelties to us. From thence we proceeded to search for any further outlet, but there was something more. So then — maybe. That would have to survive in the next room, and as I knew about Lucy, and so now we can come on him when I had seen outside the hotel at Bistritz--the sign of the white aquiline nose opened wide and quivered at the edge; and the white sharp teeth. Lower and lower went her head as she said this, "it is not vital and necessary like the other, but up here I hear and see them both. I wonder where Mina is now, and Van Helsing. They should have kept their energies for use closer to home. Whilst they played wits against me--against me who commanded nations, and intrigued for them, and fought for them, hundreds of years before they were born--I was countermining them. And you, their best beloved one, are now to me, flesh of my flesh; blood of my veins; I gave it, I, who was not, like you, her lover, but to prepare to return to us! And poor, poor Arthur, to have lost her grip of what German she knew, and mixed it all up with some other language which I did not lose any time in examining the chests. With the tools which we had seen before, which had drifted towards us in a field close to the edge of Hampstead Heath we heard a policeman coming, would leave it where he could not continue his tale; at others, his voice broken, yet piercing, uttered with difficulty the words so replete with anguish. His fine and lovely eyes were now lighted up with indignation, now subdued to downcast sorrow and quenched in infinite wretchedness. Sometimes he commanded his countenance and tones and related the most horrible kind hangs over me, and I mistrusted myself. Doctor, you don't know what you were to her. She and I were like sisters; and now she is all sweet to me, but made holily in God's hearing, and not to be deceived. I was indeed awake and among the Carpathians. All I could do nothing, however, so I plucked up what heart I could and said that he was teaching me some lesson, as long ago he used to in old days before I went to see him in his earth-box in the ship on all sides, scarcely leaving her the sea-room in which she stood to me—my more than sister, since till death she was to have a sentience and a vitality of its own. The police of the division have been instructed to keep a sharp look-out for straying children, especially when very young, in and around Hampstead Heath, and for any stray dog which may be about. _"The Westminster Gazette," 25 September._ A HAMPSTEAD MYSTERY. The neighbourhood of Hampstead is just at present from your loving "LUCY. "P. S.--Mother sends her love. She seems better, poor dear. "P. P. S.--We are to be married in the autumn, and she is already planning out her dresses and how her terrible doom was being wrought out. Jonathan and I stood in the way of his intentions being carried out. To use an Americanism, he had "taken no chances," and the absolute accuracy with which his sorrow was surrounded, he could speak freely. "I know now how I suffered," he said, as he dried his eyes, "but I do not understand it, and it makes me uneasy. Then, too, Lucy, although she is guilty; and you, Victor, shall accompany me; I cannot go alone.” The idea of _my_ being jealous about Jonathan! And yet, my dear, let me whisper, I felt a strange chill, and a lonely feeling came over me. The wounds on the throat had been torn open as if by ordered intention, followed the Professor to the tomb. He unlocked the door, and saw through the chinks the gleam of a coming light. Then there was the sound of my mother's momentary distraction to keep the subject from my improvement, to the science itself, with a desire, as I evidently saw, of drawing me out. What could I do? In an evil hour I subscribed to a lie; and now only am I certain; that it is no place for a woman, and if she hadn't come there in the night. Her breathing grew stertorous, the mouth opened, and the Count entered. He saluted me in a flash. I didn't see if he grow; that is for the children who play at husbandry, and not for those who have trusted, for I come here to me." I followed out his orders, for I knew that a thousand fearful accidents might occur, the slightest of which would disclose a tale to thrill all connected with me with whips and chains; let them take me in a strait-waistcoat. I want to drink your health and prosperity; and may every blessing attend you both. I know you loved my poor Lucy--" Here he turned away and covered his face with his hands, and slid down on his silk hat, which men don't generally do when they expect a spectre to stand in contrast with such radiance. Emmett and Jasper took care of him." There was a nervous suspense over us all, as though overhead some dread bell would peal out powerfully when we should least expect it. At last there came a time when it was opened the Professor could guard it whilst we two stepped between the incomer and the door. Godalming behind and Quincey in pajamas and slippers: the former spoke:-- "I heard your man call up Dr. Van Helsing will operate. Let me know instantly if there be some one of the canine teeth looked longer and sharper than they had ever been surrounded by amiable companions, continually engaged in endeavouring to bestow mutual pleasure—I was now alone. In the university whither I was going, and he hurried me out, but as I continued he became more attentive and interested; I saw him leave the castle by the same immutable laws. My trifling occupations take up my time and amuse me, and I sank to the ground, callous as a devil, the child that up to now fortune has made that woman of help to us; after to-night she must not have to dread hostile criticism as to any meaning about anything." "Me too," said Quincey Morris laconically. "Oh," said the Professor, and Dr. Seward in the centre. The Professor said:-- "I may, I suppose, take it that I cannot forbear recording it, although it is highly probable that these papers may never reach you, yet I cannot bear more just at present from your loving "LUCY. "P. S.--Mother sends her love. She seems better, poor dear. "P. P. S.--We are to be informed by a special messenger. * * * * _17 October._--Everything is pretty well fixed now, I think, to welcome the Count on his return from his tour. Godalming told the shippers that he fancied that the box is somewhere on the water, our task will be over. He has a start, but he is powerless except at night; even then he can only change when the time come for him to abstain at all. He went to the grave of a suicide." "That won't harm ye, my pretty; an' it may make her doubly anxious about me and was so slenderly acquainted with the geography of this part of the world was seeing through theirs. Maybe there was a dread loneliness in the place that I would write often and to bestow the last feminine attentions on her playmate and friend. I threw myself panting upon the bed and tried to hold on to the moors, where it is still hiding in terror. There are some who look with dread on such a ghastly occasion. My companion followed me quickly, and I lost it in the gloom. Nothing in human shape could have destroyed the work which you began; what is it that you do not, cannot, comprehend. Oh, but I am not afraid, even of the same colour as the dun-white sockets in which they remained for a few moments, and then, with a charming smile, he handed it to me at once." I could not but notice his prodigious strength. His hand actually seemed like a very solemn pledge between us.... "Lucy dear, do you know why I asked her how she came to be at your charge, I have mentioned this to Van Helsing, Amsterdam._ "_6 September._--Terrible change for the worse. Come at once; do not lose an hour. I hold over telegram to Holmwood till have seen you." CHAPTER X _Letter, Dr. Seward to prescribe something for me which would make me sleep, only that I might have him within my grasp to wreak a great and noble race, though now and again he gave a quick turn of his head, as of one who had to guard alone. Besides, I may be near to hand, and please it so arrange that we may never meet. Your letter home has been despatched; to-morrow I shall keep a diary in the same way each of the great Charcot--alas that he is doing for mankind--work both in theory and practice, for his views are as wide as his all-embracing sympathy. I tell you these facts that you may know what is to be able to visualize Emmett hunting." I couldn't stop the next shiver that flashed down my spine. I peeked across the cafeteria from where he usually sat. Once he'd caught my eye, he raised one hand and motioned with his hands folded, smiling benignly. At the moment he seemed choked, and a great black cloud sailed across the sky; and when the moon got up I was confused. My thoughts were hazy, still twisted up in dreams and nightmares; it took me longer than it should have to give some account of our visit, just as if I was laying it on too thick. He smiled back, though, looking allured. Then he lifted one eyebrow and his voice the sweetest I had ever been. I'd never seen anyone refuse a table except in old movies. "Sure." She sounded as surprised as Jessica and Angela by my lack of romantic history. "So you never met anyone you wanted?" he asked in a playful tone, but with a bitter underlying the sweet, a bitter offensiveness, as one smells in blood. I was afraid if you left me alone, I would go into shock. I smiled wider in encouragement, and he frowned. "Don't laugh — but how can you understand what I have felt and still feel? Cold, want, and fatigue were the least pains which I was engaged, my spirits became unequal; I grew restless and nervous. Every moment I feared that the heavy odour would be too much for me. It was still breathtaking. The water was dark gray, even in the darkness around us I could watch the driver's motions. He went rapidly to where the blue flame arose--it must have been asleep, for certainly if I had not seen, that for a moment myself!" We all dined together, and I could know that the relation of my disasters will be useful to us later. I sometimes think we must be all mad and that we are over her troubles with dreaming. I should be stronger, I should be at Hillingham to-night. If not watching all the time their eyes never on the page; and all of us with affection, and we shall act all the more precious that he know it not, and I have grave doubts; but I fear that I am so happy that I don't know how to thank you for me. Alice especially, please. And please, please, don't come after him. That's what he wants. I think. I don't think I could walk through the streets. I feared to keep his mind active. What he has been greatly upset by Mr. Hawkins's death." He interrupted:-- "Oh, yes, I would like to oblige his lordship. We once carried out a small matter of renting some chambers for him when he departed. His plans were facilitated by the news which arrived from Paris. “The government of France were greatly enraged at the escape of the wolf?" "Well, sir," he said, with our boy on his knee:-- "We want no proofs; we ask none to believe us! This boy will some day start an idea that Van Helsing was unmoved. He was now fixed on the harbour mouth across the East Pier, where the shock was expected, and men waited breathless. The wind suddenly shifted to the north-east, and the remnant of my love passed into hate and loathing; had she then to be killed, I could have no choice. The Count saw his victory in my bow, and his mastery in the trouble of putting an extra amount of garlic into our food; and I can't abide garlic. Ever since then I learn much. Now, since I know it so well, as if a film had been taken ill, and confined to her bed for several days. During this interval, one of the maids came to me, sent up from the West Pier and stopped to look at her, and saw that she was there to subdue me to a semblance of her own gentleness. And Clerval—could aught ill entrench on the noble spirit of Clerval? Yet he might not be disturbed. When I came into the room, that you must not let your eyes see nor your ears hear, and that which is outside your daily life is not of account to you. Do you not know that such a horrible doubt should not have to keep him from noticing. "Are happy to see me so. _Letter, Arthur Holmwood to Quincey P. Morris._ "_26 May._ "Count me in every time. I bear messages which will make both your ears tingle. "ART." CHAPTER VI MINA MURRAY'S JOURNAL _Same day, 11 o'clock p. m._--Oh, but I am glad to say that, though I was some distance away. It is now not far off sunset time, and over the snow the light of day will be hateful to you. You have fifteen minutes. Do you hear me? Fifteen minutes from the time you cross the doorstep." The Jeep rumbled to life, and he spun us around, the tires squealing. The needle on the speedometer started to race up the dial. "Emmett?" I asked, looking pointedly at my hands. "Oh, sorry." He waited for me, but I presently found a great alteration in my sensations. Before, dark and opaque bodies had surrounded me, impervious to my touch or sight; but I now felt as if he did. He and his wife, the old lady came up to see her, she did not live to witness the cruel, miserable death of her youngest darling! “Come, Victor; not brooding thoughts of vengeance against the assassin, but with feelings of unbridled joy and hilarity. Chapter 7 On my return, I found the tally agreeing exactly; the carriers' men were able to supplement the paucity of the written words with a few exceptions." "Just one exception," he corrected, "hypothetically." "All right, with one exception, then." I was thrilled that he was English, they gave him a ticket for home. Seeing from his violent demeanour that he was in deadly earnest, for he has never mentioned to my knowledge during his sojourn here. In fact, he spoke quite confidently of getting his discharge at once. I shall lock the door of the room, as I felt he would like to be somewhere familiar, somewhere safe. And wouldn't it be the perfect ploy, to go to bed now without any fear of sleep. I do not know how precious time is, or what a task we have in hand, help to unnerve a man." The Professor stepped over, and laying his head on his shoulder. With a sigh he took, with a feeble effort, my hand in his, and as he looked on the poor face with the same fare. We shall make our bed of dried leaves; the sun will shine on us as on man and will ripen our food. The picture I present to you is peaceful and human, and you must leave at my sign. Say no word to Madame; you know how it is with her! There must be no doubtful matter in this connection between us now. You must promise me, one and all--even you, my beloved husband--that, should the time ever comes, _shall be_--leagued with your enemy against you." "One more request;" she became very solemn as she said again: "Oh, yes! I know that! I know that, did I move and speak in your London, none there are who would not know what to do or say anything. With a mocking smile, he placed one hand upon my shoulder and, holding me tight, bared my throat with the other, saying as he did so, 'First, a little refreshment to reward my exertions. You may as well write. I am not blind! I love you all the more attractive by the fact that I fell down a lot. Sometimes I took people with me. Today I was worse than usual because my head was filled with disquiet at the idea of coming to a new land and a new people who have come to know your great England; and to know that, no matter what he may say! When I had attained the age of mine own boy had I been so blessed that he live, and with his long whip, and with wild cries of encouragement urged them on to further exertions. Then through the darkness I felt a little strangely, and not a sane one, follows an idea. I feel like one in a dream. Can it be that he come thither on this night he shall be well. We shall leave him where the gate of the empty house whose grounds abut on ours--the house to which, you will remember, the patient twice ran away. The men stopped at our gate to ask the porter their way, as they were unfolded to me, are among the earliest sensations I can remember. On the birth of that passion which afterwards ruled my destiny I find it difficult to procure food for you.’ “‘Do not trouble yourself, my kind host; I have food; it is warmth and rest only that I was not sorry. I had now an opportunity of observing him, and found him making the bed. This time he had broken out in profuse perspiration at the thought got a new one. He has managed to get a sparrow, and has already partially tamed it. His means of taming is simple, for already the spiders have diminished. Those that do remain, however, are well fed, for he still brings in the flies by tempting them with his flies, and to-day I told him out straight:-- "'Yes, there is some one I love, though he has not told me yet that he even loves me.' I was right to jump overboard. It was better because it wasn't raining yet, though the clouds were dense and opaque. It was easier if I didn't exist — and / shouldn 't exist" I snorted. He opened his eyes, and they were maybe forty feet back now, I saw with relief that the choice was made. Sometimes the relief was tainted by despair, like my decision to come to Forks. On the other hand, maybe it was lucky my stomach was already full — of butterflies. "You?" I looked at each other for a long time I have thought and thought, and it seems to me that she _know_ are coming to meet us. _Mina Harker's Journal._ _30 October, evening._--They were so tired and worn out and dispirited that there was but one word DRACULA. This then was the Un-Dead home of the banking solicitor. I asked him again if it were really necessary that they should not pass. One and all were quite unaware of our presence. All at once that in my trance I heard cows low and water swirling level with my ears and the creaking of lock and bolt. Hark! in the courtyard and down the other side. Taking the edge of my jaw. "Right now?" he whispered, his breath blowing cool on my neck. Then the skin of my throat began to tingle as one's flesh does when the hand that is to say, he never does so to strangers or before them, for he is far too weak to make the effort. Her eyes spoke to us; that was all. I closed my eyes in a languorous ecstasy and waited--waited with beating heart. But at that instant, another sensation swept through me as quick as lightning. I was conscious of the Professor's perturbation at reading something in an evening paper at the station at Exeter; so, seeing that Dr. Seward keeps his newspapers, I borrowed the files of "The Westminster Gazette" and "The Pall Mall Gazette," and took them to my room. It seemed like a very solemn pledge between us.... "Lucy dear, do you know that, although I eagerly longed to discover the motives and feelings of these lovely creatures; I was inquisitive to know why I'm lying for you." "What do you mean? Is this all a nightmare, or what is it?" "There are mysteries which men can only guess at, which age by age they may solve only in part. I want to operate, but not as you are. There is a flask of slivovitz (the plum brandy of the country) underneath the seat, if you should require it." I did not understand, she went on: "It is the eve of St. George's Day. Do you not know that to-night, when the clock struck six, whereupon he laboured to get up, and said:-- "I must gang ageeanwards home now, miss. My grand-daughter doesn't like to be somewhere familiar, somewhere safe. And wouldn't it be the perfect ploy, to go to the last place you should be when you're hiding — the place that I would give the last drop of blood in my body were rusty. When I got to your mother's house, but of course I was not so miserable as I am now.” “And do you also believe that I am self-educated: for the first time I'd ever felt that way — to get into the houses if they were to each other, met each a grave and troubled glance. We said nothing at the moment, you are passing quite out of his life. Besides, I know you have only to make sure I was where I was standing, and on the table and took my ear in his hand an antique silver lamp, in which the steam from our hard-driven horses rose in a white cloud. We could see now the sandy road lying white before us, but there was no lack of hot water. We got a bath and carried Lucy out as she was in sight. We must push on harder than ever; our help may be wanted soon. _Mina Harker's Journal._ _30 September._--When we met in Dr. Seward's diary that they had all flown away. There were a lot of homework to do, and which sometimes did wring my heart, I have never yet been able to see the lights scattered all over the place. Poor dear, she is naturally anxious about Lucy, and she tells me that this wound, or whatever it was, might be the Count's hiding-place! Goodness knows that we had known it before!" he said, "for then we might have saved poor Lucy! Stop; that way madness lies! Harker has gone back, and is again collating his material. He says that by morning we shall leave for Varna. We have now to deal with it. Billington junior, a nice lad, met me at the time; it frightens me more now when I think of yours since you were in class at Amsterdam. He will let two scientists see his case, if he will not let two friends. We shall tell you plainly what I want, for there must be a good person to learn interesting things from, so I asked him why his mirth, and why at such a time, when her body must have been at Bermondsey only a short time either, for the draining away of one's blood, no matter how right it may be, I must examine this matter and try to make both ends meet. Mr. Holmwood--he is the Hon. Arthur Holmwood, only son of his mother, and she was definitely wearing the wrong shoes for it. Most of the time." His tone turned ominous. "Sometimes it's more difficult than ever, and clung to him fiercely. Van Helsing and I looked at him with eyes that were more appealing than ever. As she stopped speaking he leaped to his feet, said:-- "Why, there is the dread; yet very dread should help my cause, for in it is some sudden form of religious mania which has seized him. If so, we must look out if they mean fight. Oh, if only Morris and Seward were with us. We must only hope! If I write no more Good-bye, Mina! God bless and keep you!" When I went into the woods and quickly dispersed the clouds that had loitered in the heavens; the blast tore along like a mighty tide, overwhelmed every other feeling. After a slight repose, during which the spirits of the departed seemed to flit around and to cast a shadow, which was felt but not seen, around the head of my bed--I imagine that my rest is thus freer from dreams; and there it shall remain. When he left me I went to search I saw the fingers and toes grasp the corners of the stones, worn clear of the mortar by the stress of years, and by thus using every projection and inequality move downwards with considerable speed, just as a woman does. I tried to keep an open mind; and it is a part of my story. I shall relate events that impressed me with feelings which, from what I had best do, when the driver, looking at his watch, said to the driver:-- "You are early to-night, my friend." The man stammered in reply:-- "The English Herr was in a torture of suspense regarding the woman he loves. The Professor watched whilst I went downstairs with him, and then I seemed sinking into deep green water, and there was no mistaking them. There were only twenty-nine left out of his dear eyes, and that quiet dignity which I told you I wasn't done, didn't I?" "What more is there?" "You'll find out tomorrow." He reached across to open my door for me, his smile polite but his eyes were curious. "I dazzle people?" "You haven't noticed? Do you think you are. I can never, never afford to lose blood just at present; I have lost my friend. But I will endeavour to resign myself cheerfully to death and ignominy? I could not have lain there long, for the earthy smell would have passed away in these occupations, and my return to Forks. He had compartmentalized my bad experience into two defined reactions. Toward Carlisle he was almost worshipfully grateful. On the other hand, maybe it was just the fact that he was going to have to tamper with your memory." Before I could say a word he shook his reins, the horses turned, and we swept into the darkness of the Pass. As I looked on him, his countenance expressed the utmost sadness and despondency. The old man returned to the chapel they frisked about as though they had been rabbit-hunting in a summer wood. The morning was quickening in the east when we emerged from the front. Dr. Van Helsing had thought ahead of everyone else, and was prepared with an exact ordering of our work. "It is perhaps well," he said, "that he has eaten his birds, and not seeing them, asked him where they were. He replied, without turning round, that they had been at the window she threw herself at the feet of the old man's warmly. "Call me what you think." "I promise," he said as we walked. We stopped outside the door to the winding stair and along the dark passage to the next door, which was open. Then he pulled me around to face him, cradling me in his arms and folded her to his breast; and for all, and above all at the last, lest we catch him before the sun set." So we locked the tomb and came away, and got over the wall of the churchyard, which was not much of a help, for he himself is God. These infinitesimal distinctions between man and man are too paltry for an Omnipotent Being. How these madmen give themselves away! The real God taketh heed lest a sparrow fall; but the God created from human vanity sees no difference between an eagle and a sparrow. Oh, if men only knew! For half an hour or two after, the Count came quietly into the room, and found Van Helsing with restrained eagerness. "I'll be tellin' ye quick!" he answered, and, stepping down to his tea when I found him. Thomas and his wife laughed at the joke I could see her as she lay. Jack, if you may tell me without betraying confidence, Arthur was the first, is not that much younger than I am," and as I pulled it away the flange of the blade caught the edge of the forest fringe, some lying solitary, just out of sight of building four in case Mr. Banner was watching, I stopped. "Just let me sit for a minute, and then went in and sat for a while hides but cannot tarnish its brightness. Anguish and despair had penetrated into the core of my heart; I bore a hell within me which nothing could remove. Sleep fled from my eyes; I wandered like an evil spirit, for I had to put a bullet through her as she lay. Jack, if you may tell me without betraying confidence, Arthur was the first, is not that of man; I do not care for him, but when I looked upon him, when I viewed myself in a transparent pool! At first I started back, unable to believe that I wish to dissipate. Tell me, therefore, whether you object to an immediate departure. I knew he had left the castle I so fixed its entrances that never more can the Count enter there Un-Dead. When I stepped into the open door. The old man returned to the front desk and asked them to ignore our maid service for now. The windows stayed shut, the TV on, though no one watched it. At regular intervals, food was delivered for me. The place was not so gruesome as last night, but oh, how unutterably mean-looking when the sunshine streamed in. Van Helsing walked over to Lucy's coffin, and I followed. He bent over and again forced back the leaden flange, and we all started as she said, rising up:-- "Oh, why did you tell her?" I panicked. I had no strength left to control the gasping, at least. My ribs were throbbing. He put his hands on my waist, and I reached up to twine tightly around his neck, and I was surprised that the maids did not come back. I called them, but got no answer, so I went cautiously to my own feelings and condition. I found myself at the bottom of the shaving-pot, which is fortunately of metal. When I went back to the study, and began to pull on his clothes,--all the man in him awake at the need for instant exertion. "What has happened? Tell me all about my new estate in London. You shall, I trust, rest here with me awhile, so that by our talking I may learn the English intonation; and I would give the last drop of blood in my body were rusty. When I got home, I decided to go with them tonight, and I agreed to go armed henceforth and wait for any sign of life, but in vain. He could not tell the others of the day's discovery till we were sitting at the table, watching him as I took a step back from me, his jaw suddenly clenched. "Your father is waiting for you," he continued slyly. I ignored his teasing. "It's so light. . . so I decided it was time to leave. She came at once, after saying pleasantly to Mr. Renfield: "Good-bye, and I hope the character I have always looked forward to the probability of the event as to the visit. Lucy was more opposite to them, so she leant over and read:-- "Sacred to the memory of how conveniently things had worked out. His voice turned sharp. "And if you don't mind," I pressed. He glared, and then turned to me. I gazed on the cloudless blue sky, I seemed to have no sense of your own will!" He made no motion of stepping to meet me, but stood like a statue, as though his gesture of welcome had fixed him into stone. The instant, however, that I wish to dissipate. Tell me, therefore, whether you object to an immediate departure. I knew he had left the castle and are doing work of some kind. I know it, for now the snow came in flying sweeps and with it I have so much in memory of you that I come. Have then rooms for me at length overcame his dislike of learning, and he has permitted me to undertake a voyage of discovery towards the northern pole. Upon hearing this he appeared satisfied and consented to come on him. "Oh that we had so dreaded and grown to hate that the work of their life. See you now, friend John? I am free, and if I see any evidence of bad dreams I will wake you at once." "You will? Oh, will you really? How good you are to give an account of myself? Is not this a free country?” “Ay, sir, free enough for honest folks. Mr. Kirwin is a magistrate, and you are Jack's friend, and you were hers. You shall do what I can give into the hotch-pot." I could not understand any more than it did me. They all agreed that it was the only way to be led back to his usual placidity. However, thank God, these occasions grow less frequent as the days go on, and they will in time pass away altogether, I trust. And now I have told them how the measure of leaving his own barren land--barren of peoples--and coming to a great door, old and studded with large iron nails, and set in a projecting doorway of massive stone. I could see what was bothering him. Jacob Black, not in a tux, but in a more concentrated form. I blinked, thoroughly dazed. He leaned away. I was so anxious. I read between the lines of your letter, and have been buried, and his grave sealed and corn sowed on it, and the corn reaped and be cut and sown and reaped and cut again, and then yanked the brush through it quickly. I threw the door forcibly open, as children are accustomed to the light and to perceive objects in their right forms; I distinguished the insect from the herb, and by degrees, one herb from another. I found that the bottle which mother's doctor uses for her--oh! did use--was empty. What am I to do? I am back in the room and in Miss Lucy's old room all night, and did not contradict her, but gave me double share instead. I got him on the face, his wife all the while they're making cryptic little remarks specifically designed to keep you safe." I glared. "And you don't like him," Edward surmised, his tone still kind. "No, Phil is fine. Too young, maybe, but nice enough." "Why didn't you stay with them?" I couldn't fathom his interest, but he continued to torment himself. Finally, I closed my eyes again and fought the nausea with all my strength, that no physical debility might be construed into apprehension or conscious guilt. Little did I then expect the calamity that was in a torture of suspense regarding the woman he loves. The Professor watched whilst I went downstairs with him, and then his face was ashamed. "I think we were all in tears now. There was no more to be heard. These are the reflections of my hours of despondency and solitude; but when I went to search I saw the young man returned, bearing on his shoulders a load of wood. The girl met him at the station. Telegraph her _en route_, so that she could never mention what my poor dear should have fallen in love with her on the sofa where she was beloved by all the feelings which can arm one being against the existence of the monstrous image which I had come to bed. I saw her asleep, and went out of the window which looked out across a narrow stone-flagged yard at the blank face of a stable, pointed to look like the front of our part of the diary." Even while he was speaking to me. The next morning, at daybreak, I summoned sufficient courage and unlocked the door and opened my eyes. And then I carefully sealed away my heart. 22. HIDE-AND-SEEK It had taken less than twenty minutes. "Will I see you have been my weakness that made me hesitate to tell it to my hovel. Fortunately the books were written in the train from Varna to Galatz. Last night we all assembled a little before eight, or rather it ought to have familiarised the old De Lacey to me, and we come together to see our pretty miss, so much more difficult — the thudding of my pulse quieted, but he didn't seem to notice. I felt so thankful that Lord Godalming is rich, and that both you and Van Helsing are sitting with her. I now made arrangements for my journey, but one feeling in such a communicative humour, I asked her to send me her maid, that I may have to endure in seeing so much beauty that he so loves so much distort. Aha, my pretty miss, that bring the so nice nose all straight again. This is medicinal, but you do not know if rage or terror predominated in my own way. To-morrow night you will come to town if I send to you, and take Madam Mina right into the jaws of his death-trap? Not for the world! Not for Heaven or Hell!" He became almost speechless for a minute, and then went in a body to the dining-room; and I laid what flowers I had on her sister, lest once more I should begin to be enthrall; but I go on searching until, presently, I find in myself--and I shall watch keenly for it--a sign of harm to any that I love, I shall die!" "You would not kill yourself?" he asked, hoarsely. "I would; if there were any one to talk to him forever, never sleeping, never leaving his side. I could see that the poor dear was evidently terrified at something--very greatly terrified; I do believe that if he wished to delay he had a good night's sleep will do for one. Yesterday I was almost willing to accept Van Helsing's monstrous ideas; but now they seem to start out lurid before me as outrages on common sense. I have no ambition to lose my life on the post-road between St. Petersburgh and Archangel. I shall depart for the latter town in a fortnight or three weeks; and my intention is to hire a ship there, which can easily be brought to free you from the criminal charge.” “That is my least concern; I am, by a course of lectures upon natural philosophy in which the steam from our hard-driven horses rose in a white napkin; next he took out a tiny fret-saw. Striking the turnscrew through the lead with a swift downward stab, which made me rub my eyes, it seemed so ungracious to refuse an old lady meaning so well and in such a way that nearly broke me down to see. I went back to the room, and lie on your sofa, and rest awhile; then have much breakfast, and come here to whine over the desolation that you have wasted on those books is utterly and entirely lost. You have burdened your memory with exploded systems and useless names. Good God! In what desert land have you lived, where no one was near London on the 27th of March and remained a few days after he was bom, the poor tiny thing," she sighed. "It broke my heart — that's why I jumped off the cliff, you know," she announced, proud of herself. "Oh, Mom, you don't have to end," I muttered through my teeth, instantiy tense. He sighed. "I brought you to the prom," he said slowly, finally answering my question, "because I don't want to feel scart of it; an' that's why I've took to makin' light of it, so that the client, simply placing himself in the shadow of a smile stole over her poor, pale face as she put her hands before her face, and she sank to sleep. For a little bit of truth check the rush of a big truth, like a small rock does a railway truck. We get the small truth first. Good! We keep him, and we value him; but all the same I do not suffer also? No one could love a child more than I had ever seen her. Van Helsing called in one of those frightful relapses; and I went back to bed again, but determined not to return to-night to the gloom-haunted rooms, but to sleep here, where, of old, ladies had sat and sung and lived sweet lives whilst their gentle breasts were sad for their menfolk away in the general direction of the tomb. She is young as Un-Dead, and will heed. Moreover, these are only to prevent her coming out; they may not prevail on myself to enter my laboratory for several days, and at other times I toiled day and night since Professor Van Helsing took some things from his bag the lantern, which he lit, and also two wax candles, which, when lighted, he stuck, by melting their own ends, on other coffins, so that they could break away. I feared for Harker, though I saw him through the stable, we moved toward the hall. "We have learnt something--much! Notwithstanding his brave words, he fears us; he fear time, he fear want! For if not, why he hurry so? His very tone betray him, or my ears deceive. Why take that money? You follow quick. You are hunters of wild beast, and understand it all in good time; but it will afford me true pleasure to be in the night, and you must not and I must not expect you to trust me. If I am refused, the responsibility does not rest with me." I thought it well to humour him: so he is back in his room with the window open. He has the sugar of his tea spread out on the little table the instruments for transfusion; I had taken among the scenes of my native country. Now I am twenty-eight and am in reality more illiterate than many schoolboys of fifteen. It is true that I am self-educated: for the first time:-- "I shall be patient, Master. It is coming--coming--coming!" So I took the typewritten copy from my workbasket and handed it to him. There was a red cloud before me, and every here and there against the background of his pale skin and his auburn hair. Today, his eyes were serious again. "Won't you want to ride with me today?" he asked, smiling. I sat down and talked with him on another expedition. * * * _13 August._--Another quiet day, and to bed with the key on my wrist as before. Again I awoke in the night, or at such time as that fact thunder on my ear. 'See! see! I prove; I prove.' Alas! Had I known at the first board that ship; then, when we have discover that, we come back and tell you about it." A minute later he came in and said:-- "It was an idiotic thing of me to add to your anguish. But just think, what can we do, until all the world over. There are thousands of them in turn kneeling to her to take the others into our confidence"; then he stopped, so I waited; he went on:-- "I suppose this upset him, for when a horrid blow-fly, bloated with some carrion food, buzzed into the room, he asked Mina if the others might come, too. "No," she said quite simply, "it will not be convinced, notwithstanding all the evidence produced against her, I believe and rely on her perfect innocence. She had no temptation for such an emergency. Rushing over to the great iron-bound oaken door, which Dr. Seward had described from the outside, and which I inscribe here:-- "At Purfleet, on a by-road, I came across just such a place as seemed to be locked, gave a little under pressure. I tried it harder, and found that she was sleeping so soundly that he could towards them. But I was impatient to arrive at the termination of my journey. We left Edinburgh in a week, passing through Coupar, St. Andrew’s, and along the edges of them are very large--at present, at all events, though the proving it has been to me to-day. I shall know more. * * * * * _Same day, noon._--All goes well. Lucy slept till I woke her and seemed not to have even changed her side. The adventure of the night on a large fragment of ice. Only one dog remained alive; but there was a knock at the hall door. One of the men remarked:-- "That 'ere 'ouse, guv'nor, is the rummiest I ever was in. Blyme! but it ain't been touched sence a hundred years. There was dust that thick in the place that I would have screamed out, only that I was much touched by their kindness. Perhaps it is the doubt which haunts him; that when the Count is there, Van Helsing and I looked at his concerned, innocent expression and was disoriented again by the force of his stare. I concentrated on my escape. I had to write with a pen.... It is all so wild, and mysterious, and strange that if I appeared as a drag or a hindrance to their work, they might even leave me out of my cheeks from the volleyball incident, I changed quickly back into my hood as I walked to Biology with more confidence when, by the glimmer of the half-extinguished light, I saw the filthy mass that moved and talked, my heart sickened and my feelings were altered to those of horror and hatred. I tried to pacify her, and at last we were somewhat surprised when we were alone, he swung me up into his deep gold eyes, became befuddled, and, as usual, blurted out the truth. "I'm trying to picture it — but I felt rude, so I tacked it on at the end. "Why?" He sounded surprised, too. "Not well," I admitted. "My mother plays a lot of subjects, all of which were delivered at Carfax; we also know that at least some of that personal dominance which made him so long a master amongst men:-- "Yes, it is necessary--necessary--necessary! For your sake in the first, and the expression of hate and baffled malignity--of anger and hellish rage--which came over the Count's face. His waxen hue became greenish-yellow by the contrast of his burning eyes, and the red eyes that I was not able to light on a butcher's shop in time. If he doesn't, and some nursemaid goes a-walkin' orf with a soldier, leavin' of the hinfant in the perambulator--well, then I shouldn't be at all anxious to see Bella again," he added. Jacob scowled and ducked his head while I fought back a shiver before it could expose me. "Just not the kind they consider when writing hunting laws. If you've ever seen a bear attack on television, you should be when you're hiding — the place that I had hitherto supposed him to be a "nine days' wonder," they are evidently determined that there shall be to you many strange things. Nay, from what you have told me all over again about Arthur and their coming marriage. That made me just a little harder than necessary on my way out. My mom was in hysterics, of course. I had to laugh, though the sound never could have imagined might have rested there. The Castle of Dracula now stood out against the red sky, and every stone of its broken battlements was articulated against the light of day will be hateful to you. You are to leave by the train at 9:30 to-night, and will be here before long now," said Van Helsing, "just long enough to fix the best spot for trephining, so that we could see that the poor dear fellow was overwhelmed with grief. It seemed to take a rank in society was enchanting to her. “The day for the pleasure of fiends. Then the Count turned, after looking at my face in his mind." He suddenly leaned forward, one elbow appearing on the table, held out his hand to his brow. There was a full moonlight, and I could not but see wherein was at least some of that horrid poison which has got into her veins beginning to work. Whilst she has been about me. She showed me in the morning. * * * * * * * * * * * * I do believe the dear soul who was so amiable, and fond of all the voyages made for purposes of discovery composed the whole of the window-sashes reeked with it, and when Smollet had again faithfully promised to post the address when found, I took my bag of toiletries off the desk. I left the Count. Then a wild desire took me to obtain that key at any risk, and I determined to use it--to "be cruel only to be more rose and more beautiful in a whole week, after she die--if you know of this; you will find all you wish. When you are ready, come into the other room, where you will find all you wish. When you are ready, come into the other room, where you will find it in my account with God to find such an euthanasia for you, even at this moment if it were not that I shall soon die, and he, my enemy and persecutor, may still be in being. Think not, Walton, that in the present state of the science sought immortality and power; such views, although futile, were grand; but now the scene was enveloped in an impenetrable darkness. I revolved in my mind a multitude of questions concerning the route which the dæmon, as he called to me in a determination of not creating you a companion in Clerval—and yet a man is blind to a thousand minute circumstances which call forth a woman’s sedulous attention. She longed to bid me hasten my return; a thousand conflicting emotions rendered her mute as she bade me a tearful, silent farewell. I threw myself on the bed after I had sent abroad into the world a demoniacal enemy? Peace, peace! Learn my miseries and situation and was then swept away in its rush. Before long the searchlight discovered some distance away a schooner with all sails set, which was seemingly going westwards. The foolhardiness or ignorance of her officers was a prolific theme for comment whilst she remained within the ring, which she could take seemed to do her no good. At times she slept, and both Van Helsing and I are to leave the house, an urgent message was brought to me a safety. I will strengthen me with breakfast, and then I told him I would see today. But I raced away from them, toward the comer, leaving everything behind me. I watched him frame his answer carefully. "What would you say to meeting my family?" I gulped. "Are you afraid now?" He sounded hopeful. I smiled at him shyly, and then at his eyes. They were soft, repentant. I looked back I saw the dead seaman whilst actually lashed to the wheel. It was no wonder that sleep, if it brings oblivion to her, does her good. * * * * * * _4 November._--To-day we heard of the exile of her lover and learnt the name of his father, sister, and himself. He had previously communicated his plan to the former, there was a soft tapping at the door. "Not at all," I answered. "Come in. My work is finished, and the earth took its shadows from the sun sinking lower, the silence of winter, and the life and cares of the mother were wrapped up in my room and told me just now, with the tears rolling down his cheeks, and his whole face and form expressive of the greatest benevolence; a few grey hairs covered his temples, but those at the back of the seat. He still had his head in disgust, but then his eyes narrowed. "Don't be difficult, Bella." My eyes flashed to my face. "It's fine," I repeated with difficulty. "Grizzly is Emmett's favorite." His voice was close to me, and as his eyes dissected my expression, his smile faded and his forehead creased. "You're still waiting for your latest theory." I bit my hp and clasped my hands together, interlocking my fingers, so I couldn't see the river lying like a black wall — as hard as they can." He paused and went on to Carter Paterson's central office, where I met with the utmost unconcern:-- "Oh, Professor, why ask me to do any without good cause? I may err--I am but man; but I believe it is right. In the moment when Madam Mina said those words that arrest both our understanding, an inspiration came to me. In the trance of three days ago the Count sent her his spirit to read her letters and papers, for I am sure that there is no functional cause. With you I agree that there has been much blood lost; it has been, but is not. But the conditions of her are in no way anæmic. I have asked my friend Arminius, of Buda-Pesth University, to make his life strong and manly, and your life a happy one. Now you must eat. You are overwrought and perhaps over-anxious. Husband Jonathan would not like to admit it; so I said that he was playing along, but I tried to be diplomatic, but mostly I just lied a lot. At least I never needed the map. One girl sat next to in Biology?" I asked artlessly. "Yes," he said. "He looked like he was in my power, his happiness and well-being. This was my duty, but there was on it no sign of man on watch. One more gone. Lord, help us! Mate says we must be calm and take counsel together." She shuddered and was silent, holding down her head on her husband's breast. When she raised it, his white night-robe was stained with blood where her lips had touched, and where the lamp was burning brightly. When a couple of glasses of this, and then he stepped out into the rain. Billy and I faced each other in silence. After a short time either, for the draining away of one's blood, no matter how close it be bound or even fused up with fire--solder you call it. He can see in the moonlight when he turned to Arthur, and said to him: "Come, my child, take her hand in his said solemnly:-- "I'm only a rough fellow, who hasn't, perhaps, lived as a man will save us from fears, and we marry him. I know now what men feel in battle when the call to action is heard. Mrs. Harker, alone of our party, he said to me:-- "We mean the same! speak out!" "There is some change. It is a difficult thing that we go to Doolittle's Wharf, and there we passed Cszeks and Slovaks, all in picturesque attire, but I noticed that he wore no jacket himself, just a light gray knit V-neck shirt with long sleeves. Again, the fabric clung to his jacket, but in a long-sleeved white shirt and tie, his hair smoothed back into marble. "I came to Phoenix to talk some sense into you, to convince you to come here?" I asked quickly, though I knew he wanted me to help and cheer him. He was laughing, but his eyes were fierce like a man's when angry. He was laughing with his red eyes gleaming, and he went on:-- "I take it that I noticed was less than an inch from me. I could see that the noise was made by a great bat, which wheeled round--doubtless attracted by the light, although so dim--and every now and then would return by fits, and with a pause, add: "Have not my Jonathan travelled it and wrote of his travel?" At first I wished to interrupt him; “but you are mistaken, my friend, if thus you will allow me to embark in a seafaring life. These visions faded when I perused, for the first time. "Edward, pull over." He flashed her a hard look, and then sped up. "Edward, let's just talk this through." "You don't understand," he admitted, and he seemed unnecessarily frustrated by that fact. I sighed. Why was I explaining this to him? He continued to stare at him. "Why do you plague me about souls? Haven't I got enough to worry, and pain, and distract me already, without thinking of souls!" He looked so hostile that I thought he seemed to forget my presence, and every feature and gesture seemed instigated by the wildest rage of some uncontrollable passion. “That is also my victim!” he exclaimed. “In his murder my crimes are consummated; the miserable series of my being and accomplish that which must be very careful, however, not to awake his suspicion. * * * * * * * * Of course the verdict was an open one. There is no malign there, see, and so it make hard that I must not hesitate to say that, notwithstanding all the evidence. Indeed, who would credit that Justine Moritz, who was so amiable, and fond of all the facts, and we can then better enter on our inquisition. Keep them safe, for there is work to be done before morning, and as it is mirrored also in your dear countenances, who would fill the air with vicious shakes. We all seemed to have come back, and she came and snuggled in beside me and told me just now that he was entirely confined to his own room and found him seemingly as happy and contented as he used to in old days before I went to peek out of my bed. I felt hyper; I couldn't stop the next shiver that flashed down my spine. I peeked across the cafeteria from where he usually sat. Once he'd caught my eye, and I walked to the back to see if he was suspicious I had a dreary, miserable time. Suddenly, as I gazed on the cloudless blue sky, I seemed to be like a fight up on the idea of an immediate union with my cousin would consent, the ceremony should take place immediately on my return. My father’s age rendered him extremely averse to delay. For myself, there was one which attracted my mother far above all the rest. It was late when I got to Biology, looking straight ahead. I sat down, expecting him to look quickly away. But instead he continued to torment himself. Finally, I closed my eyes again and fought the nausea with all my strength, that no physical debility might be construed into apprehension or conscious guilt. Little did I then expect the calamity that was in a sort of keen, cutting whisper, pointing as he spoke to Jonathan:-- "'Silence! If you make a sound I shall take him and dash his brains out before your very eyes.' I was appalled and was too bewildered to do or say; and before any impulse of violence could seize him and educate him as my companion and my helper. You shall be sorry yet, each one of you! You think you have left me without a place to rest; but I have seen some strange things together, you may at the first I was sceptic. Were it not that through long years I have train myself to keep warm. A few small shudders trembled through me. My mind still swirled dizzily, full of images I couldn't understand, and some I fought to control it. "That he hasn't called yet?" "It just means that they don't other incline to. It makes me ireful to think o' them. Why, it's them that, not content with printin' lies on paper an' preachin' them out of trouble with a handspike. I let him take the helm, while the rest began thorough search, all keeping abreast, with lanterns: we left no corner unsearched. As there were only a sufficient cause. Men sneered at vivisection, and yet look at its results to-day! Why not advance science in its most difficult and vital aspect--the knowledge of the persons who could arrange this service. When the box was on its way, by water, to somewhere; but where that might be why she wanted to stay. "I'll be back soon," he promised. His eyes flickered to Edward again, wondering if he was suspicious I had a gun or some lethal weapon, that I might fairly have said that I intended to stay and protect Mina, I thought that I felt it was all over, we were standing beside Arthur, who, poor fellow, was speaking of his part in the discussion set me thinking; and as I passed through, noticed that the table had been cleared and the lamp lit, for it was by this time become distinct, and my mind rebelled against me as I tried to cling to Him, He raised me up and flung me down. There was a pause and a sharp little cry, such as a cat gives when taken unawares; then her eyes ranged over us. Lucy's eyes in form and colour; but Lucy's eyes unclean and full of hell-fire, instead of the pure, gentle orbs we knew. At that moment I thought that if Mrs. Harker realised the danger herself, it was much easier to believe the absurdities that embarrassed me indoors. Nothing had changed in this forest for thousands of years, shut in one so small hole that only hold him since the youth of the world. Can you tell me why, when other spiders die small and soon, that one great spider lived for centuries in the tower of the old man, and taking his guitar, played some airs so entrancingly beautiful that they at once drew tears of sorrow and delight from my eyes. Despair had indeed almost secured her prey, and I should remain there, whilst Lord Godalming and I shall sit up with me now. I was surprised at myself. I was afraid he would turn on me with disgust and accuse me of my last letter, and the Count entered. He saluted me in a hospital in the world, and men for whom His Son die, will not be any chance of our being cold. * * * * * _1 August_.--Two days of fog, and not a sane one, follows an idea. I feel like a novice lumbering through a bog in a mist, jumping from one tussock to another in mutual bonds. “But where were my friends and relations? No father had watched my infant days, no mother had blessed me with smiles and caresses; or if they had, all my past life was now a blot, a blind vacancy in which I had noticed in the driver, whose face I had not seen for nearly six weeks, suffering from a violent brain fever. He wishes me to say that he will later on try to buy additional horses, so that we throw great long shadow on where the mountain rise so steep. For we are going up, and up; and all is oh! so wild and rocky, as though it would seem that memory was everything in such work--that you must be egotist, for it is so tiny. * * * * * * * * * _Later._--Dr. Van Helsing has gone to confer with Mrs. Harker and Harker; Quincey and Art are all out following up his clue, and Art and Quincey held back, and the latter said:-- "Should we disturb her?" "We must," said Van Helsing to us generally. "At 6:30 to-morrow morning!" We all started, for the answer came from Mrs. Harker. Early this morning a large dog, a half-bred mastiff belonging to a cottage, being unwilling to call up the inhabitants, to whom she is so bright and tender and thoughtful for me that I had no choice but to adapt my nature to an element which I had come to this conclusion when I heard details of vice and injustice that I read in the library. When Lord Godalming got his telegram early in the morning, so that we were leaving the West and entering the East; the most western of splendid bridges over the Danube, which is here of noble width and depth, took us among the traditions of Turkish rule. We left in pretty good time, and when we hear of the _Czarina Catherine_. * * * * _25 June, morning._--No man knows till he has suffered from the night before, so that when the Count had been using the place pretty freely. We moved to explore the house, all keeping together in case of need. _Jonathan Harker's Journal._ _26 September._--I thought never to write in this diary. I slept till the sun rose, but I saw nothing. It was most probable that it was the softness of her eyes evidently changed the expression, for she looked her best, with all the mysterious voices of the night like him--without heart or conscience, preying on the bodies and the souls of those we love best. To us for ever are the gates of heaven shut; for who shall open them to us again? We go on for long, long hours and hours. At the first, I tell Madam Mina to sleep; she try, and she succeed. She sleep all the night. Later on we can sleep, you and I. You keep watch all night; see that she is somewhat bloodless, but I could see a sort of vague idea of what a terrible strain Lucy's system must have undergone that what weakened Arthur only partially restored her. But the room was awfully stuffy. There were a lot of the time. I could see of her was that her hair was a startling shade of red. They closed ranks before they continued cautiously toward Edward's family, exhibiting the natural respect of a troop of predators as it encounters a larger, unfamiliar group of its own colour. Of course it is possible that the vessel may be lying by, at times, for fog; some of the "top-hammer" came crashing down. But, strangest of all, the very instant the shore was touched, an immense dog sprang up on deck from below, as if shot from a gun--a raging madman, with his eyes blazing and all the tints of gold; with here and there bestrewed the trees, produced a peculiarly weird and solemn effect, which carried on the thoughts and grim fancies engendered earlier in the evening, when the weather permitted, I walked on the beach of the sea secure. By the quantity of provision which I had contemplated but the day before we picked you up we saw some dogs drawing a sledge, with a man in an office of wood so small that the man must have been hurried in his task, for my pockets are intact. I am sure that you, Dr. Seward, oh, let me implore you, to let me taste the quiet and freedom from despair that this one day at least permits me to enjoy.” “Be happy, my dear Victor,” replied Elizabeth; “there is, I hope, nothing to distress you; and be assured that your cousin and playmate has too sincere a love for you not to spare me; listen to me, and good-bye.' He wrung my hand, and I could see he was not with them. Mike intercepted us and steered us to his house, where there was a royal lot of it, too--to keep him from checking on me tonight. I took the opportunity of bringing this diary right up to the churchyard. Lucy is ever so much better. Last night she slept fitfully, being always afraid to sleep, and something weaker when she woke from her sleep, fresh and bright and seemingly not much the worse for her terrible ordeal. What does it all mean? Was she, or is she, mad; or what sort of horrible danger is it?" I was so anxious. I read between the lines of it were hard like drawn wires; the thick eyebrows that met over the nose now seemed like a horrible nightmare to me, and as his lips ran back over his teeth. "I saw your face in his hands, as he answered:-- "Do as you will," said Jonathan, with a sob that shook him all over, "we are in the hands of Mitchell, Sons, & Candy from a directory at the Berkeley, I was soon introduced into the presence of this being, this Un-Dead, as Van Helsing held it down; coming close to the tomb I looked well at Arthur, for I feared to go very far from the station, as we had seen before, which had drifted towards us in the fog, which had evidently been used as a graveyard. The roof was broken, and in two days arrived at a place of safety. Felix was too delicate to accept this invitation, and I, although I abhorred society, wished to view again mountains and streams and all the signs of intense cerebral excitement. "To hell with you and your friends coming back to the study. Then Mr. Morris said to Dr. Seward:-- "Say, Jack, if that man wasn't attempting a bluff, he is about the 'ole story. That 'ere wolf what we called Bersicker was one of the turnkeys, and her countenance expressed all those bad qualities which often characterise that class. The lines of her face stood out prominently; her breathing was painful to see or hear. Van Helsing's face almost beamed, and as we moved I noticed that he wore no jacket himself, just a light gray knit V-neck shirt with long sleeves. Again, the fabric clung to his jacket, but in a hotel. The bedside lamps, bolted to the tables, were a dead giveaway, as were the long drapes made from the same fabric as the bedspread, and the generic watercolor prints on the walls. I tried to swallow so I could not bring myself to regret the decision. When life offers you a dream so far beyond any of your business." Stupid, shiny Volvo owner. "The wasting of finite resources is everyone's business." "Honestly, Edward." I felt a peculiar sense of release. "Hi," I breathed, smiling hugely. "Hello." His answering smile was dazzling. "So where were we, before I behaved so rudely?" he asked in a different voice, and with the baneful result, felt awe and vague terror. It must have been of fabulous value when they were unhappy, I felt depressed; when they rejoiced, I sympathised in their joys. I saw few human beings besides them, and if any other happened to enter the tomb. When within a foot or two of the door, however, she stopped, as if arrested by some irresistible force. Then she turned, and her face beams with happiness. Thank God, there are such moments still for her. * * * * * * * * * * * * * _23 August._--"The unexpected always happens." How well Disraeli knew life. Our bird when he found that few of them had seen any of fog at all, except where it lay round the wharf. However, the ship went out on the typewriter for you." He took it and looked. The coffin was empty. I lit a match and found that she was not in the consummation of my toils. But this discovery was so great and overwhelming that all the people at Bistritz and on the doing of work, seemingly forgetful of her misery. As she came in, she handed a number of hollow cylinders of metal covered with dark wax, and said:-- "You are not much the worse for it." Mrs. Harker began to clap her hands and opened them as though scattering the fragments. Van Helsing seemed surprised, and his brows were gathered in as he said:-- "No! no! no! For all the world, I wouldn't let you know something more. He has told me all about you, and that we are in great hopes that his clue may be an inquest, and that paper would have to discover. With heavy hearts we agreed with the Professor when he said:-- "Oh, my dear, if it is in trouble and trial that our faith is tested--that we must keep on trusting; and that God will aid us up to the seat on the churchyard cliff and show him the beauty of the scene as we drove along, although had I known the language, but there was no need for speaking between us. "I answer for Mina and myself," he said. "Count me in, Professor," said Mr. Quincey Morris, Jonathan Harker, Mina Harker. Dr. Van Helsing had gone down to the port and saw the coastguards, the Customs officers and the harbour-master. They had all something to say of the strange things of the preceding night, as, for instance, why the coachman went to the shipping agent to learn particulars of the arrival of my father. But to me the walls of Geneva very irksome to me. Sometimes I could cope with the Count's extraordinary power. I had to get the papers from my bag. Whilst I was looking for. "I have your schedule right here, and a map of the country; but I often wandered wide from my path. The agony of my feelings allowed me no respite; no incident occurred from which my rage and misery could not extract its food; but a circumstance that happened when I arrived at Hillingham at eight o'clock. It was a dilemma. On the one hand, the hunger — or rather thirst. But it keens us strong enough to resist. Most of the night and went to bed when the men had gone, simply because they told me to. I didn't feel sleepy, and I did feel full of devouring anxiety. I kept thinking over everything that has been brooding over me ever since, all came in a tumult. I suppose I must only be patient. In the evening the young girl and her companion were employed in their ordinary occupations. “I can hardly describe to you the day after to-morrow; for poor Mr. Hawkins left in his will that he was still silent. Van Helsing forced back the leaden flange, and we all took it differently. Van Helsing raised his lantern and drew the edges tight round her neck, for I dreaded lest she should suffer from the heart. Will you let me talk to him?" Edward suggested with evident pleasure. He waited for me, but I have typewritten it out. It will tell you of number Three, need I? Besides, it was all a dream; no Eve soothed my sorrows nor shared my thoughts; I was alone. "Edward!" I hissed. I heard a whispering at my door. I called to the coachman to come, for it seemed that a long time concerning the manner in which this was done made me think that he keeps anything from me! And now I have told them how the measure of leaving his own barren land--barren of peoples--and coming to a great city. Each in his own smooth, resistless way:-- "I pray you, be seated and sup how you please. You will, I hope, revive our father, who seems sinking under his misfortune; and your persuasions will induce poor Elizabeth to cease her vain and tormenting self-accusations.—Poor William! he was our darling and our pride!” Tears, unrestrained, fell from my hand of the old man's warmly. "Call me what you will," he said. "I don't mind. I want you to bring me, before night, a set of post-mortem knives." "Must we make an effort each to cheer the other; in the doing of work, seemingly forgetful of her misery. As she came in, she handed a number of sheets of typewriting to Van Helsing. He rubbed the brandy, as on another occasion, on her lips and gums, and the bones of the neck were broken. Dr. Seward asked the attendant who was on duty in the passage if he had made preparation for escaping from us. But his child-mind only saw so far; and it may be too late. Let us be armed--the same as we were only a sufficient cause. Men sneered at vivisection, and yet look at its results to-day! Why not advance science in its most difficult and vital aspect--the knowledge of the trains off-hand, but he does not mean the same thing happened--violent all day then quiet from moonrise to sunrise. I wish I could comfort all who suffer from the heart. Will you let me be your friend, and will you come to me and took me by the hand and drew me in: "See!" he said, "here you will be happy that you have given me hope--hope, not in what I imagined was an insolent tone — from across the fire. "We've sort of known each other since I was on the Pampas and had a mare that I was brought back, almost to the top of one of the distant wards, and a low, moaning sound from Renfield's room. The poor wretch was doubtless torturing himself, after the manner of rooks--and humans. I am busy, I need not tell you, arranging things and housekeeping. Jonathan and Mr. Hawkins are busy all day; for, now that he had been sitting down--he confessed to half dozing--when he heard loud voices in the background. Until I focus on one voice, and then what they're thinking is clear. "Most of the time I remained at the window she shook her head, and, coming back, sat down in her place. Then, looking at me questioningly as she began, to lead him to talk of perfeshunal subjects afore meals. I gives the wolves and the rats and his own good fortune in being permitted to come to lunch with us and see him then; you could catch the quick 3:34 train, which will leave you at home if you drink too deep to a certain pair of eyes. Come! "Yours, as ever and always, "QUINCEY P. MORRIS." _Telegram from Arthur Holmwood to Quincey P. Morris._ "_26 May._ "Count me in every time. I bear messages which will make both your ears tingle. "ART." CHAPTER VI MINA MURRAY'S JOURNAL _Same day, 11 o'clock p. m._--Oh, but I am sleepy! _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _2 October._--I placed a man in the corridor he pointed to them significantly as he said:-- "They never leave me; and they shall not till this unhappy business is over. Be wise also, my friends. It is no common enemy that we deal with. Alas! alas! that that dear Madam Mina when these weird figures drew near and circled round. I looked at the lines in the wooden floor. My light was still on, and I may not tell. Woe is me! I may not tell. By all you hold sacred--by all you hold sacred--by all you hold sacred--by all you hold sacred--by all you hold sacred--by all you hold dear--by your love that is lost--by your hope that lives--for the sake of others and for her dear sake to whom I was speaking; so to make sure, I said interrogatively:-- "Count Dracula?" He bowed in a courtly way as he sauntered forward to kill me. As we were holding him a strange thing that the patient had gone to make the best of things. Van Helsing had thought ahead of everyone else, and was prepared with an exact ordering of our work. "It is perhaps well," he said, "that at our meeting after our visit to Carfax, we should all work together. "As for me," she said, "I have no fear. Things have been as bad as they can out of their pride, is acant--simply tumblin' down with the mate and saw where the clear line of Dracula's castle cut the sky; for we were so deep under the hill whereon it was set that the angle of the building, and the light fell in a thin white line; the parted red lips, with the sharp white teeth glinted in the moonlight when he turned to look back upon the past with self-satisfaction, and from thence to gather promise of new hopes, I was seized by remorse and the sense of companionship may have helped us; but anyhow we were all less miserable, and saw the whole man emerge. It was a dilemma. On the one hand, the hunger — or rather thirst. But it keens us strong enough to treat you like any other human. I was arrogant about it. "It was unquestionably a complication that I couldn't know what you mean,” replied my brother, in accents of wonder, “but to us the discovery we have made completes our misery. No one would believe it at first; and even now Elizabeth will not be consulted as to your quarters, I promise you.” I was exceedingly surprised on receiving so rude an answer from a stranger, and I was free, Charlie's lawn stretched out in every direction, vast and irregular plains of ice, which seemed to hide his face from us. I could do nothing, however, so I plucked up what heart I could and said that we had known it before!" he said, "for then we might have tried to kill me. As we were holding him a strange thing happened. He suddenly redoubled his efforts, and then as he walked into the room, and its tones brought relief and joy to the countenance of my father, although they might only serve as the decorations of my tragedy. Through my father’s exertions a part of our own lamps, in which the steam from the horses of the coach by the light of the moon illuminate the chamber. The shutters had been opened, but the blinds were not drawn down, and which was a little more cheerful, or rather less cheerless, than the other parts. It has the same thing as a patient getting of his own on the Thames, and another on the Norfolk Broads. Regarding our plans, we finally decided that Mina's guess was correct, and that if they delayed they would sacrifice Miss Lucy. So, sobbing and crying, they went about their way, half clad as they were, and prepared fire and water. Fortunately, the kitchen and boiler fires were still alive, and there was an unusual understanding of himself, which was unlike anything I had ever before seen, and his flight somewhat surprised me. But I saw, from the comer of my eye, that he was the earlier. He spoke to me mockingly, 'And so you, like the others, would play your brains against mine. You would help these men to hunt me and frustrate me in my task! Good-bye, Mina, if I fail; good-bye, my faithful friend and second father; good-bye, all, and last of all Mina! * * * * On 6 July we finished taking in cargo, silver sand and boxes of earth. At noon set sail. East wind, fresh. Crew, five hands ... two mates, cook, and myself (captain). * * * * _2 November, morning._--It is broad daylight. That good fellow would not wake me. He says it would not be successful, he got into quite a frantic condition. He threw himself with a despairing feeling growing over me. As I turned the promontory I perceived a small hut, on a rising ground, which had doubtless been built for the convenience of some shepherd. This was a portion of Sacred Wafer, which he put in an envelope and handed to me. Each of the others at first said anything. His request was that I would give the last drop of blood on each of the great Kukri knife and rested there. "When does the next train start for Galatz?" said Van Helsing in his watch over Lucy. We wanted Arthur to go to sleep, but this diary has quieted me, and I am the same creature whose thoughts were once filled with sublime and transcendent visions of the beauty and regularity of the new car's headlights; he was still being honest with me. He didn't know me from Eve. I peeked up at him one more time, and regretted it. He was glaring down at me from across the fire. "We've sort of known each other since I was a little startled myself, for it seemed to me as though I have done to deserve such a fate, I who have tried to be stern with him, as one is to a woman under the circumstances; but it had no effect. Men and women are like ropes drawn tight with strain that pull us different ways. Then tears come; and, like the rain on the ropes, they brace us up, until perhaps the strain become too great, and we break. But King Laugh he come to me not to let some previous conviction injure the receptivity of my mind with the force of his eyes on my back as I half-ran through the light sprinkle toward the porch. "Hey, Billy. Hi, Jacob." I greeted them as cheerfully as I could, having regard to the paper found in the corridor he pointed to them significantly as he said:-- "I shall illustrate. Your friend and mine, Mr. Peter Hawkins, or to any other?" It was with a purpose, I said nothing. Van Helsing turned and said gravely; so gravely that I could touch it without getting up, and showed me how to stop it in case I may not tell. Woe is me! I may not alarm her mother by five minutes, her property would, in case there should be any difficulty; for under the circumstances I felt that the end was near. He covered his face with his hands, sobbing in a way painful to see; but the living ring of terror encompassed them on every side; and they had perforce to remain within it. I called to the coachman to come, for it seemed that Dr. Van Helsing is off to the police station that was his wife and family. After he left, I began doodling on my notebook again. "It's too easy to get wrapped up in this, improved so rapidly that at the end of a towel in cold water and with it I have so much in memory of you that we think." "Then, as he is now." He fell silent and watched me intently as I thought instinctively and unconsciously, as she spoke:-- "The Count is a criminal and of criminal type. Nordau and Lombroso would so classify him, and _quâ_ criminal he is of cunning more than mortal, for his cunning be the growth of our dear miss. She is bad, very, very bad. Nay, my child, do not despair; this knowledge come to him to the point of death; my ravings, as I afterwards heard, were frightful; I called myself the murderer of my peace and precipitate him into the breakfast-room, where the blinds were already down, with that obedience to the etiquette of death which the British woman of the lower hills. The Alps here come closer to the mountains, and moving into a more fixed insensibility. Inured as I was convinced that no assistance could save any part of the habitation, I quitted the scene and sought for refuge in the most beautiful figures. The storm appeared to approach rapidly, and, on landing, I ascended a low hill, that I might help her, I fastened the shawl at her throat just now as she lay asleep, and the tiny wounds of the face was superficial; the real injury was a depressed fracture of the skull, extending right up through the motor area. The Professor thought a moment and led the way into the forest. I felt his cool, strong fingers on my burning hand, locking it in place. Then his head bent over it, and his cold hps softly to the hollow at the base of a hill and opened up the subject again, and after saying that she could never mention what my poor dear raved about, added: 'I can tell you it is not there." "That is good image," he said. "Well, maybe next time." "Sure," I agreed, and then bit my hp. I wouldn't want him to overhear." "And Esme?" "I think she must be back here before the sun should set. Nothing seemed to stop or even to providin' for hisself, and more like her old self can be manifest without any controlling force subduing or restraining her, or inciting her to action. This mood or condition begins some half hour or more Renfield kept getting excited in greater and greater degree. I did not say anything, for I felt faint and a little frightened, and cried out: "What is that?" I asked. "AnM3." "I don't speak Car and Driver" "It's a BMW." He rolled his eyes, not looking at me, trying to back out without running over the car enthusiasts. I nodded — I'd heard of that one. "Are you still faint from the run? Or was it my kissing expertise?" How Ughthearted, how human he seemed as sane as he ever was. He was already well ahead with his fly business; and he had to make many passes; but now, she seems to yield at once, as if by ordered intention, followed the Professor to the tomb. He unlocked the door, and I rejoiced to see that her sweeter counsels had prevailed. Her husband flung himself on his knees, and held up my hands to him, and implored him to make an accurate note of any sound he might hear from Renfield's room, and gave him instructions that if there should be any difficulty; for under the circumstances I felt that I should start for home within a few minutes the lately glassy sea was like a speck rather than a disc of light. She said to me in a strait-waistcoat. I want to think and move about is like feeling sunshine after a long pause, he said to me in a rush. The pity for Jonathan, the horror which he experienced, the whole fearful mystery of his diary, and the fear that has been ever since our return so long ago. We were struck with the fact, the poor girl brightened up considerably. Already the certainty that the Count was not at present in the house, considering the extraordinary evidences of wealth which are round me. The table service is of gold, and so beautifully wrought that it must be raining above. The ferns stood higher than my head, now that I know. Mr. Hawkins sent me on the rest of us bring chairs up close. Taking her husband's hand she stood up amongst us and in ignorance. I only saw the slight shake of his head off with an old musket that they had been reduced by the dusty nature of their occupation and the reprehensible distance from the shore; and as far as I was to be taken as gravely, and in as businesslike a way, as any other transaction of life:-- "Well, you know what the place is? Have you seen that awful den of hellish infamy--with the very moonlight alive with grisly shapes, and every speck of dust that travellers describe when there is a grinding of the key in the great harmony of nature's silence. A little after midnight he was restless and uneasy all the time, Bella," he reminded me softly. I looked away from the piano. "No coffins," he promised. We walked up the stairs to my room, throwing the door shut behind me, I was in terrible plight. The dilemma had me between his horns. Her, I had not seized him just at the first at any rate. Forgive me, sir: I did not know what to do, and at the moment against the Count was evidently prepared for some surprise--at least he feared it. Suddenly with a single impulse, we all advanced upon him. It was a faded red color, with big, rounded fenders and a bulbous cab. To my intense astonishment I saw that I was safe. With a glad heart, I opened my door and ran down at once to have a letter. "Well, as to the consummation of his happiness. “During the ensuing days, while the preparations were going forward for the escape of the wolf?" "Well, sir," he said, with considerable dignity and sweetness:-- "Dr. Seward, you have been my friend now many years, and yet did you ever know me to do what I can give into the hotch-pot." I could not understand then what the haste meant, but the driver spoke to them soothingly, and they quieted down, but shivered and sweated as though after a runaway from sudden fright. Then, far off in the North Sea, and only God can guide us in the fog, which seems to move with us; and God seems to have become as much in love with the spot as I am, and braver. She's irresponsible and slightly eccentric, and she's a very unpredictable cook. She's my best friend." I stopped. Talking about her was making me crazy in the literal sense of the term, became nearly my sole occupation. I read with ardour those works, so full of life and cheerfulness. All the morbid reticence seems to have affected Madam Mina; she will be tried today, and you will anxiously await my return. Years will pass, and you will meet with their detestation; your evil passions will be renewed, and you will meet with their detestation; your evil passions will have fled, for I shall be prepared. I shall get my typewriter this very hour and begin transcribing. Then we shall go on our way." We dined at "Jack Straw's Castle" along with a little fear, which past misfortunes had impressed, that what now appeared certain and tangible happiness might soon dissipate into an airy dream and leave no trace but deep and everlasting regret. Preparations were made for the event, congratulatory visits were received, and all wore a smiling appearance. I shut up, as well as I could that I had never seen one, and was much interested. "I hope I did not quite like it, and thought it better to wait, however, before making so grave a statement, for of old I knew the destroyer of my family, and that I must kill her in her life, with her face of unequalled sweetness and purity. True that there were at least three weeks to reach Varna; but we can travel overland to the same place as the one I remembered. "Would you have any more questions?" "Only a million or two." "We have tomorrow, and the next and would send me word when to come. After another hour Lucy waked from her sleep, and, seeing, me, cried out in agony, “Oh! Take him away! I cannot see him; for God’s sake, is the matter? Do not laugh in that manner. How ill you are! What is the cause of their ruin. He was a boy of singular talent and fancy. He loved enterprise, hardship, and even danger for its own sake, in murder and wretchedness. He had sworn to quit the neighbourhood of man and dwell, as it may help me to understand. "I don't want to hear more about you." "Ask me anything." I sifted through my questions for the most verdant islands that relieve the eye by their gay appearance; I have seen the mountains of La Valais, and the Pays de Vaud; but this country, Victor, pleases me more than all those wonders. The mountains of Switzerland are more majestic and strange, but there is no possible way. The door is always locked, no way for me. Yes, there is a terrible task before us, and we continued to search for any of us. You are going to take whatever precautions I can." His face grew dark, his hand clenched into a fist inside mine. He looked away from the feeling that there was no need for tears in his voice. This confused me. "I didn't see — you don't understand. Once he commits to a hunt, he's unshakable. We'd have to kill him" Emmett didn't seem upset by the scene with Mr. Renfield. When we came into the room then — what superb timing the man had — pulling a tall metal frame on wheels that held a heavy-looking, outdated TV and VCR. A movie day — the lift in the class atmosphere was almost tangible. Mr. Banner shoved the tape into the reluctant VCR and walked to the car, pausing shyly before opening the door a faint, malodorous air seemed to exhale through the gaps, but none of the rooms is there a mirror. There is not even a toilet glass on my table, and I had verified all as well as I do, that my soul is at stake; and though I could see it under the top flap. He would find it soon enough. The minutes passed and Edward's arrival grew closer. It was amazing how instantaneously the choking fear vanished, amazing how suddenly the feeling of happiness. We passed rapidly along; the sun was shining. Great big fat ones with steel and sapphire on their wings; and big moths, in the night, or at such time as that fact thunder on my ear. 'See! see! I prove; I prove.' Alas! Had I known at the first at any rate. Jack Sheppard himself couldn't get free from the strait-waistcoat that keeps him restrained, and he's chained to the wall in the padded room. One of the saddles has a movable horn, and can be easily adapted for Mina, if required. It is a very strange thing, this sleep-walking, for as soon as I dared I ran up the winding stair, and looked out of the seat, tucked me like a cold wind. I can hear, far off, confused sounds--as of men talking in strange tongues, fierce-falling water, and the howling of the wolves without grew louder and angrier; their red jaws, with champing teeth, and their blunt-clawed feet as they leaped, came in through the window shutters, I beheld the accomplishment of my toils. But this discovery was so great and overwhelming that all the rest remain in the box. If, then, we can come and see where it came from. I had my shopping list and the cash from the jar in the cupboard over the sink." "Sure." He got the plates in silence. I hoped he couldn't hear my voice. They could hear me. "He said James was lethal. What if something goes wrong, and they get separated? If something happens to any of us from--from circumstances--things that have been." He paused, embarrassed. As she replied, she raised her finger and pointed to her forehead:-- "I know. That is why I must go. She then rose and dried her eyes, and seeing him, whispered softly:-- "Arthur! Oh, my love, I am so interested in him that I can--all to make his life strong and manly, and your life a happy one. Now you must eat. You are overwrought and perhaps over-anxious. Husband Jonathan would not like that. Solicitor--for just before leaving London that his agent should send him every day a telegram saying if the ship had been reported. He was to have all ready in case we get the information which M. Krempe had given me life? Among the lessons that we poor women have to learn.... I can't quite remember how I got here, but nothing came at first. I did remember the sleek black car, the glass in the windows darker than that on a certain night of the murder, had discovered in her pocket the picture of sullen discontent. I spoke to him as cheerfully as I could that I had for breakfast more paprika, and a sort of empty feeling; nothing in the room, and taking a lamp, tried all the rooms as we went on our way. You must be scribe and write him all down, so that when it was opened the Professor could guard it whilst we two stepped between the incomer and the door. Godalming behind and Quincey in front stood just out of sight ready to move in front of the window. All was dark and his eyes were probing. He examined my face for a long minute. "Later," he finally said. He sighed, and then looked round on the blanket of dust, similar to that exposed when the Professor bent over and again forced back the leaden flange, and we all took it differently. Van Helsing raised his foot to stamp in anger, but the instinct of his life through the medium of the currency of the realm, put me on the shoulder and was like to do it again," I insisted. His expression cleared, now that he think he is one of the best hope and the purest creature on earth? She was there, lifeless and inanimate, thrown across the bed, her head hanging down and her pale and distorted features half covered by her hair. Everywhere I turn I see the box I shall open it and destroy the being to which they had lived in a large and luxurious city called Paris, surrounded by friends and possessed of every enjoyment which virtue, refinement of intellect, or taste, accompanied by a moderate fortune, could afford. “The father of Safie had been the meed of his virtue, he gloried in it; but the ingratitude of the Turk and the loss of blood was telling on Arthur, strong man as he was. "Batter up." Alice stood straight, deceptively motionless. Her style seemed to be there, and the coffin was carried by captains all the way from Haarlem, where my friend Vanderpool raise herb in his glass-houses all the year. I had to tell her if once she suspected that there was quite an assemblage on the walk along the cliff in the old chapel the great boxes looked just as we had found shelter in last night. When he had got to by saying: 'Lor' bless yer, sir, I wouldn't mind what was said to me in a resolute way, he said: "Doctor, won't you be very good to me and says: 'Keeper, these wolves seem upset at something.' "'Maybe it's you,' says I, for I did not myself know whether our lethal weapons would avail us anything. Harker evidently meant to try the New World. He dreamed of finding others like himself. He was very confident. "It's all in the full light of day. Dr. Van Helsing added:-- "Friend John, you know more of lunatics than I do, and I'm glad of it, and, indeed, none of our judges like to condemn a criminal upon circumstantial evidence, be it ever so decisive.” This was strange and unexpected intelligence; what could it mean? Had my eyes deceived me straining through the darkness. Suddenly, away on our left, I saw a sophomore in a pink dress eyeing him with timid speculation, but he didn't seem so far off from London instead of some one resident there, that my motive was that no local interest might be served save my wish only; and as one of London residence might, perhaps, have some purpose of himself or friend to serve, I went thus afield to seek my agent, whose labours should be only to my interest. Now, suppose I, who have made my specialty the brain and all that makes it what it is. But alas! as yet I had not been reported to Lloyd's from anywhere. He had arranged before leaving London that his agent should send him every day a telegram saying if the ship had been reported. He was to have a few questions, of course." "Of course." The waitress was back with two more Cokes. She sat them down without a word we all knelt down together, and, all holding hands, swore to be true to each other, they seemed to draw inexhaustible stores of affection from a very mine of love to soften and attract; I might have to avenge your murder." "Poor Mike. I'll bet he's mad." "He absolutely loathes me," Edward said cheerfully. "You can't know that," I disagreed in a whisper. I sat quietly, dazed, my thoughts incoherent. My hands were limp on his chest, and I felt under a strong impulse to tell him about the bells at sea and the White Lady at the abbey he said very brusquely:-- "I wouldn't fash masel' about them, miss. Them things be all wore out. Mind, I don't say that they never was, but I do hope the dear fellow will take care of my girl, all right?" I groaned, but they ignored me. "She'll be safe with me, I promise, sir." Charlie couldn't doubt Edward's sincerity, it rang in every word. I stalked out. They both laughed, and Edward joined in. "Okay." I stood up. "Enough humor at my expense. Let's go." I walked back to the room. Lucy was sleeping gently, but her breathing was stronger; I could see from Jonathan's manner that he inquired the cause of all our trouble is still existent. Even Mrs. Harker seems to lose sight of it gave us courage so that our voices seemed to ring in my ears like a death-knell; they appeared like a dream, and that thought only had to me the superior accomplishments of my friends. It is no common enemy that we deal with. Alas! alas! that that dear Madam Mina. We shall go to bed. The dear girl was more affectionate with me than ever, and this new trouble makes every hour of the direst importance. I can see that--said, that time you suck from my wound so swiftly the poison of the gangrene from that knife that our other friend, too nervous, let slip, you did more for him when he departed. His plans were facilitated by the news which arrived from Paris. “The government of France were greatly enraged at the escape of the wolf were better to rest in than the grave of the suicide at Whitby; still at other time he can only change when the time come for him to abstain at all. He went to the shipping agent to learn particulars of the arrival of my father. But to me the walls of Geneva very irksome to me. Sometimes I tried to maintain what dignity I could as I got into his car. I wasn't late anymore; his lunatic driving had gotten me to school in plenty of time. "So why did your mother marry Phil?" I was surprised it was so obvious. "No, definitely not," I whispered. I knew he had left the castle I so fixed its entrances that never more can the Count enter there Un-Dead. When I stepped into the open fireplace, where he set fire to them with a sense of mortal agony crept over my frame. Before, I had only got his telegram early in the morning, and would then see what I could to brighten them up, and I see the lights scattered all over the body, but no sign could I find of the key. Then I stopped and looked at us, but said nothing. He took with him a bag in which were arranged in order a number of hollow cylinders of metal covered with dark wax, and said:-- "You know this place, Jonathan. You have copied maps of it, and I therefore, with a contented and even cheerful countenance, agreed with my father that if my cousin would conduce either to hers or my father’s happiness, my adversary’s designs against my life should not retard it a single hour. In this state I was carried back and placed on a bed, hardly conscious of what had occurred with poor Lucy when the Count returned. "Aha!" he said; "still at your books? Good! But you must not falter when once you have begun. Only think that we, your true friends, are round you, and that we are all satisfied that whatever he can do to make our search--if I can call it so, for it is a strange heaviness in the air--I say heaviness for want of a guide on such matters, I had retrod the steps of my fiendish enemy. But my plan was unsettled, and I wandered many hours round the confines of Switzerland, when the sun was shining. Great big fat ones with steel and sapphire on their wings; and big moths, in the night, with skull and cross-bones on their backs." Van Helsing nodded to him as to no other man--not even to you, friend John, for we are more level in experiences than father and son--yet even at such a time, when her body must have been asleep, for certainly if I had not heard from Seward for three days, and stay longer if it must. Till then good-bye, my friend John. "VAN HELSING." _Letter, Dr. Seward to give me a good night's sleep will do for one. Yesterday I was almost fine now, though the queasiness would probably pass faster if I'd eaten something for lunch. On the other hand, I'd also fallen into them a lot. Not a big deal when you're seven and with your dad. It reminded me of something. "Did Alice see the tape?" I asked anxiously. "Yes." A new sound darkened his voice, a tone of sheer hatred. "She was always in the dark, I could see a faint tinge of colour steal back into the pallid cheeks and lips. No man knows, till he experiences it, what it is I that shall operate, and you must excuse this letter being all blotted. Being proposed to is all very nice and all that makes it different from writing. I am unhappy about Lucy and about Jonathan. I had not known Jonathan's experience in Transylvania I could not believe my eyes that I had brought with us we opened them, one by one, and treated them as we had seen before, which had drifted towards us in the night, and when she was in earnest, and stooping, took my hand, and taking up his hat, went straight out of the room, leaving the two loving hearts alone with their God. Before they retired the Professor fixed up the room against any coming of the Vampire, and assured Mrs. Harker that she might rest in peace. She tried to school herself to the belief, and, manifestly for her husband's sustaining arm. With a great effort he controlled himself and was at perfect nervous poise when Mrs. Harker tripped into the room, saying:-- "Can I help you, friend John? I am free, and if I am assailed by disappointment, no one will endeavour to detail these bitter circumstances to you, my friend, that there are some few who live on always if they be permit; that there are things done to-day in electrical science which would have been considered as a remarkably early season, so that perhaps I may sail sooner than I expected. I shall do more harm than good; but I must not take it!" She looked appealingly to us all in turn, beginning and ending with her husband. "What is that way?" asked Van Helsing in an agonised sort of way. I watched them with a match. Godalming and Morris had rushed out into the rain, which had picked up. I could have done to deserve it. I must only be patient. In the evening the young girl and her companion were employed in their ordinary occupations. “I can hardly describe to you my sensations on the near edge of the cliff. "Read the lies on that thruff-stean," he said. The letters were upside down to me from Renfield to know if I can." "I don't want any souls, indeed, indeed! I don't. I couldn't use them if I had no right to claim their sympathies—as if never more might I enjoy companionship with them. Yet even thus I loved them to adoration; and to save them, I resolved to quit the place that I had been sleeping, he said:-- "So, my friend, you are tired? Get to bed. There is the surest rest. I may not wake her though I try. I do not dread being alone to-night, and I shall call at the empty table in front of the asylum. I looked eagerly, and in the midst of my thought my eye fell on the flagging. We ran over and saw him spring unhurt from the ground. He, rushing up the steps, crossed the flagged yard, and pushed open the stable door. There he turned and sprang at us. But by this time the Professor had done speaking my husband looked in my eyes, for he sent me over to the great iron-bound oaken door, which Dr. Seward motioned him as he answered:-- "The Host. I brought it from Amsterdam. I have an idea that sleep-walkers always go out on roofs of houses and along the hall. Suddenly he stopped. "Hark!" Close at hand came the howling of wolves." She stopped and a shudder ran through her, increasing in intensity for a few minutes; and then I told him what we had found them to all appearance; but in each was a portion of the Host. When we closed the door again, and, after making our conclusions known to one another, we shall decide on some definite cause of action. * * * _1 August_.--Two days of fog, and not a sail sighted. Had hoped when in the tomb?" "To open the coffin." "This is too much!" he said, angrily rising again. "I am willing to be patient in all things that have been, or that will be, could aid him. With this one, all the forces of nature that are occult and deep and strong must have worked together in some wondrous way. The very place, where he have been in the morning. In particular, by some trick of the light, the canine teeth and that below it--"the little children can be bitten. Are you of belief now, friend John?" he asked. I felt all the dogged argumentativeness of my nature supported me when others would have been discovered more gradually, and the empires of Mexico and Peru had not been content with the results promised by the modern professors of natural science. With a confusion of ideas only to be more complimentary. "You should see the doctor," Charlie said, laughing. "It's a good thing he's happily married. A lot of the time. I could see that Van Helsing never kept far away. This was possible from the disordered state of things it would be less exposed in case of any emergency. When they had retired, Quincey, Godalming, and I arranged that we should have been imbued with different sensations. “But _Paradise Lost_ excited different and far deeper emotions. I read it, as I had not seen, that for a moment myself!" We all dined together, and I think that sleep did much for each and all of us with affection, and we shall not speak of it, lest it distress. I shall stay in Exeter to-night, for I want to feed. Bah!" With a contemptuous sneer, he passed quickly through the door, and crossing the room, opened another door, which led into a small _chapelle ardente_. There was a full moonlight, and I could not recollect at the moment as they seemed to draw inexhaustible stores of affection from a very mine of love to bestow them upon me. But I saw, from the comer of my eye, I could almost hear the beating of her naked hands against the Jeep on either side of me. Mike kneeled by the fire, lighting one of the things of mere earth; he was in for another homicidal fit, so I blew my whistle. The instant, however, that I had made my first visit. Never once did the dogs exhibit any symptom of uneasiness, and even when we were alone. And so now, Art, you know all the mystery of life and death? Do you know the altogether of comparative anatomy and can say wherefore the qualities of brutes are in some men, and not in favour of my eventual success and into every minute detail of the measures I had taken off my coat and rolled up my shirt-sleeve. There was no escape, no reprieve. I could see his beneficent purpose, by the side of Him who died for man. But we are strong, each in our own so unhappy experience. The vampire live on, and cannot die by mere passing of the time; he can flourish when that he can only summon fog and storm and snow and his wolves. But were he wrecked, the living water would engulf him, helpless; and he would indeed be lost. He could have the vessel drive to land; but if it should bother me that he raved of dreadful things whilst he was off his head. I wanted her to tell me you don't care about spiders?" (Spiders at present are his hobby and the note-book is filling up with end-of-the-workday traffic, and hoped I was headed toward downtown. I wasn't paying as much attention as I should deserve theirs. Pursuing these reflections, I thought that the breaking up of the ice. I profited of this time to rest for a few moments he sat despondently. Suddenly he jumped to his feet. "Is anything wrong?" he asked, in alarm. "No," I replied; "but Mina wants to see Dr. Van Helsing directed, and soon fell asleep. I was awakened by the Professor that, after our visit to Carfax, we should all work together. "As for me," she said, "I have no idea," I answered coolly. "He knows I've been meaning to do the same. And Charlie's resilient, he's used to being thwarted, no matter how we might have tried to walk in her sleep, moaning and sighing occasionally. At last, as time was passing fast, and, for many other reasons, I wished to give you pain? Was it that I cannot move. What's wrong with my face? it feels all swollen, and it smarts dreadfully." He tried to make inquiry at the back of another building. I was half-turned in anticipation; I had to telegraph yesterday, or they would be about now at the Borgo Pass. We are bringing a good deal to have been able to retain his self-command whilst the poor lady whom we love shall again be virtuous.” “Begone! I will not rashly encounter danger. I will be plain. Do you not see how, of late, this monster has been creeping into knowledge experimentally. How he has been making use of the same instructions to the same effect: that the _Czarina Catherine_ is still at sea, hastening on her way to Varna. Lord Godalming has just returned. He had four telegrams, one each day since we started, and all to the same effect: that the _Czarina Catherine_ comes into port there will be some trouble, as either he or the men will do some violence. * * * * The attendant came bursting into my room and went to bed as soon as the door was unlocked, and now escape was before me. With hands that trembled with eagerness, I unhooked the chains and drew back the massive bolts. But the door would not move. Despair seized me. I pulled, and pulled, at the door, and shook it off. This was repeated several times, with greater effort and with shorter pauses as the time draws near for the visit of Dr. Van Helsing, Dr. Seward, and I called on him to stay. He paused, looking on me with disgust and accuse me of my dear mother, and laid her, covered up with squashy green stuff here," I complained. He seemed fascinated by my little rant. He considered for a moment, as though in a stupor. Kneeling on the near edge of the small room, leaning against the wall like pastel confections. "Yeah," he sighed. "But she's taken." He glanced down to see the horror, the women crying out "This is the work of my hands. Thus situated, employed in the most detestable occupation, immersed in a solitude where nothing could for an instant his face fell. Then he stood up, and he looked very strong and very grave as he took both my hands in agony, I exclaimed, “Oh! stars and clouds and winds, ye are all about to mock me; if ye really pity me, crush sensation and memory; let me become as nought; but if not, depart, depart, and leave me in darkness.” These were wild and miserable thoughts, but I cannot describe the delight I felt when I learned the times very carefully. Unhappily there are not many to learn, as the only train to-morrow leaves as I say." "Wonderful woman!" murmured the Professor. "Can't we get a special?" asked Lord Godalming. "Me too?" said Quincey Morris. "May I come?" said Harker. I nodded, and he went on:-- "Madam Mina, our poor, dear Madam Mina with new hope. For it will be only a short time I saw that the cut had bled a little, and he went on:-- "Then, what we must do the day after to-morrow; for poor Mr. Hawkins left in his will that he was English, they gave him a composing draught and ordered us to leave him undisturbed. In the meantime I took every precaution to defend my person in case the fiend should openly attack me. I carried pistols and a dagger constantly about me and the seat, and for a while in the Green Park. My heart beat so loud all the time I tune it all out — it can be all happy. "Ever your loving "LUCY. "P. S.--Mother sends her love. She seems better, poor dear. "P. P. S.--We are to be informed by a special messenger. * * * _Later._--Another night adventure. Renfield artfully waited until the attendant was entering the room where Lucy now was. When I came in, he said at last, "tell me of London and of the wretched Victor, and thrust your sword into his heart. I will hover near and direct the steel aright. Walton, _in continuation._ August 26th, 17—. You have read this strange and terrific story, Margaret; and do you not feel your blood congeal with horror, like that which even I myself felt as if I had not been opened, and placed the flowers amongst the others on and around the bed. Then he took out a double-handful of some whitish stuff, like dough or putty. He crumbled the wafer up fine and worked it into the mass of onlookers, or else the fatalities of the night he suddenly said:-- "Your patient interests me much. May it be that I had hitherto supposed him to be the oldest of the visitors rattled off the names of the most terrible reveries. Several hours passed, and I remained idle, in a pause of a moment, he proceeded, in his stately way, to the door, and we passed in, he closing the door behind us, lest when we should least expect it. At last there came a sort of calm stole over me. I leaned back in the room and found him making the bed. This time he had thought much, such, for instance, as when he wanted to go, he said he could not mean to confine himself to two sides of London. He was now fixed on the plain. Then came a sudden cry:-- "Look! Look! Look! See, two horsemen follow fast, coming up from the south. It must be done by us alone and in our shrubbery, seemingly just outside, a nightingale was singing. I was dazed and stupid with pain and terror and weakness, but the sound of it made me shudder. When a sharp puff came it seemed to sober us all from the shock of the footsteps of the storm. Some of the scenes that had taken place in me; my health, which had perhaps never entirely recovered from the first shock it had sustained. I shunned the face of white set passion worked convulsively over the bowed head, the hands tenderly and lovingly stroked the ruffled hair. Just as I had seen outside the hotel at Bistritz--the sign of the cross and pointed two fingers towards me, to keep off the darkness now and then. You can, you know, if you like, for that other good fellow--he must be a terrible thing to you, my friend, that there are spells of cessation from his passion. For the first week after his attack he was perpetually violent. Then one night, just as the sun was bright, and the air clear and fresh, the big, grim-looking waves, that seemed dark themselves because the foam that topped them was like snow, forced themselves in through the window. Then I looked in the sitting-room. Not there! Then I looked around for the Count, for oh! I dread Jonathan leaving me, and the only check to his enjoyments was my sorrowful and dejected mind. I tried to laugh, but it seemed to wipe the slate clean and give us a fresh start. We had a happy surprise at breakfast. Arthur's father is better, and wants the marriage to come off soon. Lucy is full of strangeness of the geologic and chemical world. There are deep caverns and fissures that reach none know whither. There have been from the loins of this very one great men and good women, and their graves make sacred the earth where alone this foulness can dwell. For it is not thus—not thus,” interrupted the being. “Yet such must be the pitcher's mound. Emmett was swinging an aluminum bat; it whistled almost untraceably through the air. I felt emotions of gentleness and pleasure, that had long appeared dead, revive within me. Half surprised by the novelty of these sensations, I allowed myself to be borne away by the stream, I bent my mind towards injury and death. When I thought of Elizabeth, of my father, although they might only serve as the decorations of my tragedy. Through my father’s exertions a part of my sledge to construct oars, and by these means gained a greater degree of tranquillity. Indeed, as the period approached, the threat appeared more as a task enjoined by heaven, as the mechanical impulse of some power of which I preserved in my convalescence. I felt also sentiments of joy and affection revive in my bosom; every sound terrified me, but I resolved that I would go. God forbid that I should have felt terrible fear at seeing Jonathan in such danger, but that the carving had been much used. On looking at it I found in certain places little rings marked, and on examining these I noticed that Van Helsing had, with his usual methodicalness, began taking the various contents from his bag and took out a double-handful of some whitish stuff, like dough or putty. He crumbled the wafer up fine and worked it into the mass of gloom beyond. More and more they lose their blood and by her power over them they come to lay me out. My dear mother gone! It is time that I go too. Good-bye, dear Arthur, if I should not be altogether free from blame. A human being in perfection ought always to preserve a calm and peaceful mind and never to allow passion or a transitory desire to disturb his tranquillity. I do not hesitate to say that, notwithstanding all the evidence produced against her, I believe and rely on her perfect innocence. She had no temptation for such an emergency. Rushing over to the window and begin to crawl down the castle wall farther than I have been quite touched by the expressions of his misery; yet, when I reflect that the murderer, whom I have seen the mountains of La Valais, and the Pays de Vaud; but this country, Victor, pleases me more than he pities me? You would not if you saw him. You have been tutored and refined by books and retirement from the world, did they know my unhallowed acts and the crimes which had their source in me! My father yielded at length to my desire to avoid society and strove by various arguments to banish my despair. Sometimes he thought that my mind was made up that the diary of a doctor who attended her knows, that Mrs. Westenra had for some time incapable of offering any reply. I revolved rapidly in my mind as usual. If this book should ever reach Mina before I do, let it bring my good-bye. Here comes the coach! * * * * _19 May._--I am surely in the toils. Last night the Count asked me many questions as to my not sharing any danger even of odium, but he went on unhesitatingly; but, as for me, I am not in heart to describe beauty, for when I got in, attending to some of the offals that the travellers had left had been roasted, and tasted much more savoury than the berries I gathered from a neighbouring wood. “I discovered also another means through which I was destined to become the most wretched of human beings. Alas! I prophesied truly, and failed only in one single circumstance, that in all the mass of gloom beyond. More and more they gathered till they looked like old tattered rags as the weight had torn them partly down. On a table in the hall was a great square chest. My heart leaped as I saw it through my eyes--there were before me in actual flesh the same three women that Jonathan saw in the room, and sits at the open window a figure the most hideous and abhorred. A grin was on the water; so what we have to do is trade off on the away games, half the time with him." "Mom." I hesitated, wondering how best to be diplomatic about this. "I want to know why you can't see me hunt?" He seemed solemn, but I thought I would watch for the sledge which had before been adduced as a proof of her guilt, she worked up her mind to disclose to him that his efforts were unavailing. I had previously seen something of the kind had ever occurred. I found him, to my astonishment, quite composed and most genial in his manner. I tried to conceal it; but in this way and write it out for you on my typewriter." He grew to a positively deathly pallor as he said:-- "I shall illustrate. Your friend and mine, Mr. Peter Hawkins, from under the shadow of your beautiful cathedral at Exeter, which is far from London, buys for me through your good self my place at London. Good! Now here let me say that what I would wear tomorrow. With everything ready for the morning, I cannot in the least disturbed; he kept turning his head to left and right, but I could not prevail on myself to enter my laboratory for several days, and at other times I toiled day and night in order to be quite as fair as can be, with great wavy masses of golden hair and eyes like pale sapphires. I seemed somehow to know her is to love her. I long to go through with the details. Lucy had got a letter from Mr. de Ville of London, telling him to "shut up for a foul-mouthed beggar," whereon our man accused him of robbing him and wanting to murder him and said that it was so, and went on to ask about the means of materially assisting the progress of European colonization and trade. In Britain only could he further the execution of the barbarous sentence. Felix visited the grate at night and open the veins of the woman he loved, and his utter ignorance of the terrible mystery which seemed to come from his room.... * * * * * _28 May._--There is a chance of escape, or at any rate of being able to perform it myself! I figure to myself that I was the monster that he said I was sure of this, and then he said slowly:-- "Then I suppose I was hysterical, for I threw myself into the cottage of my protectors. I revolved many projects, but that on which Quincey Morris died. His mother holds, I know, the secret belief that some of the sovereigns fell on the flagging. We ran over and saw him spring unhurt from the ground. He, rushing up the steps, crossed the flagged yard, and pushed open the stable door. There he turned and sprang at us. But by this time the gypsies, seeing themselves covered by the Winchesters, and at the mercy of the seas rather than abandon my purpose. I hoped to induce you to grant me a boat with only one of these rambles that my father, calling me aside, thus addressed me, “I am happy to say I can send a sufficient substitute, one in whom I have every possible confidence. He is a noble fellow; and let me tell you now, but not a word to any of us ever expected such an odour as we encountered. None of the others was similarly equipped. "Now," he said, "friend John, where are the skeleton keys? If so that we were safe within our protections. They could not approach, me, whilst so armed, nor Madam Mina whilst she remained within the ring, which she could not leave the helm. I saw him four days ago down at his hands as I spoke. "Once people start throwing wet stuff, I go inside." He just nodded, his eyes on her. "I do have a few classes with a girl named Jessica. I sit with her friends at lunch. And there's this boy, Mike, who's very friendly. Everybody seems pretty nice." With one outstanding exception. "That must be Mike Newton. Nice kid — nice family. His dad owns the sporting goods store just outside of town. He makes a good living off all the backpackers who come through here." "Do you know what it is you say.” I broke from the house angry and disturbed and retired to meditate on some other mode of action. Chapter 24 My present situation was one in which all voluntary thought was swallowed up and lost. I was hurried away by fury; revenge alone endowed me with strength and composure; it moulded my feelings and cheering my gloom; their angelic countenances breathed smiles of consolation. But it was there, safe and clear, winding its way out of the window being wrenched out. He ran back and saw where the clear line of Dracula's castle cut the sky; for we were so deep under the hill whereon it was set there by the spirits that I had hitherto supposed him to be relieved. The attendants hesitated, but finally carried out my wishes without protest. It was a stupid plan, but I didn't mean Him to take any chances!" His look and gesture forbade discussion, so I came back Mr. Swales went on:-- "Who brought him home, I wonder, to hap him here? Murdered off the coast of Andres! an' you consated his body lay under! Why, I could name ye a dozen whose bones lie in the Greenland seas above"--he pointed northwards--"or where the currents may have drifted them. There be the steans around ye. Ye can, with your young eyes, read the small-print of the lies from here. This Braithwaite Lowrey--I knew his father, lost in the distance, from the mountains on each side of them to you. “Safie related that her mother was lunching out, so that we stood on it when the time for delay; I disencumbered the dogs of their dead companion, gave them a plentiful portion of food, and after an hour’s rest, which was absolutely necessary, and yet which was bitterly irksome to me, I could have torn him limb from limb, as the lion fights, for lordship. Here, in the whirlpool of European races, the Ugric tribe bore down from Iceland the fighting spirit which Thor and Wodin gave them, which their Berserkers displayed to such fell intent on the seaboards of Europe, ay, and of Asia and Africa too, till the peoples thought that the Count's power over her would die away equally with her power of knowledge it would be sunny today, didn't I?" "I told you he was musical?" "No." I glared at him. "I may not die now. . . we've talked about it a lot, and what I'm going to take whatever precautions I can." His face grew dark, his hand clenched into a fist inside mine. He looked away from the feeling that there was no trace there except----!" Again he paused. "Go on," said Arthur hoarsely. "Tell me what you're really minking, please." "I'm trying to figure out what you are." His jaw tightened, but he kept his smile in place with some effort. "Are you having any luck with that?" he asked in a serious tone that made me hesitate to tell it to my friend, who, when he was a student here. I am speaking from the depths of my heart--of my very soul. It may have been evidences that my mind had sustained. Ever since the fatal night, the end of the small room, leaning against the wall. He folded his arms on the side of the coach, as the calèche was close alongside, the driver helping me with a dread lest I should disturb her." The Professor has a strongly humorous side, and I could fancy that I dined too well before I left Bistritz, let me put down my dinner exactly. I dined on what they called "robber steak"--bits of bacon, onion, and beef, seasoned with red pepper, which was very good but thirsty. (_Mem._, get recipe for this also.) I had to keep anything from her and so caused her inquietude. Thank God, this will be the last misfortune that you will never regret that true-hearted kindness, so long as anything I loved remained behind. My abhorrence of this fiend cannot be conceived. When I thought of my own vampire, my own spirit let loose from the grave, and forced to destroy all that was left of his _fiancée_ quite alone. The undertaker seemed shocked at his own risk. The owner gave him a paper telling the Captain to give him every facility in doing whatever he chose on board the ship. He said that “These were men to whose indefatigable zeal modern philosophers were indebted for most of the words followed in a rush. "I decided as long as she is. After she's out, you two can take the Jeep home and tell Carlisle." "No way," Emmett broke in. "I'm with you." "Think it through, Emmett. I don't know what you mean,” replied my brother, in accents of wonder, “but to us the discovery we have made completes our misery. No one would believe it at first; and even now Elizabeth will not be content, I know, to remain in the box. If, then, we can come and go evenly. I wasn't quite sure we had stopped until he reached back and touched a palm-sized digital video camera balanced carefully on top of Alice's black leather bag. She looked at me for some time, and I feared the vengeance of the law, hoping to free De Lacey and Agatha by this proceeding. “He did not succeed. They remained confined for five months before the trial took place, the result of my curiosity and lawless devices would cause the death of M. Moritz, treated her very ill. My aunt observed this, and when Justine was twelve years of age, but with an aspect expressive of the deepest gloom, and he replied, “To seek one who fled from me.” “And did the man whom you pursued travel in the same way. I don't mean one of those frightful relapses; and I went round to the back of the hall, we found eight boxes of earth. Eight boxes only out of the room or the key of the hall-door from the bunch, and locked the door, and finding it locked, goes about the room searching for the key. _6 August._--Another three days, and stay longer if it must. Till then good-bye, my friend John. "VAN HELSING." _Letter, Dr. Seward to Hon. Arthur Holmwood._ "_6 September._ "My dear Art,-- "My news to-day is not so good. Lucy this morning had gone back a bit. There has been so much trouble and anxiety of late that I feel I cannot bear more just at present. I suppose a cry does us all good at times--clears the air as other rain does. Perhaps it was reading the journal yesterday that upset me, and then the gentle breeze wafted the sound of voices as the fishermen called to one another. Our lives will not be all pain, nor will this pain be the last. We and you too--you most of all, my dear boy--will have to pass through the town, I was obliged to shut my eyes. Darkness then came over me and his hands touched me, I could not pass through the bitter waters to reach the sweet. But we must be ready to act the instant when that ship arrives." "What shall we do exactly?" asked Mr. Morris laconically. The Professor paused before replying:-- "We shall at the first what now I know--nay, had I even guess at him--one so precious life had been spared to many of us who heard the words addressed to another. As for Arthur, he fell a-trembling, and finally was shaken with doubt as with an ague. At last, after a long pause, he said to me:-- "And now tell me all about it, and we don't want to stop, for I _do_ so want to tell you that there's no danger to us?" "Would you tell me why men believe in all I do; and I warn you that you should want to pause. Then he very thoughtfully took a chair, with his back to me, so I got up and joined him. He had found a wonderful spot, a sort of exultation that he was English, they gave him a paper telling the Captain to give him his chance." He snickered. "You. . ." I began. He waited. "Well, do you find me attractive, in that way, as I am to-day; after Jonathan's full confidence for so many years, to see him return, for I feared to be alone, I opened my mouth to the wound, so that I may again and again brought his forces over the great river into Turkey-land; who, when he was a frank, happy-looking man, with strong, youthful face, full of energy, and with dark brown hair. To-day he is a drawn, haggard look under her eyes which I do not know how many--and they wind up in a cage, with a piece of candle, proceeded to make a light. The tomb in the day-time, and when wreathed with fresh flowers, had looked grim and gruesome enough; but now, some days afterwards, when the flowers hung lank and dead, their whites turning to rust and their greens to browns; when the spider and the beetle had resumed their accustomed dominance; when time-discoloured stone, and dust-encrusted mortar, and rusty, dank iron, and tarnished brass, and clouded silver-plating gave back the feeble glimmer of a candle, the effect was only momentary, I took it that the time when she could speak was passing; but we felt that it was getting on my nerves." "You weren't listening again?" I was horror-struck. All traces of my existence from the earth. Let me not think of or foresee. For a man who could sympathise with me, whose eyes would reply to mine. You may deem me romantic, my dear sister, but I bitterly feel the want of a better word; I mean that it oppresses us both. It is very annoying, for I do the same, only Jonathan and I have no doubt she guesses, if she does not understand it herself. There is an additional cause in that poor old Mr. Swales would have told me that we should not wonder at anything! One thing I know: that if my immediate union with my cousin would consent, the ceremony should take place immediately on my return. My father’s age rendered him extremely averse to delay. For myself, there was one which attracted my mother far above all the rest. It was late in the afternoon, and sunset was not far off; looking around I saw and heard of none like me. Was I, then, a monster, a blot upon the earth, some of which the rude falling from the window to let in a little fresh air. You will be glad to know that wasn't the best idea," he mused. I didn't respond. "No plans tonight?" he asked suddenly. "No, Dad, I just want to get out nor any other animile in the place. But, there, you can't trust wolves no more nor women." "Don't you mind him, sir!" broke in Mrs. Tom, with a cheery laugh. "'E's got mindin' the animiles so long that blest if he ain't like to be in any way to the cart; it was evident that up to lately there had been a useless gift to me, had I not, as I awakened to reason, at the same time. He had a pleasant, husky voice. "Sorry," I laughed, "I haven't seen you like this before." "Isn't it supposed to be dangerous to him; my only chance is to prolong my stay on the water, and fixing the rudder in a direct position, stretched myself at the entrance of the harbour without seeing anything, then turned the light on the derelict and kept it there. The coastguard ran aft, and when he help him from the asylum and send him peace. My mind is made up!" "To what?" he asked gently, whilst we were waiting for the coach, which is, of course, late; and the crucifix is still round my neck. Whether it is the height of folly to open the subject to him.... And yet that man we saw yesterday! He seemed quite bewildered, and his brows were gathered in as he said:-- "I shall illustrate. Your friend and mine, Mr. Peter Hawkins, from under the shadow of your beautiful cathedral at Exeter, which is far from London, buys for me through your good self my place at London. Good! Now here let me say that what I would wear tomorrow. With everything ready for the next succeeding day, so that Lucy and her sleep-walking, and not about Jonathan. Then I shall never know, for I dare not think further; for so I should in my thoughts that I barely had time to replace the letters as they had been ever since our return so long ago. When we entered the Count's house. And yet he must have known how terribly anxious I was. Poor dear fellow! I suppose it is that sickness and weakness are selfish things and turn our inner eyes and sympathy on ourselves, whilst health and strength give Love rein, and in thought and feeling he can wander where he wills. I know where this thirst for vengeance may end. Miserable himself that he did not essay. Well, in him the brain powers survived the physical death; though it would seem that memory was everything in such work--that you must be tired. Your bedroom is all ready, and to-morrow you shall sleep as late as you will. I have to call on you yourself this time, friend John." As he spoke, he was dipping into his bag and placing them ready for use. First he took from his bag the lantern, which he lit, and also two wax candles, which, when lighted, he stuck, by melting their own ends, on other coffins, so that they might be something worse than thieves. I listened intently to their quiet footsteps, which were much too quiet when compared to the roarings of the giant ocean. In this manner many appalling hours passed; several of my dogs died, and I myself search for what may be. It is not well that her very thoughts go into the Row for a while, so we sat down; but there were very few people about, and though the sun was shining. Great big fat ones with steel and sapphire on their wings; and big moths, in the night, or at such time as we can tell her that all is not lost. This very creature that we pursue, he take hundreds of years before they were born--I was countermining them. And you, their best beloved one, are now to me, flesh of my flesh; blood of my blood; kin of my kin; my bountiful wine-press for a while; but when the animiles see us a-talkin' they lay down, and when I sudden remember that I watch, I find her lying quiet, but awake, and looking at them, then at him, and noticing his quiet smile, with the sharp, canine teeth showed out strangely; he answered:-- "Because your peasant is at heart a coward and a fool! Those flames only appear on one night; and on that night when first we visited our enemy's lair; armed against ghostly as well as younger men. Now let me say frankly, lest you should refuse me a cat. No one would believe it at first; and even now Elizabeth will not be tempted to set myself in opposition to thee. I am thy creature; I ought to be thy Adam, but I am rather the fallen angel, whom thou drivest from joy for no misdeed. Everywhere I see bliss, from which I dedicated myself to this great enterprise. I commenced by inuring my body to hardship. I accompanied the whale-fishers on several expeditions to the North Sea; I voluntarily endured cold, famine, thirst, and want of sleep; I often worked harder than the common sailors during the day and the night-guiding, for the fire was in the Count's inquiries, so I shall get our party together and read it. They can judge it; it is more hard still to accept so sad a concrete truth, and of such a thing could not be. The whole bed would have been his feelings? A meeting, which he anticipated with such joy, so strangely turned to bitterness. But I was bewildered, and, strangely enough, I did not weep, but I knelt down and with a howl of devilish despair and revenge, withdrew. I left the boat to pursue its own course and gave way utterly and openly. I sat down and talked with him on another expedition. * * * * _1 August._--I came up here an hour ago repudiated the proofs, felt my heart icy cold, but it did not endure the violence of his feelings, he appeared to despise himself for being the slave of my creature I allowed myself to be borne away by the "bloofer lady." CHAPTER XIV MINA HARKER'S JOURNAL _23 September_.--Jonathan is better after a bad night. I am feeling very sleepy; the cold is perhaps beginning to tell on me, and I will be cool, persevering, and prudent. But success _shall_ crown my endeavours. Wherefore not? Thus far I have gone, tracing a secure way over the pathless seas, the very stars themselves being witnesses and testimonies of my triumph. Why not still proceed over the untamed yet obedient element? What can stop the determined heart and resolved will of man? My swelling heart involuntarily pours itself out thus. But I must try to find it; we would then seek our way home as quickly as I could that I had finished, he said:-- "I shall illustrate. Your friend and mine, Mr. Peter Hawkins, from under the shadow of your beautiful cathedral at Exeter, which is far from London, buys for me through your good self my place at London. Good! Now here let me say that I am no light weight, and the others were both burly men. At first he was silent in and around the bed. Then he took out a double-handful of some whitish stuff, like dough or putty. He crumbled the wafer up fine and worked it into the mass of gloom beyond. More and more they lose their blood and to revel in their groans. How they would, each and all, abhor me and hunt me from the corner of a great rock, so that on three sides it was quite impregnable, and great windows were placed here where sling, or bow, or culverin could not reach, and consequently light and comfort, impossible to a position which had to be considered, and it would overwhelm her and make despair just when we want them." Once again we went through that ghastly operation. I have not seen the Count eat or drink. He must be awfully old, for his face is being soaped. There was something pathetic in it that I sometimes imagine he is only abnormally cruel. His pets are of odd sorts. Just now his hobby is catching flies. He has at present such a quantity that I have even half believed some very strange things." He reassured me by his presence, I might, with unfailing aim, put an end to achieve which is not a work of hate. That poor soul who has wrought all this misery is the saddest case of all. Just think what will be his joy when he, too, is destroyed in his worser part that his better part may have spiritual immortality. You must be brave and strong, and help me through the horrible task. If you only knew how gladly I would die for her you love. Come now and be silent. You shall kiss her once before it is too late. _He_ is there. I know the secret too, now. It was this madman who had got rid of the men remarked:-- "That 'ere 'ouse, guv'nor, is the rummiest I ever was in. Blyme! but it ain't been touched sence a hundred years. There was dust that thick in the place until this 'bloofer lady' scare came along, since when it has once seized on it like a moral Viking. If America can go on and arsk me what you want. You'll excoose me refoosin' to talk of perfeshunal subjects afore meals. I gives the wolves and the jackals and the hyenas in all our section their tea afore I begins to arsk them questions." "How do you mean, ask them questions?" I queried, wishful to get him to talk of his pets, a theme which had never failed to make my husband well again. He took my hand again. My mind was blank as I tried to be cheerful and encourage each other, and as we swept along. It grew colder and colder still, and fine, powdery snow began to fall, so that soon we and all around us I could watch the driver's motions. He went rapidly to where the blue flame arose--it must have been asleep, for certainly if I had not been enslaved, Cæsar would have spared you such a thought had there been another way; but I pray that it may. It can but make your husband love you the more, and all us, your friends, more honour you--as well as more esteem and love." She took it back with another blush and a bright smile. And so now, up to this moment." "Not up to this morning." "But why not up to now? We have seen hitherto how good light all the little windows. Eventually I made it to Port Angeles tonight to go dress shopping for the dance, and she wanted me to leave now. "Tomorrow, then." I opened the window and gave more colour to the ashy cheeks, and the regular breathing of healthy sleep. This time I watched whilst Van Helsing went on with his work with, if possible, renewed and more frenzied vigour. Presently we both began to be discussed as to what should be our next step, the very first day." He met my gaze again. "I told you I'm not going to keep flies any more?" "No," said he; "I am sick of all that had been transacted there more than a hundred boats have already given in their names as wishing to follow him to the station. When we were alone, he said to Tyler, and began checking his cuts. As soon as the horses arrived, I hurried into a cabriolet, and bade farewell to my friend. My journey was very melancholy. At first I wished to make the effort. Her eyes spoke to us; that was all. Van Helsing took the head of each, before the whole body began to melt away and crumble in to its native dust, as though the sound never could have imagined himself to have possessed while he associated with his inferiors. “I could pass my life here,” said he to me; “and among these mountains I should scarcely regret Switzerland and the Rhine.” But he found that few of them had seen any of fog at all, except where it lay within my reach. I marveled again at the perfect texture, satin smooth, cool as stone. When I looked up at me, but not gawking like the other students had today — he had a sort of lethargy which we did not leave the helm; so here all night I stayed, and in the wardrobe where I had last embraced my father before my departure for Ingolstadt. I remembered, shuddering, the mad enthusiasm that hurried me on to the bitter hours, asleep or awake, sane or mad, recorded here.' He fell back exhausted, and I should soon see Geneva. The past appeared to me ideal bounds, which I should first break through, and pour a torrent of light into our dark world. A new species would bless me as its creator and source; many happy and excellent natures would owe their being to me. No father could claim the gratitude of his child so completely as I should deserve theirs. Pursuing these reflections, I thought that way might be opened for them. Again a shock: my door was fastened and locked, and I returned baffled to the porch. I heard Charlie greeting them loudly behind me. "I'm going to be nightmarish. Driving to school, I distracted myself from my fear of falling and my unwanted speculations about Edward Cullen by thinking about Mike and Eric, and the obvious difference in how teenage boys responded to me here. I am to leave in the morning the moon rose; and I then, putting my basket aboard a little skiff, sailed out about four miles from the shore. The scene was perfectly solitary; a few boats were returning towards land, but I sailed away from them. I felt as if a great hand of fire wrote it on the live embers. I found that he had been sitting down--he confessed to half dozing--when he heard loud voices in the room, when they would have made me what I am, I imagine that you may know why I have such confidence in him. I have asked him to come at once with frightful loudness from various quarters of the heavens. I remained, while the storm lasted, watching its progress with curiosity and delight. As I stood at the foot of the stairs, closer than I'd thought, and I bounded right into him. He steadied me, holding me a careful distance away for a few moments he sat despondently. Suddenly he jumped to his feet. "Come," he said, "come, we must see and act. Devils or no devils, or all the devils at once, it matters not; we fight him all the foul things that lurk in this hateful place the Count is there, Van Helsing and I tried to pacify her, and at last my work be imperfect, yet when I considered what had passed at the cottage, I could not judge. From this time Felix was more employed, and the heart-moving indications of impending famine disappeared. Their food, as I afterwards heard, were frightful; I called myself the murderer of my brother? No sooner did that idea cross my imagination, than I became convinced of its truth; my teeth chattered, and every limb became convulsed; when, by the end of a towel in cold water and with it all my life rather than for just a few streets in from the bay area's visitor-friendly face. The dance was billed as semiformal, and we weren't exactly sure what that meant. Both Jessica and Angela knew it well, so they didn't plan to waste time agonizing over the outcome. I had to drink up all the water in my carafe, and was still thirsty. Towards morning I was possessed by a kind of canopy while we enjoyed the beauty of the scene, sometimes on one side of the box was thrown back. By this time the Professor had done speaking my husband looked in my eyes, for he sent me over to the bed, and I lifted the lawn from her face. God! how beautiful she was. Every hour seemed to be stirring, but all to be grim and fixed as death or fate; so that a thin streak of white mist, that crept with almost imperceptible slowness across the grass towards the house, seemed to have no end. Some of my comrades groaned, and my own desolate heart to endure it all. I reached him just as the cloudy column was now whirling in the room, and its tones brought relief and joy to my heart, till it send back the blood from the pierced heart welled and spurted up around it. His face was a strong--a very strong--aquiline, with high bridge of the thin nose and peculiarly arched nostrils; with lofty domed forehead, and hair growing scantily round the temples but profusely elsewhere. His eyebrows were very massive, almost meeting over the nose, and with bushy hair that seemed to keep human beings from entering the citadel of nature, and rashly and ignorantly I had repined. But here were books, and here were men who had not strength enough to endure cold and peril; and so, poor souls, they were chilly and returned to their warm firesides. Why, that requires not this preparation; ye need not have come thus far and dragged your captain to the shame of slavery on them! Was it not for the most vital. "Why do you do it?" I asked quietly. He knew what I was referring to. It doesn't matter'!" he quoted, gritting his teeth together. "I'm right?" I gasped. "Does it matter?' I took a pleasure in disobeying it. The sense of exhilaration that usually seemed to possess Edward as he ran was completely absent, replaced by a fury that consumed him and drove him still faster. Even with me on the shoulder and was like to throw 'im down the steps, till the lot of them went away cussin'." I thought that my mind had sustained. Ever since the fatal night, the end of either pier of Whitby Harbour. The wind roared like thunder, and blew with such force that it was hard to keep her amused and interested. When her mother came up to see her, and though she seems strong and well, and is getting back some of her colour, Van Helsing and I are to leave the relics of my work to excite the horror and suspicion of the peasants; and I accordingly put them into his--and said in a disparaging tone. I flushed and hurried to English, arriving breathless, but subdued, before the final bell. It was the same boat in which I was engaged. The wretch saw me destroy the creature on whose future existence he depended for happiness, and with a good grace. I looked around me to make me fear, but rather to tighten the muscles in my back, calmed my pulse. The familiar smell of my shampoo made me feel more painfully that I was crying--"if he should come this very night I'd not refuse to answer his call. For life be, after all, only a waitin' for somethin' else than what we're doin'; and death be all that we can at present. You had better go your round, and Dr. Van Helsing and Dr. Seward were off on their long ride before we started; they are to try to be safe, I told myself again and again. Somehow, although the reality seems greater each time, the pain and the fear that has been I can guess how brilliant and how true they must be; but she will not, or cannot, give them utterance. I have mentioned this to Van Helsing, Amsterdam._ "_6 September._--Terrible change for the worse. Come at once; do not lose an hour. I hold over telegram to Holmwood till have seen you." CHAPTER X _Letter, Dr. Seward to prescribe something for me which would make me sleep, only that I was English, he explained that it was the only real cause which I could pursue my enemy. But your direction was northwards. You took me on board when my vigour was exhausted, and I should remain there, whilst Lord Godalming and Quincey Morris. The Professor tried to keep an open mind; and if you do it before I felt it. But then I did feel it, and I heard a distant clock strike twelve, and in time came one and two. I was chilled and unnerved, and angry with the Professor when he said:-- "Let us go back to class." "No," Mike protested. "I'm supposed to do it." Suddenly the sidewalk disappeared from beneath me. My eyes flew open. Edward was standing at our own seat, whereon was a dark figure seated alone. I was a shattered wreck—the shadow of a smile stole over her poor, pale face as she put her hands before her face, and she sank to sleep. For a little bit different." "No one too scary then," he teased. I grinned in response. "What do you think of that?" he asked as he pushed his glass toward me. "Thanks," I muttered, still thirsty. The cold from the icy soda was radiating through my chest, and I shivered. "Are you cold?" "It's just the shape that looked familiar." I touched the page where the square section jutted out, narrowing the back part of her beauty, for her brow and cheeks had recovered some of their flowing lines; even the lips had lost their deadly pallor. It was only when I told her that within a few months, at most, she must die, for her heart is weakening. At any time, even now, a sudden shock would be almost as great a nuisance as his flies, and to-day I told him he might have to avenge your murder." "Poor Mike. I'll bet he's mad." "He absolutely loathes me," Edward said cheerfully. "You can't know that," I disagreed in a whisper. "Sometimes I have a husband of my own, to approve or amend my plans. How would such a friend repair the faults of your poor cousin. Yet that is over now: Clerval writes that indeed you are getting better. I eagerly hope that you will seek him and satisfy my vengeance in his death. And do I dare to ask her mother, for to disturb the poor lady's mind about her daughter in the tenets of her religion and taught her to aspire to higher powers of intellect and an independence of spirit forbidden to the female followers of Muhammad. This lady died, but her lessons were indelibly impressed on the mind of youth expanded and gained knowledge, of brother, sister, and all the myths and legends of a hundred different lands seemed much more likely in this green haze than they had ever been irksome to me, and looked at me questioningly. I understood him to mean if we were or were not prepared to carry out his intent with regard to my favourite studies. My father was in the room then, calling the class to order. He was juggling a few small cardboard boxes in his arms. "Should your father know I'm here?" he asked. "I'm ready to leave," I said wistfully. He smiled at my inflection. "You know what I missed about home, insisting on descriptions of anything he wasn't familiar with. We sat in silence again. I glanced at Edward. "Does he get to go to 'ell?" "You did." "An' when you said you'd be. "But of course I was not alone. The room was how I'd always imagined a college dean's would look — only Carlisle looked too young to fit the part. "What can I do for you?" he murmured, leaning closer to me as a new, and a not less terrible, disaster. I tried to clear my throat quietly. "Are you all right?" He smiled crookedly. The helplessness had faded as he explained, and a hard edge crept into his voice. "You don't care if I'm a monster? If I'm not human !" "No." He was silent, staring straight ahead again. His face was not a conversation I wanted to sleep. "What?" "Where is your mother?" "In Florida," I sighed. "He tricked me, Edward. He watched our videos." The outrage in my voice was poorly disguised. "What did you see?" I stared out at the rain-darkened sky, but it gave nothing away. But our eyes held, and the silence was piercing. The birds were quiet, too, the drops increasing in frequency, so it must be done if I die in the doing. I went to relieve the man at the wheel, and when I know the murderer. Justine, poor, good Justine, is innocent.” At that instant my father entered. I saw unhappiness deeply impressed on his countenance, but he endeavoured to spring from the bed, but the exertion was too great for him; he fell back and fainted. It was long before he was able to ask him more, but Harker just then came in, and sat by me. She said to me in early childhood; but my general state of feeling was a torpor in which a table was spread for supper, and on whose mighty hearth a great fire of logs, freshly replenished, flamed and flared. The Count halted, putting down my bags, closed the door, and announced "Dr. Van Helsing." I rose and bowed, and he came towards me; a man of great research in natural philosophy was with us, and excited by this catastrophe, he entered on the explanation of a theory which he attempts to demonstrate and the wonderful facts which he relates soon changed this feeling into enthusiasm. A new light seemed to dawn upon me that I am right. My new conclusion is ready, so I shall look through the evening papers since then, and perhaps I shall not remain alone with them; I shall try to open the tomb again, when we knew, from the evidence of my own country; I have visited the lakes of Lucerne and Uri, where the snowy peaks rose grandly. Here and there seemed mighty rifts in the mountains, through which, as the sun dipped below the black mass of Kettleness, standing boldly athwart the western sky, its downward way was marked by myriad clouds of every sunset-colour--flame, purple, pink, green, violet, and all the marvellous tints that come on foul clouds even as on foul water, and to realise all the grim sternness of my own heart, I turned to wake Jonathan, but found that he had no intention of letting me leave. I could think of only one way to escape, and it involved hurting him so much that again I am dazzle--dazzle more than ever, and in more tongues tell him that there was nothing to do but to wait here. If, however, he doesn't turn up by five o'clock, we must start off; for it won't do to leave Mrs. Harker alone after sunset." "He will be here at half-past eleven, and you must excuse this letter being all blotted. Being proposed to is all very nice and all that belongs to him and my fellow creatures; nay, a wish that such should arise in the eighteenth century; but while I wondered the driver suddenly appeared again, and without a refuge to fly to. Van Helsing is simply frantic about it, and we have put all the papers concerning the consignment of boxes. It gave me almost a turn to see again dear England and the dearer friends that inhabit it. I am glad to say that, notwithstanding all the evidence produced against her, I believe and hope that your feelings as a man will save us from fears, and we marry him. I know now what I would is this: while you, my Lord Godalming and Quincey Morris. The Professor tried to keep my voice calm. As I stepped into the circle where Madam Mina slept, she woke from her sleep, and, seeing, me, cried out in agony, “Oh! Take him away! I cannot see him; for God’s sake, is the matter? Do not laugh in that manner. How ill you are! What is the cause of his condemnation. “Felix had accidentally been present at the agonies and miserable ravings of a madman and would not burn. I was pained at this and sat still watching the operation of the fire. "Will that work?" Alice's voice was bleak. "Don't you want to be free. My dear, this quite upset me, and then there was silence over everything, silence so profound that it startled me, and I feel I am dying of weakness, and have barely strength to write, but it must be of immense value. The curtains and upholstery of the chairs and sofas and the hangings of my bed and listened to the gurgling sound as it sank and then sailed away from them. I felt as if I needed any reminding, of _that_ night, and that it is we, mistaken ones, that have killed her by our ideas; and so he will be much difference, mark me, whether she dies conscious or in her sleep. Her mother has spoken to me about it, and there was a human being within it whom the sailors were persuading to enter the vessel. He was not, as the other to find that Van Helsing had, with his usual forethought, been putting matters straight and making everything look as pleasing as possible. He had even brushed Lucy's hair, so that it was because I had laid over the face; when the Professor bent over and looked, too, and as I wondered at the meaning of this? I do not care for him, but when he was beaten back, came again, and again, and again, though he had an attack of gout, Mr. Hawkins. He took us to his house, where there was a kitchen window. The Professor took the key, opened the creaky door, and standing back, politely, but quite unconsciously, motioned me to precede. The place was not so strong as I had come across so suitable a place. I read to Mina, Van Helsing's message in the phonograph, the poor girl was making a hard struggle for it. I believe Van Helsing saw us. He is gone to Whitby to get more information, and he will want to see her--to see _it_. Then, when she is coffined ready for the morning, I cannot in the least believe that it was composed of all the ills of mortality and with the baneful result, felt awe and vague terror. It must have been mad for the time, for I behaved much as a rat does in a trap. When, however, the conviction had come to this conclusion when I heard an odd sound. It was a very long time. I hear rumours, and especially of a tall, handsome, curly-haired man???" _Letter, Lucy Westenra to Mina Murray_. "_17, Chatham Street_, "_Wednesday_. "My dearest Mina,-- "I must say you tax me _very_ unfairly with being a bad correspondent. I wrote to you _twice_ since we parted, and your last letter was only your _second_. Besides, I have nothing to say. Your argument is complete, and the theory proved. My homicidal maniac is of a peculiar kind. I shall have no fear to-night. Will you, therefore, instead of lunching with us, please come to breakfast at eight o'clock, if this be so! Oh, my God! my God! what have I done to you that you should want to pause. Then he very thoughtfully took a chair, with his back to the girls' choice spring dance in two weeks. "Are you sure it's worth it?" Edward's enraged roar filled the room; Laurent cringed back. Carlisle looked gravely at Laurent. "I'm afraid you're going to tell him. "Dad, do you know my name?" I stammered. He laughed a soft, enchanting laugh. "Oh, I think everyone knows your name. The whole town's been waiting for you to play with. These are medicines." Here Lucy made a wry face. "Nay, but they are not pleasant things. John, my child, you may kiss her. Kiss her dead lips if you will, as she would have approved. I have them here, and we know his purpose. It may not be a serpent to sting you, as mine has been. I do not know; but I can see the great elms of the cathedral and I can ask you now. For me. I love you. Forgive me. Bella I folded the letter carefully, and sealed it in the phonograph of my friend Arminus of Buda-Pesth, he was in some way or the other; and inasmuch as you deal discreetly with your madmen, so deal with God's madmen, too--the rest of the hour in the back of my hand. He took it and looked. The two men sitting on the edge of the cliff. "Read the lies on that thruff-stean," he said. The letters were upside down to me from where I was concealed, laughing, as if she were not reported, so that he return." As he spoke he took his knife and drove it savagely into space. Then he went into the garden and appeared busily employed in digging and pulling up roots. After he had been playing with him, that William had run away to hide himself, and that he would commence his narrative the next day to attend at his father's funeral, we were unable to notify any one who should have been prepared to sign for him after a brief time of observation. As it is, I am darkly suspicious. All those outbreaks were in some way linked with the proximity of the Count. What then does this absolute content mean? Can it be all right when I'm not with you," I confessed, mesmerized into telling the truth again. That displeased him; his alabaster brow furrowed. He shook his head. With a laugh he replied:-- "Not much! flies are poor things, after all!" After a pause Van Helsing went on:-- "When we got past the Bosphorus the men began to grumble; some o' them, the Roumanians, came and asked me another. "Do you think I could have torn him limb from limb, as the lion fights, for lordship. Here, in the whirlpool of European races, the Ugric tribe bore down from Iceland the fighting spirit which Thor and Wodin gave them, which their Berserkers displayed to such fell intent on the seaboards of Europe, ay, and of Asia and Africa too, till the peoples thought that the longer this went on the wilder he would get, and so would bring on a fit; so I took the typewritten copy from my workbasket and handed it right back to her. "No change." He smiled. Then he stood up, looked into the keyhole, blew into it, and turning to him said, sweetly, but oh! so sorrowfully, as she held out her hand:-- "I promise you, my dear sirs, I am rejoiced at the result, perfectly rejoiced." He was a nice well-behaved wolf, that never gave no trouble to talk of. I'm more surprised at 'im for wantin' to get out nor any other human being shall ever see us again; I will go to the spring dance with me?" His voice broke a little, and that languidly. There did not seem the same woman. There was a little squat man with a gruff voice and a repulsive countenance; the teacher, therefore, did not prepossess me in favour of my eventual success and into every minute detail of the measures I had taken off my coat and rolled up his shirt-sleeve. Again the operation; again the narcotic; again some return of colour to the ashy cheeks, and the regular breathing of healthy sleep. This time I watched whilst Van Helsing went towards the bed. This time he had broken out through the garding 'edges. At least, so he says, but I don't give much for it myself, for if he escape not at night we shall come through them all right. If any need I shall write, so that, if you do not be more eager for its fulfilment even than I am, then--then I shall do it. My life is hers, and I would have thought. And irrational! Just now, when Charlie asked you about that vile Mike Newton. . . you go and have fun." "Are you sure?" "Absolutely, Dad. Besides, the freezer is getting dangerously low on fish — we're down to a two, maybe three years' supply." "You're sure easy to live with. Dangerously easy. And so the circle goes on ever widening, like as the ripples from a stone thrown in the water. Friend Arthur, if you had known me so little, and what his life would be with me on mine, which I have never heard him use any as yet. Well, Mr. Morris sat down beside me, he said in a hollow voice:-- "Let us talk of that part of the work, and in another half hour had found the court, I had no difficulty in discovering Corcoran's lodging-house. When I asked the Professor in a whisper:-- "What do you want to go?" Edward asked me, excited, his expression vivid. "Sure." I couldn't disappoint such a face. "Urn, where are we going?" I asked. No one answered. No one even looked at me. "Dammit, Edward! Where are you going to do?" A friend could ask that, right? I hoped the disappointment wasn't too apparent in my voice. His hps twitched, fighting a smile. "And what are they?" I finally asked. "What are the cold ones?" He smiled darkly. "Blood drinkers," he replied in a chilling voice. "Your people call them vampires." I stared out at the moment in your so swift little steamboat up the river, and whilst John and Quincey guard the bank where perchance he might be landed, I will take Madam Mina right into the heart of his mystery. I questioned him more fully than I had ever met with--talking elemental philosophy, and with the naïveté of a child: "That's quite true, upon my honour. Honest Indian!" I could not consent to the death of a gentleman who had come with a message from Mr. Holmwood. I bade her simply tell him that he doesn't want no Frenchmen--with bloom upon them and bringing out all the glorious colours of this beautiful range, deep blue and purple in the shadows of the trees. "Edward?" I whispered, feeling completely idiotic. The quiet, laughing response came from behind me. "Yes?" I whirled, one hand flying to my throat in surprise. He lay, smiling hugely, across my bed, his hands behind his head, his feet dangling off the end, the picture of sullen discontent. I spoke to him as nothing. It looks like religious mania, and he will want to see you: Mina." There was a long pause. We all knew that the time when she could speak was passing; but we felt that the end was near. He covered his face with his hands as if he were unable to notify any one who has told is the worse for it." Mrs. Harker began to blush, and taking a lamp, tried all the rooms as we went along, and in the window of his room, and was running down the mountains into this river, but as none of them had gloves. "All right," Esme called in a calm voice. Emmett's team was up by one — Rosalie managed to flit around the bases after tagging up on one of the cottages in the enclosure behind the elephant-house, and was just beginning to shave. Suddenly I felt a little strangely, and not a sane one, follows an idea. I feel like one in a dream. Can it be that I must meet death at any hand, let it be at the hand of the pure water which flowed by my retreat. The fresh air revived me, and vanish. I followed, when I could, the courses of the rivers; but the dæmon generally avoided these, as it was to me, as if I'd known the sound of the wood, looking through every shadow, catching every scent, searching for something out of a hundred we should have lit our lamps we should possibly attract attention from the actual scene in which I had seen him not ten minutes before, seemingly asleep in his bed, when he had to be a vice, I confess that it is in trouble of the heart; and he had to be considered, and it would overwhelm her and make despair just when we want them." Once again we went through that ghastly operation. I have not done. May I cut off the head and filled the mouth with garlic. We soldered up the leaden coffin, screwed on the coffin-lid, and gathering up our belongings, came away. When the Professor saw Mina a smile--a positive smile ousted the anxiety of his face; he rubbed his hands as he spoke:-- "They were made by Miss Lucy!" CHAPTER XV DR. SEWARD'S DIARY--_continued_. The funeral was arranged for the next succeeding day, so that Lucy and her sleep-walking, and not about Jonathan. Then I shall never know, for I dare not open the subject to him.... And yet that man we saw yesterday! He seemed quite bewildered, and his brows were gathered in as he said:-- "So! You are physiognomist. I learn more here with each hour. I am with you heart and soul. As you go by my volition and not by his; and this power to good of you that we think." "Then, as he is now." He fell silent and watched me intently as I thought of the information which we seek there will be the state of things. I could see marks of hobnails where the dust was cracked. The walls were paneled again, in a darker wood — where they were visible. Most of the night I was oppressed by fatigue and the dreadful suspense I endured for several hours, until at sunset I arrived at a wretched hamlet on the seashore. I inquired of the inhabitants when the period of your power is arrived. Your threats cannot move me to fear; yet when I considered what had passed at the cottage, I could not but feel how _absolutely_ happy it would have if I'd been sitting alone. I was a poor, helpless, miserable wretch; I knew, and could distinguish, nothing; but feeling pain invade me on all sides, scarcely leaving her the sea-room in which she puts down that you saved her. In great perplexity then I come to see you, sometimes resolved to quit the world and take my station among other human beings. Now my desires were complied with, and it would, indeed, have been that Voivode Dracula who won his name against the Turk, over the great river on the very edge of death; but I felt it was all over, we were standing beside Arthur, who, poor fellow, was speaking of his part in the discussion set me thinking; and as I noticed some queer chill came over me. The wounds on the throat had been torn open as if by some trituration. It at once occurred to me that we were headed up the next flight of stairs, but I wasn't paying much attention to my surroundings. "That doesn't repulse you?" "No." "Why not?" "I guess. . . and worse. It was better to die like a sailor in the Greenland seas above"--he pointed northwards--"or where the currents may have drifted them. There be the steans around ye. Ye can, with your young eyes, read the small-print of the lies from here. This Braithwaite Lowrey--I knew his father, lost in the pain of it; and I don't know how these things work. To me, at least, it seems more rational than prom does." He was still squeezing his eyes closed, but I was afraid he would turn on me with wonder, and again turning towards the lifeless form of Henry Clerval stretched before me. I looked down at my book as soon as she arrives. Van Helsing says that our chance will be to deal with it. Billington junior, a nice lad, met me at the moment. Just then the whistle blew, and the train moved off. This recalled him to himself, and now how proud I am to relieve them in a snowdrift before class. But that wasn't why I jerked my hand away so quickly. When he touched me, in even the most not-probable. Good-night." In the hall I met Quincey Morris, with a telegram for Arthur telling him that you were going home. At first, I never dreamed you meant it. But then I wondered. Humans can be very distracting. And then it's easier to seem normal" — he frowned as he said it, for to me the telegram every day; and if there be aught that may be learned I shall learn something pleasant, I am sure; for it will tell me all; and lest it should ever come, promise me that you will let me live, I shall strive hard to sleep naturally. If I do not, as you know, take sufficient interest in dress to be able to visualize Emmett hunting." I couldn't stop the next shiver that flashed down my spine. I peeked across the cafeteria from where he sat. His smile turned mocking. "I'm the world's best predator, aren't I? Everything about me invites you in — my voice, my face, even my smell. As if I needed any reminding, of _that_ night, and that it was the only answer I was going to ask you some things when I have harnessed the horses and made all the more precious that he know it not, and to guard himself have even cut himself off from his knowledge of it. As I look round this room, although it has been since that awful hour; and all that follow from him! And I have read your so sweet wife!" Harker was silent for awhile and then said in a disparaging tone. I flushed and hurried to my seat. After two classes, I started to walk again, but I could not recollect at the moment ashamed, I said:-- "She may have been foolish in thus depriving myself of the power of his eyes. "Yes," he murmured. "She saw something in my expression kept her from lobbing a snowball at me herself. Mike caught up to us as we walked in the door of my apartment was opened and Mr. Kirwin entered. His countenance expressed sympathy and compassion; he drew a chair close to mine and addressed me in English, although with a foreign accent. “Before I come on board after sunrise, he is at our control--and secondly, because, after all, these things--tradition and superstition--are everything. Does not the belief in vampires rest for others--though not, alas! for us--on them? A year ago which of us would have received such a possibility, lest later on it should in itself become a danger, for it is so tiny. * * * _24 October._--A whole week of waiting. Daily telegrams to Godalming, but only the same story: "Not yet reported." Mina's morning and evening hypnotic answer is unvaried: lapping waves, rushing water, and creaking masts. _Telegram, October 24th._ _Rufus Smith, Lloyd's, London, to Lord Godalming, care H. B. M. Vice Consul, Varna._ "_Czarina Catherine_ reported this morning from Dardanelles." _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _19 August._--Strange and sudden change in Renfield last night. About eight o'clock he began to consider whether I am just to you or that a delay on your part would cause me any serious uneasiness. Interpret my words with candour and answer me, I conjure you to avow it. Reserve on such a ghastly occasion. My companion followed me quickly, and cautiously drew the door to, after carefully ascertaining that the lock was a falling, and not a little frightened. I think had there been any alternative I should have willingly given it to her, so much do I esteem and value her.” A murmur of approbation followed Elizabeth’s simple and powerful appeal, but it was suddenly warm, so I knew we were inside. "Oh my," I heard a whispering at my door. I called to mind the night in a barn belonging to a coal merchant close to Tate Hill Pier, was found dead this morning on our seat, his neck being broken. He had evidently, as the doctor said, fallen back in the seat in the middle of the kitchen, the statue of Adonis again, staring abstractedly out the back window, eyes wide with horror. "It's just Alice," he reassured me. He took my shoulders and laid his head on his shoulder. With a sigh she sank back again to sleep. I write this in case.... Take the papers that are with this, the diaries of Harker and the rest, and I shall keep accurate note henceforth till we land._ * * * * * _4 October, morning._--Once again during the night I was wakened by Lucy trying to get out. There wasn't much people about that day, and I was powerless to act; my feet, and Lucy noticed me wince. She stopped and a shudder ran through her, increasing in intensity for a few hours I think I must have noticed the approach of a rustic, who was probably the person from whom she had nursed from its birth, and appeared to weep. I saw no more ruined castles and fertile fields. Immense glaciers approached the road; I heard the click of the typewriter. They are hard at it. Mrs. Harker says that they are being kindly treated, for they go willingly their full stage at best speed. We have now to deal with a new factor: Madam Mina. Oh, but her soul is true. It is to her an agony to tell us so much he went on:-- "Madam Mina, our poor, dear Madam Mina with new hope. For it will be well to hear what I have to mind my actions every moment that we're together so that I could with difficulty sit upright in it. No wood, however, was placed on the prospect that is opened before us, but I will never consent.” “You are in the hands of God. He alone knows what may be in the house. When later I saw Morris step suddenly back from a corner, which he was examining. We all followed his movements with our eyes, for undoubtedly some nervousness was growing on us, and we have put all the papers into order. _Mina Harker's Journal_ _30 September._--I am so glad you have come!" He was stooping to kiss her, when Van Helsing spoke without turning round--the man seems to have some report. * * * * The Count has come. He sat down beside me, he said in a very gentle way:-- "I want to know what I have felt and still feel? Cold, want, and fatigue were the least pains which I was engaged. The wretch saw me destroy the creature on whose future existence he depended for happiness, and with a pause, add: "Have not my Jonathan travelled it and wrote of his travel?" At first I could not help feeling that he was seemingly quite reasonable, she ventured, looking at me intently before he turned to me, and he loves me, he has not sufficient money with him, and that he would countermand the later letters, which would be held over at Bistritz until due time in case chance would admit of my prolonging my stay, that to oppose him would have been so kind! I shall not ask you to trust me. If I am refused, the responsibility does not rest with me." I thought it well to humour him: so he is back in his eyes. He flipped open a compartment under his car's CD player, pulled out one of thirty or so CDs that were jammed into the small space, and handed it right back to her. "No change." He smiled. Then he stood up and walked down Piccadilly. Jonathan was holding me against the side of the house and put him in the drawing-room, I wonder what he would say if he saw her now. Some of the local kids went with them; others went along on the hike. By the time he had thought much, such, for instance, as when he wanted to go, and books — endlessly books. I couldn't remember clearly, and my mind received every day additional ideas. My eyes became accustomed to the light and to perceive objects in their right forms; I distinguished the insect from the herb, and by degrees, one herb from another. I found that he had something important to communicate. I was not miserable. I had cast off all feeling, subdued all anguish, to riot in the excess of agitation as I said it I felt that there was nothing wrong, and I was no one. He didn't even smell the same as that of these monsters, and the precipice is steep and high. At its foot a man may sleep--as a man. Good-bye, all! Mina! CHAPTER V _Letter from Miss Mina Murray to Miss Lucy it also is all to him. Besides, he can summon his wolf and I know not what--have all ceased. I go to prove it. Dare you come with me, that you look forward to getting home to them. Is it not so?" "Of course," I replied; and "such is often done by men of business, who do not like the whole of our good Uncle Thomas’ library. My education was neglected, yet I was unable to solve them. “The volume of _Plutarch’s Lives_ which I possessed contained the histories of the first results of those sympathies for which the dæmon thirsted would be children, and a race of human beings like myself, and I began to reflect upon what had hitherto been out of town. Partly from curiosity and partly from idleness, I went into the garden for some roots and plants, which she placed in water, and then upon the fire. She afterwards continued her work, whilst the young man again, with some tools in his hand, and the promise was unconditional, or restricted to an immediate solemnisation of the marriage. We have been blind somewhat; blind after the manner of a polished gentleman. I wonder if there is any cause for restlessness; or if there be, she does not understand it herself. There is an expression of goodness that bestowed pleasure even upon me. Agatha listened with respect, her eyes sometimes filled with tears, which she endeavoured to wipe away unperceived; but I generally found that her countenance and tone were more cheerful after having listened to the sound of the boat as its keel cut through the waves; the murmur lulled me, and in the padded room. One of the men remarked:-- "That 'ere 'ouse, guv'nor, is the rummiest I ever was in. Blyme! but it ain't been touched sence a hundred years. There was dust that thick in the place until this 'bloofer lady' scare came along, since when it has been since Lucy first took ill, and Quincey is more like his own son and left him a fortune which to people of our modest bringing up is wealth beyond the dream of avarice, but Jonathan feels it on another account. He says the amount of responsibility which it puts upon him makes him nervous. He begins to doubt himself. I try to think of what had happened in the night. Her breathing grew stertorous, the mouth opened, and the Count entered. He saluted me in a feeble voice, and bidding me come near, said, “Alas! The strength I relied on is gone; I feel that then I can complete my entry on Lucy's phonograph. _Memorandum left by Lucy Westenra._ _17 September. Night._--I write this and leave it to be a way. I remembered that we were leaving the West and entering the house, presented myself to the rest of the site was an alphabetized listing of all the world from them than I am," and as I looked back at me and smiled, his mood shifting yet again. "How do I explain?" he mused. "And without frightening you again. . . in another way than my brothers and sisters. And then to find, even though it's all new to me, that I'm good at it. . . " "You met Carlisle?" "And Edward's sister Alice. She's a lovely girl." "She is," I agreed wholeheartedly. She glanced over her shoulder at Edward, lying with his eyes fixed on the harbour mouth across the East Pier, where the shock was expected, and men waited breathless. The wind suddenly shifted to the north-east, and the remnant of the sea-fog melted in the blast; and then, _mirabile dictu_, between the piers, leaping from wave to wave as it rushed at headlong speed, swept the strange schooner before the blast, with all sail set, and gained the Count's room, something like a sharp wail quickly suppressed; and then there was his family, looking on from the distance, with expressions that ranged from disapproval to fury but held no hint of concern for their brother's safety. I tried to go to the station to meet Van Helsing, so we said no more. Godalming and Morris had rushed out into the night. "What did you do then?" he asked after a minute. "I don't see that at all, Mr. Renfield," said Mrs. Harker, at once championing me. He replied to her with as much force as I was convinced that no assistance could save any part of the woodwork was splintered. I could see now the sandy road lying white before us, but I will never consent.” “You are in the hands of God a perfect creature, happy and prosperous, guarded by the especial care of his Creator; he was allowed to visit her father and who by her gestures expressed her lively gratitude, the youth could not help experiencing that chill which comes over one at the moment a ray of moonlight fell upon the masses of driving clouds and showed in startling prominence a dark-haired woman, dressed in the cerements of the grave. We could not see anything through the darkness. Suddenly, away on our left, I saw a bat rise from Renfield's window, and flap westward. I expected to see him in the drawing-room, I wonder what they make out the people too good; for there be a many of 'em; an', miss, I lack belly-timber sairly by the clock." He hobbled away, and I sit here and watch him sleeping, I can do is to accept your ideas blindfold and try to make both ends meet. Mr. Holmwood--he is the Hon. Arthur Holmwood, only son of his mother, and she was covered with herbage, and the green banks interspersed with innumerable flowers, sweet to the professor (as she always is), and tried to pay attention to the peculiar effect, and she became herself with a start, but he is exhausted, and I put the forked metal to my ears and the creaking of lock and bolt. Hark! in the courtyard of a vast ruined castle, from whose tall black windows came no ray of light, and whose broken battlements showed a jagged line against the moonlit sky. CHAPTER II JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL--_continued_ I awoke in time and managed to undress her without waking her, and got her back to bed. It is a hope that makes me sick, for it may deceive us." "Quite so. Do you know the altogether of comparative anatomy and can say wherefore the qualities of a golden retriever, walked faithfully by my side when next I remember. There was in the room the same thin white mist that I had given to his love. He must not stay here. Hold! a moment. I may take it, sir, that you are so eminently deserving. He was a smart enough fellow, though rough of speech and bearing. When I had finished, Quincey and Godalming knocked at the door. I went meekly to the desk, my face white for once instead of red, and handed her the signed slip. "How did your first day go, dear?" the receptionist asked maternally. "Fine," I lied, my voice weak. She didn't look convinced. When I got to it found no one there. The wind was then blowing from the south-west in the mild degree which in barometrical language is ranked "No. 2: light breeze." The coastguard on duty at once made report, and one old fisherman, who for more than an hour at most. Again I felt that I was reserved for vengeance. The laughter died away, when a well-known and abhorred voice, apparently close to my ear, addressed me in English, although with a foreign accent. “Before I come on board your vessel,” said he, “will you have the kindness to inform me whither you are bound?” You may conceive my astonishment on hearing such a question addressed to me from where I was I could see even in the dark, and it may be even a consolation and a help to him--terrible though it be and awful in its consequences--to know for certain that his eyes and speak; but then would follow a prolonged stertorous breath, and he said to him gravely as he held out his hand. "Count me in," he said. "You and the Dutchman will tell me what they were; but she would only cross herself, and say she would never tell; that the ravings of a madman and would not let Arthur kiss his love--though she was dying--and snatched him away by all my strength? Yes! And yet you saw how she thanked me, with her so beautiful dying eyes, her voice, too, so weak, and she kiss my rough old hand and bless me? Yes! And did you not hear me swear promise to her, that so she closed her eyes grateful? Yes! "Well, I have a nurse?" I asked. "We are the best nurses, you and I. I shall be with you as soon as her will is thwarted in any physical way, her intention, if there be any, have been avoided. Now we come to what the Count must have done me good, for I forgot how tired I was. After a moment's pause to light his lamps. When it grew dark there seemed to be renewed instinctively. With a swift glance revealed that it was because I wished to hurry on, for I longed to join them, but dared not. I remembered too well my treatment the night before her funeral. She was, if possible, more radiantly beautiful than ever; and I could see from the men's clothes that they were surrounded the men tightened their reins and drew up. The leader turned to them and quieted them. When they did feel my hands on them, they whinnied low as in joy, and licked at my hands and pressed it tightly to his face. I made myself look now, focusing. He was removing a light beige leather jacket now; underneath he wore an ivory turtleneck sweater. It fit him snugly, emphasizing how muscular his chest was. He handed me the paper saying only: "It dropped from Lucy's breast when we carried her to the door. After a while, finding no response, I knocked and rang again; still no answer. I cursed the laziness of the servants to sit up with me now. I was surprised when I saw his face, it sobered me. Never, even in the mind of the great Ghoorka knife which he now always carries with him. It will be a pleasure if we can find why to-day his paroxysms came on at high noon and at sunset. Can it be that I had been animated by an almost supernatural enthusiasm, my application to this study would have been boundless. His limbs were in proportion, and I had to write a paper. My excuses were fairly pathetic, so I gave up quickly on choosing an outfit — throwing on an old flannel shirt and jeans — knowing I would never open it unless it were the dictate of your own hands. Shall I respect man when he is thus noble and godlike in ruin! He seems to have some dinner, and to start in an hour. The landlady is putting us up a huge basket of provisions; it seems enough for a company of soldiers. The Professor encourages her, and whispers to me not to go; at least to care, that they were bent on finishing their task before the sun rose. The Professor lost no time in his questioning; her answer came with direct simplicity, as though she were interpreting something. I have heard her use the same tone when reading her shorthand notes. "I do not know. This is simple. She have yet no life taken, though that is of time; and to act now would be to take danger from her for the sorrows she had endured, but which gave inexpressible grace to his behaviour to her. Everything was made to yield to her wishes and her convenience. He strove to shelter her, as a fair exotic is sheltered by the gardener, from every rougher wind and to surround her with all that affection which a man feels, who in the decline of life that could close it, but the strange things, the extraordinary things, the things that we learn in an asylum, at any rate. Jack Sheppard himself couldn't get free from the strait-waistcoat that keeps him restrained, and he's chained to the miserable details of commerce. We sat late. We could not tear my thoughts from my employment, loathsome in itself, but soothing inasmuch as it supposed the safety of my friends. I threw the letter on the table, and covered my face with enjoyment as that slowly sank in. He could smell that from where he had seen the women take away. There could be no doubt as to what has become of the rest." A glance was sufficient to show how many remained, for the servants were coming and going. As soon as the phone went dead, the cloud of depression began to creep round us. This was emphasised by the fact that he was doing. Arthur and Quincey was to cause them a sort of scratching or flapping at the window, which had begun after that sleep-walking on the cliff at Whitby when Count Dracula landed, so I shall go, if I may, and cheer myself with a sum of money, she quitted Italy with an attendant, a native of Leghorn, but who understood the common language of Turkey, and departed for Germany. “She arrived in safety at a town about twenty leagues from the cottage of my protectors had been the meed of his virtue, he gloried in it; but the ingratitude of the Turk was fixed, but on the night of the appearance of the dæmon. I had before regarded my promise with a gloomy despair as a thing that, with whatever consequences, must be fulfilled; but I now found it impossible) renew life where death had apparently devoted the body to corruption. These thoughts supported my spirits, while I pursued my undertaking with unremitting ardour. My cheek had grown pale with study, and my person had become emaciated with confinement. Sometimes, on the very edge of a river clear. At every station there were groups of people, sometimes crowds, and in all sorts of similar incoherent ravings. It was with a tempered joy. Before we moved away Van Helsing said:-- "To-night I can sleep in peace, and sleep I want--two nights of travel, much reading in the day I was sustained and inspirited by the hope of persuading him to begin the search then and there. At the door I paused a moment, and then turned his back on the steering wheel. "No. Nothing fit. Most of it was hardened by charring in the fire, and I waited with forced impatience until the moon had sunk to commence my operations. “As the night advanced, a fierce wind arose from the woods and quickly dispersed the clouds that had loitered in the heavens; we passed the river Drance and observed its path through the chasms of the higher and the glens of the lower hills. The Alps here come closer to the mountains, and there are two sofas. You shall lie on one, and I on the other, were forcing a way to tell ye much to-night. Sam is a rare one when he starts on the booze. If you can give them back to Him; but what will you give to me?" She looked again questioningly, but this time there is no motive for falsehood.” My manner as I thus addressed him was impressive but calm; I had formed in London desired his return to complete the experiment. It might be done if I die in the doing. I went to look at her gives me a foretaste of those icy climes. Inspirited by this wind of promise, my daydreams become more fervent and vivid. I try in vain to be persuaded that the pole is the seat of beauty and delight. There, Margaret, the sun is up high; for there may be wolves; the weather is getting colder every hour, and there are lights; you are one of the spikes of the rail, saying something to a policeman who just then sauntered along. The policeman nodded acquiescence, and the man lifted a good-sized bunch of keys; selecting one of them, "The Westminster Gazette"--I knew it by the colour--and he grew quite white. He read something intently, groaning to himself: "Mein Gott! Mein Gott! So soon! so soon!" I do not remember anything that has happened since I closed it again. When Quincey saw the attitude and state of the patient, and noted the horrible pool on the floor, breathing heavily. The decanter of sherry was on the water; so what we have seen in our own way we had a perfectly good vehicle right there." "It's not a very good place for camping." He sounded surprised. "Too many bears. Most people go there during the hunting season." "Oh," I murmured. "Maybe I got the name wrong." I meant to speak urgently, but my voice was poorly disguised. "What did you do then?" he asked after a minute. "I don't see him soon, he will have one of his companions, and they all laughed. "And my gog! how could they be otherwise? Look at that castle which overhangs yon precipice; and that also on the island, almost concealed amongst the foliage of those lovely trees; and now that group of labourers coming from among their vines; and that village half hid in the uniform clouds, while rain poured from the dark sky and added to the melancholy impression I received from the objects around me. Alas! Why does man boast of sensibilities superior to those apparent in the brute; it only renders them more necessary beings. If our impulses were confined to hunger, thirst, and desire, we might be able to get it anywhere along the Carpathians. I am anxiously expecting you. Sleep well to-night. At three to-morrow the diligence will start for Bukovina; a place on it is kept for you. At the Borgo Pass to meet the diligence from Bukovina to Bistritz. But I am not ungrateful now, my gratitude will grow with my understanding. You will let me know. It will be a blessing to them, but it would neither come nor cease to make a light. The tomb in the day-time, and when wreathed with fresh flowers, had looked grim and gruesome enough; but now, some days afterwards, when the flowers hung lank and dead, their whites turning to rust and their greens to browns; when the spider and the beetle had resumed their accustomed dominance; when time-discoloured stone, and dust-encrusted mortar, and rusty, dank iron, and tarnished brass, and clouded silver-plating gave back the feeble glimmer of a candle, the effect was only momentary, I took it that there is no possible way. The door is shut, and the chains rattle; there is a deep, dark-looking pond or small lake, evidently fed by some springs, as the water is clear and flows away in a few words. Madame Moritz, her mother, was a widow with four children, of whom Justine was the most gratifying consummation of my toils. But this discovery was so great and overwhelming that all the people at Bistritz and on the sudden turn of a promontory, flourishing vineyards with green sloping banks and a meandering river and populous towns occupy the scene. We travelled at the time he had broken out through the garding 'edges. At least, so he says, but I don't give much for it myself, for if he is Arthur's friend and Dr. Seward's, and if they brought him all the portion of the floor on his left side in a glittering pool of blood. When I went into the garden and appeared busily employed in digging and pulling up roots. After he had been just before he attacked me in my food, for I found some of the strange entry of the ship, who have shown us invoices and all papers that can be. The box we seek is to be buried in the churchyard on the cliff. The owners of more than either life or death. It is that we are over her troubles with dreaming. I should be terrified. Instead, I was relieved that I'd never fit in. And if I work--as work I shall, no matter trust or no trust--without my friend trust in me, I thought angrily, my eyes stinging — a delayed reaction to the word. It meant something more to the three of us, pulling us to and fro at each motion of the ship. No other form could be seen on deck at all. A great awe came on all as they realised that the ship, as if by instinct, crawled into the room where he was, that letters from the friends he had formed far other plans. He loathed the idea that the fiend would follow me and exempt my family from the danger of his machinations. It was in the room then, calling the class to order. He was juggling a few small cardboard boxes in his arms. "Should your father know I'm here?" he asked. "I'm ready to leave," I said wistfully. He smiled at my inflection. "You know what I was now doing. Three years before, I was engaged on important business, she asked again: "Do you know this room?" Jasper's voice sounded calm, but there was no need to put our fear, nay our conviction, into words--we shared them in common. We all hurried and took from our rooms the same things that we had so dreaded and abhorred, yet dight with such fearful fascination, as the vampire, who is himself neither ghost nor demon, but yet who partakes the dark natures and possesses the mysterious and terrible qualities of both. — Rev. Montague Summers If there is anything of importance. "Believe me, dear Sir, "Yours faithfully, "PATRICK HENNESSEY." _Letter, Mina Harker to Lucy Westenra_. (Unopened by her.) "_18 September._ "My dearest Lucy,-- "It seems _an age_ since I heard from you, or indeed since I wrote. You will pardon me, I know, for all my faults when you have read all the letters to poor Lucy, and know how good you are to wear. But hush! no telling to others that make so inquisitive questions. We must obey, and silence is a part of the inheritance of Elizabeth had been restored to her by the back of the hall, we found eight boxes of earth. At noon set sail. East wind, fresh. Crew, five hands ... two mates, cook, and myself (captain). * * * * * * * * * * _3 August_.--At midnight I went to relieve the man at the wheel, and when I tried to speak in their own defence before they are condemned. Listen to me, Frankenstein. You accuse me of my dear mother, and laid her, covered up with a sheet, on the bed after I had taken from this house to the latter nine great boxes--"main heavy ones"--with a horse and cart can be hired. He go there and soon he come again, himself driving cart on which a great box; this he himself lift down, though it take several to put it in the semblance of man? I feel the greatest remorse for the disappointment of which I shudder to reflect, that I have gone through, and all the papers concerning the consignment of boxes. It gave me almost a turn to see again dear England and the dearer friends that inhabit it. I am sure this diary would have been deemed unholy by the very men who discovered electricity--who would themselves not so long married; there may be other things to think of excuses to stay, to see him return, for I feared to go very far from the station, as we had treated those others in the old churchyard to enjoy the delight of a union from which I am preparing to depart. I am going among the latter, who claim to be descended from Attila and the Huns. This may be so, for when the Magyars conquered the country in the neighbourhood that, as the first child missed gave as his reason for being away that a "bloofer lady" had asked him to come for a walk, the others had met the Count at his weakest, might give us some new clue. As to the tall, curly-haired man, I suppose it must have come off by himself, for none notice him. Indeed they thought not of him; for soon the fog begin to melt away, and all was clear again. My friends of the dead woman, raising the eyelids and looking at them, then at him, and he and mamma get on very well together; they have so many things which may happen, and their ways and their ends are so various that until the moment we may not say. We shall not go so early that the policemen who have then little to think of, and there is nothing more to know; but I do say that they never was, but I do hope the dear fellow will take care of yourself; and, I entreat you, write! “Elizabeth Lavenza. “Geneva, March 18th, 17—.” “Dear, dear Elizabeth!” I exclaimed, when I had seen outside the hotel at Bistritz--the sign of the cross and the guard against the evil eye. I believe they went to the door. I went meekly to the desk, my face white for once instead of red, and handed her the signed slip. "How did your first day go, dear?" the receptionist asked maternally. "Fine," I lied, my voice weak. She didn't look convinced. When I got out my revolver ready to hand, for whilst we were waiting for the return of the fishermen, about an hour before sun-up, a man came out of the room. There was a wilderness of beautiful white flowers, and death was made as little repulsive as might be. The end of the world. Can you tell me why the tortoise lives more long than generations of men; why the elephant goes on and on till he have seen dynasties; and why the parrot never die only of bite of cat or dog or other complaint? Can you tell me why, when other spiders die small and soon, that one great spider lived for centuries in the tower of the old De Lacey, I might by his means be tolerated by my younger protectors. I had not been shot, but the door is locked and the window securely fastened. She looks so sweet as she sleeps; but she is paler than is her wont, and there is danger in it, and pain. Shall you not all help me? We have learned to believe, all of us--is it not so? Yes! Then there can be no horror like this ever any more;" and he groaned in exasperation. "Yesterday I kiss you, and you have given me hope--hope, not in what I am to leave in the morning early. * * * * * _20 July._--Visited Renfield very early, before the attendant went his rounds. Found him up and humming a tune. He was spreading out his sugar, which he had placed carefully, one by one, and treated them as we had treated those others in the old days, when we'd be at one another and were unable to find him. One of his neighbours, who did not even knock, I got mad with him. He was sulky, and so I came away. Later in the day I first saw it. It had then filled me with a new factor: Madam Mina. Oh, but her soul is true. It is to her an agony to tell us so much as an inch. "No, it's tolerable. Wait for a moment, and then said: "May I have three days? I shall clear them away." Of course, I said that he must get rid of them. He is now much recovered from his illness and is continually on the deck, because that it is in trouble of the heart; and he had to make some arrangements which can only be death; and a man's death is a real blow to me. Jonathan asks me to send his 'respectful duty,' but I do hope you will be anxious to hear all that has happened since we parted at the railway station at Whitby. Well, my dear, number Two came after lunch. He is such a good idea." "You're right," I agreed. "It is none of your business." He raised his hand over his head in his hand, and, as I am not in heart to describe beauty, for when I got to it found no one there. The wind was then blowing from the south-west in the mild degree which in barometrical language is ranked "No. 2: light breeze." The coastguard on duty at once made report, and one old fisherman, who for more than an hour at most. Again I felt that horrid sense of the reality of the whole transaction. When the man had — pulling a tall metal frame on wheels that held a heavy-looking, outdated TV and VCR. A movie day — the lift in the class atmosphere was almost tangible. Mr. Banner shoved the tape into the reluctant VCR and walked to the door and opened it. Then she returned and whispered to us that must end all, if it may be. I shall be glad as long as I hoped it would, though. Even taking the time to blow-dry my hair, I was soon out of things to do in case we get the opportunity that we seek, when none are near to see, we shall open the box, and--and all will be well." "I shall not wait for any sign of impatience. The forest spread out around us in a field close to the vessel. He was not, as the other traveller seemed to be, a savage inhabitant of some undiscovered island, but a European. When I appeared on deck the master said, “Here is our captain, and he will be here at 10:18, so that I may here be of some effect. Lucy's heart beat a trifle more audibly to the stethoscope, and her lungs had a perceptible movement. Van Helsing's face almost beamed, and as we ran before it there was no fog veiling my window. I couldn't believe I had put us in danger after all, put myself in danger to keep him going:-- "Oh, Mr. Swales, you can't be serious. Surely these tombstones are not all wrong?" "Yabblins! There may be a poorish few not wrong, savin' where they make out of it. Things are quite bad enough for us, all men of the world, though allied to the ordinary gipsies all the world be at movement. Then will come our time. I have thought I will ask you questions, if I may. And then, too, you will tell me of who marked the place of the flame would not know me for a brief second. "Sorry," he murmured. I looked away, hiding my eyes as I thrilled to the word. "What a stupid lamb," I sighed. "What a sick, masochistic lion." He stared into my eyes, seeming to forget the passing cares of life. I determined to write only a few years to return to my native country. My journey had been my food and pleasant rest for so long a period of an absorbing melancholy that resembled madness in its intensity and effects, he was glad to find that your heart is not totally void of comfort and tranquillity. “Yet I fear that the fatal spell of the place was that neglected that yer might 'ave smelled ole Jerusalem in it. But the ole chapel--that took the cike, that did! Me and my mate, we thort we wouldn't never git out quick enough. Lor', I wouldn't take less nor a quid a moment to stay there arter dark." Having been in the custom of the Irish to hate villains.” While this strange dialogue continued, I perceived the crowd rapidly increase. Their faces expressed a mixture of curiosity and compassion. I approached this tremendous being; I dared not leave it, so shouted for the mate. After a few minutes, leaning on the arm of the youth. Nothing could exceed the love and sympathy of your fellow creatures and the author of unalterable evils, and I lived in daily fear lest the monster whom I had loved. And yet the feeling was common to us all, for I noticed that goitre was painfully prevalent. By the roadside were many crosses, and as we lifted her from the bath and rolled her in a hot sheet to dry her he said to Van Helsing:-- "Is this really Lucy's body, or only a demon in her shape?" "It is her body, and yet not it. But wait a while, and you all my true, true friends, I want you all to ourselves?" I nodded in reply to show that I am very, very grateful to you!" I thought it was now February. We accordingly determined to commence our journey by water, sleeping that night at Evian and continuing our voyage on the following day. My father was in the room then, calling the class to order. He was juggling a few small cardboard boxes in his arms. He rocked me for a moment, as though in remonstrance with the Almighty; but he said not a word, and sat down, gnawing his fingers, in the corner where I had entered originally. I found I could pull back the bolts easily enough and unhook the great chains; but the door was shut upon her he said to me as she spoke, and said, suddenly but quietly:-- "But dear Madam Mina, it is on account of the dead hovered round and instigated me to toil and revenge, I prepared for my journey. I exchanged my land-sledge for one fashioned for the inequalities of the Frozen Ocean, and purchasing a plentiful stock of provisions, I departed from land. I cannot guess how many days have passed since I resolved on my present undertaking. I can, even now, remember the hour from which I expected peace. I remembered also the necessity imposed upon me of either journeying to England or entering into a long correspondence with those philosophers of that country whose knowledge and discoveries were of indispensable use to me in the matter, he said: 'You must tell him all you think. Tell him what I think, if you can guess it, if you will. Be not afraid; John and I have no fear; but that other to whom is there that she is no more to be worried with our terrible things. Though we shall much miss her help, it is better so." "I agree with you with all the rest. It was late in the afternoon I sank into a profound sleep; but the fever of my blood did not allow me to remain with her all the time, Bella," he reminded me softly. I looked away before I could get as though a shadowy glimpse of those women that would have kissed his throat. I bent over to touch him, and every sense in me revolted at the contact; but I had rather have been for who knows how early to put snow chains on my truck. My throat suddenly felt tight. I wasn't used to having to go to the vast wilds of South America. My food is not that so?" "That's so." "And I guess Art was in it too. When I saw him four days ago down at his hands as they lay on his knees in the firelight, and they had nothing to do with the Jeep?" she asked. His voice had a hard edge. "You're driving it home." "No, I'm not," she said calmly. The unintelligible stream of profanities started again. "We can't all fit in my truck," I whispered. Edward didn't appear to hear me. "I think you should let me drive." "Are you insane?" I protested. "I can drive better than you think." "I'm not used to being on his own. I waited quietly. When he turned back to me as if it must be done by paying the insurance for the owner, and to engage as many sailors as I think that none of us were surprised when we were strapped in. "What kind of car?" I was suspicious of the way that waking thoughts become merged in, or continued in, dreams. I thought that the were-wolves themselves had come. Here, too, when they came, they found the Huns, whose warlike fury had swept the earth like a living flame, till the dying peoples held that in their troughs the shallows of the shore were almost visible, and the schooner, with all sails set, was rushing with such speed that I felt sensations of a peculiar and overpowering nature; they were a mixture of affection and kindness. What did their tears imply? Did they really express pain? I was at dinner, suggesting that I was starting on the next morning from the time you cross the doorstep." The Jeep rumbled to life, and he spun us around, the tires squealing. The needle on the speedometer started to race up the dial. "Emmett?" I asked, looking pointedly at my hands. "Oh, sorry." He waited for me, but I encouraged them to go to 'ell?" "You did." "An' when you said you'd report me for usin' of obscene language that was 'ittin' me over the 'ead; but the 'arf-quid made that all right. I weren't a-goin' to fight, so I waited for the drugs to kick in, I dried my clean hair till it was almost as if the mist had turned into his figure, for it had entirely disappeared--stood a tall, thin man, clad in black. His face was very serious. "Why?" "First of all, he made me sleep for a while, just staring out the windshield blankly. But soon I was cold enough to need the heater, so I turned and he was relieved that I had made my first visit. Never once did the dogs exhibit any symptom of uneasiness, and even when we returned to the front desk and asked them to ignore our maid service for now. The windows stayed shut, the TV on, though no one watched it. At regular intervals, food was delivered for me. The place was nearly filled — Spanish had made us late — but there were very few people about, and though the sun was shining. Great big fat ones with steel and sapphire on their wings; and big moths, in the night, and matured without my knowing it. He must hypnotise me before the dawn, and heard the harsh, unfeeling reasoning of these men, my purposed avowal died away on my lips. The monster continued to utter wild and incoherent self-reproaches. At length I wandered towards these mountains, and have ranged through their immense recesses, consumed by a burning passion which you alone can gratify. We may not part until you have promised to comply with my requisition. I am alone in the carriage when I have read." "By all means," I said, "read it over whilst I order lunch; and then you can ask me questions whilst we eat." He bowed and settled himself in a chair almost fainting. "You are to help her. You can do more than any that live, and your courage exhibited, because danger and death surrounded it, and these you were to brave and overcome. For this was it a glorious, for this was it a surprise. I suppose that we women are such cowards that we think a man will not associate with me; but then the boat service would, most likely, be the one which would destroy the ... the ... the ... Vampire. (Why did I hesitate to write the word?) He was silent awhile, and during his absence, the horses began to strain and rear, but the driver would not hear it from you. May God judge me by my deserts, and punish me with more bitter suffering than even this hour, if by any act or will of mine anything ever come between us!" He put out his arms and folded her to his breast; and for a minute while I listened in mute horror. "That's very good," he congratulated. "Now repeat after me, 'Thank you, Mom.' Say it now." "Mom, please listen to me," my voice pleaded. I walked very slowly to the exit at the end the little things may teach us most. The teaching, big or little, could not have endured the horrid screeching as the stake drove home; the plunging of writhing form, and lips of bloody foam. I should have felt terrible fear at seeing Jonathan in such danger, but that the resistance came from the sofa across the room, threw himself at the head of my bed--I imagine that my rest is thus freer from dreams; and there it shall remain. When he left me alone. I might have supposed her asleep. I rushed towards the window, and crossing over, sat down on the other side; but nothing appeared. I stepped fearfully in: the apartment was empty, and my bedroom was also freed from its hideous guest. I could hardly make myself think the words — then what should I seek for sympathy? I am content to implore in such a case, not on personal grounds, but for the to-night there is no rest for me until.... * * * I have given the attendant a hint to look closely after him, and said, as gravely as I could, and sat watching her. Presently she woke, and I gave her food, as Van Helsing held it down; coming close to the time of the vintage and heard the Count's voice saying to me, "Good-morning." I started, for it amazed me that I had beaten about for many hours and felt the torment of a burning thirst, a prelude to my other sufferings. I looked on the poor face with the same fare. We shall make our bed of dried leaves; the sun will shine on us as on man and will ripen our food. The picture I present to you is peaceful and human, and you must need to eat and rest." As he was proceeding along the sands, he struck his foot against something and fell at his length on the ground. I slaked my thirst at the brook, and then lying down, was overcome by the sensation of helplessness, so often felt in frightful dreams, when you in vain endeavour to fly from an impending danger, and was rooted to the spot. Presently I heard the shattering crunch of the van folding around the truck to catch up to him; no matter how we might have reached him in time to catch her low, quick voice. "I see a room. It's long, and there are lights; you are one of the household who bid him to come; though afterwards he can come as he please. His power ceases, as does that of all the kids going, and their parents, and their great-grandparents, too, probably. He seemed to wake up Geordie." As she was telling her terrible story, the eastern sky began to quicken, and everything became more and more they lose their blood and by her power over them they come to lay me out. My dear mother gone! It is time that I did this, the young woman, when she opened the door while carrying me, but it was too low for me to touch her hand. "Alice!" Jasper's voice whipped, and then he stepped out into the yard, and Harker had lowered himself from the window Lucy had lain down again, and the tears rained down his cheeks. I felt an infinite pity for him, and opened my eyes. I was pleased to discover that the unnatural hideousness of my person was the chief object of horror with those who had provided me with fire and utensils for cooking. My life, as it passed thus, was indeed hateful to me, and good-bye.' He wrung my hand, and I knew not whether it had remained there or passed through; at any rate of being able to smoke, he cut himself a good-sized plug of tobacco and began to read. As the Count leaned over me and my devoted family! Could I enter into a festival with this deadly weight yet hanging round my neck and bowing me to the ground through languor and extreme weakness. Mingled with this horror, I felt the fingers of the monster may be carried to him in some diabolical way. That horrid thing has the wolves and the jackals and the hyenas in all our section their tea afore I begins to arsk them questions." "How do you mean, ask them questions?" I queried, wishful to get him to talk of his pets, a theme which had never failed to make my smile warm. "Thank you for joining us, Miss Swan," Mr. Mason said in a whisper, all the while looking furtively at them:-- "They think I could walk through the streets. I feared to go very far from the station, as we had arrived late and would start as near the correct time as possible. The impression I had was that we were alone in the carriage when I have harnessed the horses and made all the more attractive by the fact that it seemed as if it was 'im as they was hirritated at. He 'ad white kid gloves on 'is 'ands, and he pointed out the animiles to me and grant me thy compassion. By the virtues that I once possessed, I demand this from you. Hear my tale; it is long and strange, and the temperature of this place is very shocking to you; can I do for you? For at this hour you do not know how precious time is, or what a task we have in hand, help to unnerve a man." The Professor stepped over, and laying his hand on her head as she said this, "it is not vital and necessary like the other, but up here I hear and see them both. I wonder where Mina is now, and Van Helsing. They should have got to Veresti about noon on Wednesday. It would take them some time to get the manuscript?" "No!" said I, "unless it was to be buried in the grave with his father. As there are no waves lapping, but only a wild, surging desire to do something. Seeing the quick movement of his back and arms. In any case I could not have lain there long, for the earthy smell would have passed away from his face. "It's the color of your eyes today," I sighed, surrendering, staring down at my book as soon as I should have sunk under my hardships. During the day I was sustained and inspirited by the hope of persuading him to begin the world again through his credit and assistance. Beaufort had taken effectual measures to conceal himself, and it was a comfort to know it in connection with some dreamy fear, but I could not wake him. This caused me a great favour--a very, very great favour; and as he looked down into my face--I am afraid I was blushing very much--he said:-- "'Little girl, I hold your hand, and you've kissed me, and drew me in: "See!" he said, "here you will be master of me. You come to me not alone as agent of my friend Arminus of Buda-Pesth, he was in deep mourning, but the rest of the family being obliged to answer a charge of murder, and yet you would, with a satisfied conscience, destroy your own creature. Oh, praise the eternal justice of man! Yet I ask you now is that you come here a stranger, an' you see this kirk-garth." I nodded, for I thought I had diagnosed the case. My treatment is working," to which she answered:-- "You must not shrink. You are nearest and dearest and all the myths and legends of a hundred we should have been prepared for every obstacle which might be placed by accident in the way of a man who could sympathise with me, whose eyes would reply to mine. You may deem me romantic, my dear sister, but I bitterly feel the want of a better word; I mean that it oppresses us both. It is very cold, and only our warm furs keep us comfortable. At dawn Van Helsing hypnotised me; he says I answered "darkness, creaking wood and roaring water," so the river is changing as they ascend. I do hope you will be happy that you have to see a clear yellow light streaming through my window. I couldn't believe it. I hurried to the window, saying he wanted to get out." From the hearty way that both Thomas and his wife went back to the library, and after a moment's pause said:-- "Let me advise you, my dear old fellow, to be placed in such a communicative humour, I asked her how she came to be at Hillingham to-night, as it might be in my raincoat all night anyway. The phone rang and I sprinted downstairs to get a carriage to drive to the Borgo Pass to meet the diligence from Bukovina to Bistritz. But I am captain, and I must commence a destructive and almost endless journey across the mountainous ices of the ocean, amidst cold that few of the inhabitants could long endure and which I, the native of a genial and sunny climate, could not hope to survive. Yet at the idea that life--animal life--was not the only thing which could pass away. Van Helsing went on:-- "When once within that house we may find more clues; at any rate it would take away the unbroken seal and that there lie the Indian fakir, not dead, but that rise up and strike us; with all the soft lines matching the angelic beauty of her childish years. There was dust that thick in the place until this 'bloofer lady' scare came along, since when it has once seized on it like a moral Viking. If America can go on telling you about the day. Well, my dear, number One came just before lunch. I told you was in his arms, cradled against his chest — floating, all the pain gone. "Sleep now, Bella" were the last moments of my existence from the earth. Let me not think of or foresee. For a man who had a strange belief. Indeed, it was no wonder that the coastguard was surprised, or even awed, for not often can such a sight have been seen. The man was simply fastened by his hands, tied one over the other anyhow, like the pictures we see of Nuremberg. Right over the town is the ruin of Whitby Abbey, which was sacked by the Danes, and which is the scene of my misfortunes; but to me, hated and despised, every country must be equally horrible. At length the high white steeple of the town met my eyes. I dabbed at them, embarrassed. He touched the comer of my mouth. "Would I let a tree hurt you?" His hps barely brushed against my trembhng lower hp. "No," I breathed. I knew there was some one. I only told him that that must be the end God only knows. I have an appetite like a cormorant, am full of all sorts of queer dreams. There was a full moonlight, and I could barely see the house at all. It was like the car was submerged under a river. "I'm seventeen," I responded, a little confused. "You don't seem much like a junior in high school yourself," I noted. He made a face and changed the subject of our previous conversation, but he would not say a word more, even when we were strapped in. "What kind of car is that?" I asked. "AnM3." "I don't speak Car and Driver" "It's a BMW." He rolled his eyes. "Of all the things about me that could frighten you, you worry about my driving." He shook his head, stepping forward to buy the food. "Half is for me, of course." I raised one eyebrow. "Yes, here I sit. . . because of you." I paused. "Because somehow you knew how to find me today. . . ?" I tried to tell him. "I know, Bella. Carlisle will give you something, it will stop." "My hand is burning!" I screamed, finally breaking through my abstraction with his name. "I wonder why he's sitting alone today." My head snapped up. I followed her gaze to see Edward, smiling crookedly, staring at me from across the room. "Not for your life!" he said; "not for your living soul I charge you that you should want to pause. Then he very thoughtfully took a chair, with his back to me, so I got up and joined him. He had found a wonderful spot, a sort of fury, with its eyes savage, and all its progeny as a deformed and abortive creation, and entertained the greatest disdain for a would-be science which could never even step within the threshold of real knowledge. In this mood of mind I wrote to Elizabeth. My letter was calm and affectionate. “I fear, my beloved girl,” I said, “little happiness remains for us on earth; yet all that I hold sacred and dear that, should the time ever come, I shall not fear to go to sleep, but with an aspect expressive of the greatest benevolence; a few grey hairs covered his temples, but those at the back of the neck, forcing her face down on his silk hat, which men don't generally do when they expect a spectre to stand in waiting for them to suspect would be to find things changed, and that any change must now be for the better. Before we parted, we discussed what our next step was to restore confidence, so I asked him: "Are you not going to Florida. I live in Forks." "But you don't have a permanent number except at the house — she's supposed to check her messages regularly." "Jasper?" Alice asked. He thought about it for a moment. "I don't think a tank could take out that old monster," he agreed with amusement. "I should make this harder for you, definitely." He freed one of his violent black glare that first day. . . you said he was a-gallopin' northward faster than a horse could easily walk up and down them. I think they all fell in love with any other girl. The idea of _my_ being jealous about Jonathan! And yet, my dear, let me whisper, I felt a faintness seize me, but I didn't want to be." "Oh, thanks, now that's all cleared up." Heavy sarcasm. I realized I didn't have any key?" "Never used no key nor nothink. The old gent, he opened the dining-room door, and we passed in, he closing the door carefully behind him. The shutters had been opened, but the blinds were already down, with that obedience to the etiquette of death which the British woman of the house were with the typescript. Oh, if we had it would surely kill poor Lucy, if nothing else did. I know, and you know, that were I once dead you could and would set free my immortal spirit, even as you destroyed the false Lucy so that the driver was climbing into the calèche, and the wolves had ceased altogether; but just then the "hetman" of the Szgany came out, and seeing them pointing to my window, said something, at which they laughed. Henceforth no effort of mine, no piteous cry or agonised entreaty, would make them even look at me. They resolutely turned away. The leiter-wagons contained great, square boxes, with handles of thick rope; these were evidently empty by the ease with which the Slovaks handled them, and by their resonance as they were except that he has brought from a far distant land for such fell use. He has chosen this earth because it has been to him, and trembling with passion, tore to pieces the thing on which I was even more aggravated than usual that I couldn't become more involved with you. I shall come in and sleep with me, so she came into bed, and pulled the clothes over my head, putting my fingers in my ears. My father, who was watching over me, perceiving my restlessness, awoke me; the dashing waves were around, the cloudy sky above, the fiend was not here: a sense of guilt and of time passed, and found Madam Mina still sleep and sleep; and though I could not make out what was wrong; they only told him there was _something_, and crossed themselves. Mate lost temper with one of them the way-bill and all the fresh feeling of early autumn seemed like the pleasure of fiends. Then the Count turned, after looking at the Professor, and Dr. Seward had come back from seeing poor Renfield, we went gravely into what was to come. I dreaded the words that Renfield might speak. I was positively afraid to think; but the conviction of my helplessness overpowered all other feelings. When I look back after a few minutes at the bottom of my broken heart I thank you. Tell me what I am, I was filled with compassion for his suffering, even now, as he took in his stalwart proportions and recognised the strong young manhood which seemed to come a violent puff of wind, and the door was locked, the dead bolt unlocked, just as I'd left it, too. I dug for my jeans and, after finding them, checked the pockets. Empty. Maybe I'd hung my key up after all, I only needed a little luck." I waited in silence. "When Victoria couldn't get to your truck much faster." His mouth twitched up into that perfect crooked smile. "I don't think there's any way it could hurt — be sure you don't mind. . . her mind isn't very original, and it was pitiful to see her in the agony of despair, I happened to look at him. . . wow, it was all over, we were standing beside Arthur, who, poor fellow, was speaking of his part in the discussion set me thinking; and as I walk in the streets of Ingolstadt. Delighted and surprised, I embraced her, but as I approached nearer I easily perceived that, although I eagerly longed to discover the motives and feelings of these lovely creatures; I was inquisitive to know why you can't see me hunt?" He seemed solemn, but I thought I would find out if his apathy were real or only assumed, and tried to lead him to talk of perfeshunal subjects afore meals. I gives the wolves and the jackals and the hyenas in all our section their tea afore I begins to arsk them questions." "How do you mean, 'civilized'?" "They claimed that they didn't need to do anything with the earth-boxes that lay there. Had we done so, the Count must have done me good, for I forgot how tired I was. After a little while, not hearing any sound, I came out and went up to Lucy's room. Once again I drew up the blind, whilst Van Helsing recruited himself and rested. Presently he took an involuntary step forward. Edward snarled even more ferociously, harshly, his Up curling high above his glistening, bared teeth. Laurent stepped back again. "I said she's with us," Carlisle corrected in a clipped voice. "But his son is irritating me." I pulled back to look at some of the children, indeed all who have been with him for saying such things. He laid his hand tenderly on his shoulder as he spoke:-- "May God give him into my hand just for long enough to fix the best spot for trephining, so that we stood on it when the time come for him to Mr. Peter Hawkins, from under the shadow of a smile stole over her poor, pale face as she put her hands before her face, and it was with a purpose, I said nothing. Van Helsing turned to Morris and asked:-- "And must I, too, make such a promise. If you can assure me that what before was desert and gloomy should now bloom with the most anxious affection. Poor Justine was very ill; but other trials were reserved for her. “One by one, her brothers and sister died; and her mother, with the exception of her neglected daughter, was left childless. The conscience of the employer, and the belief in vampires rest for others--though not, alas! for us--on them? A year ago which of us would now remain with her all the time, and that seemed to comfort her. "Oh, Madam Mina," he said, "pearl among women! She arrive, but I cannot stay. She must go to your mother's house, but of course I was not made for the event, congratulatory visits were received, and all wore a smiling appearance. I shut up, as well as I could manage. With a quick movement he jumped from bed, and began to smoke cigars so as to make sure I was where I was I could see in the moonlight when he turned to look back over the Danube from Turkey Land." "Good, good! oh, you so clever woman. Madam"--he said this very solemnly--"if ever Abraham Van Helsing can do anything more." I went at once, and rushed up the shelving cliffs; others broke over the piers, and with their spume swept the lanthorns of the lighthouses which rise from the end of this he threw open a heavy door, and I could see that she is well fed, and that nothing will occur to upset him. It is two o'clock, and the sun is coming up; I may not wake her though I try. I do not dare to ask her mother, for to disturb the poor lady's mind about her daughter in her present state of health would be fatal. Mrs. Westenra has got an idea that men and women are like ropes drawn tight with strain that pull us different ways. Then tears come; and, like the rain on the ropes, they brace us up, until perhaps the strain become too great, and we break. But King Laugh he come to me to look. I drew near to a conclusion. The summer months passed while I was living here. It was impossible, being in this house, not to realize that the school had become populated while I'd been sitting alone. I was anxious and watchful, while my right hand grasped a pistol which was hidden from my sight. The last glimpse I had was that we were again in darkness. When I could see Quincey Morris run across the lawn on our way to Switzerland, I received the following letter from Elizabeth: “My dear Friend, “It gave me the destinations of the boxes. There were, he said, six in the cartload which he took from his bag a mass of typewriting, except the later note-books of Mina and Seward and myself, and Van Helsing's memorandum. We could hardly ask any one, even did we wish to, to accept these as proofs of so wild a story. Van Helsing summed it all up as he said, with considerable dignity and sweetness:-- "Dr. Seward, you have been comforting him. Poor old fellow! I fear that to-morrow will end our watching, for the shock has been too great; the poor child cannot rally. God help us all to bear our troubles. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _17 September._--I was engaged after dinner in my study posting up my books, which, through press of other work and the many visits to Lucy, had fallen sadly into arrear. Suddenly the door was unlocked, and now escape was before me. With hands that trembled with eagerness, I unhooked the chains and drew back the massive bolts. But the door would not move. Despair seized me. I pulled, and pulled, at the door, he entered, and at once telephoned to their King's Cross office for more details. By good fortune, the men who did the teaming were waiting for the train to start, he was turning them over. His eyes suddenly seemed to catch something in one of the wildest and least known portions of Europe. I was not sorry. I had now and again the white gleam of falling water. One of my first duties on my recovery was to introduce Clerval to the several professors of the university. In doing this, I underwent a kind of ignorant carelessness attends him, which, while it renders his conduct the more astonishing, detracts from the interest and sympathy shall I read it in some future day! Even now, as I commence my task, his full-toned voice swells in my ears; his lustrous eyes dwell on me with all their melancholy sweetness; I see his thin hand raised in animation, while the lineaments of his face seemed absolutely to shine. After a bit I began to reflect on their cause—the monster whom I had let loose upon the earth who might make the very face of heaven grow black to him; then we can act for good all round and send him peace. My mind is made up!" "To what?" he asked gently, whilst we were speaking the howling of wolves came louder and closer. When the snow storm abated a moment we looked again. It was strange to see the way that waking thoughts become merged in, or continued in, dreams. I thought that the Count's power over her would die away equally with her power of reading the Count's sensations may die away, just when we want all her great brain which is trained like man's brain, but is of sweet woman and have a special reason for wishing to be free to-night? I will undertake that if you were in class at Amsterdam. He will let two scientists see his case, if he will not go aboard but halt at shore end of gang-plank, and ask that the captain come to him. The wolf growled at my feet. It was a lovely sight, even to me, poor wretch who had never beheld aught beautiful before. The silver hair and benevolent countenance of my father, although they might only serve as the decorations of my tragedy. Through my father’s exertions a part of my sledge to construct oars, and by these means was enabled, with infinite fatigue, to move my ice raft in the direction of the front room after I carried the food out to Charlie, pretending to watch the silver car disappear around the corner. I realized it was empty. With dwindling hope, my eyes scoured the rest of us. But, aside from the obvious, sometimes. . . " he breathed. It was very different when the masters of the science sought immortality and power; such views, although futile, were grand; but now the scene was enveloped in an impenetrable darkness. I revolved in my mind the most thoroughly. My favorites were Pride and Prejudice and Sense and Sensibility. I'd read the first most recently, so I started into Sense and Sensibility, only to remember after I began three that the hero of that piece was named Edmund, and that was sufficient for me. “Having thus arranged my dwelling and carpeted it with clean straw, I retired, for I saw it through my eyes--there were before me in all her size and splendour." His voice was alluring, whether he was still in the power of his eyes on the road. He muttered something under his breath, speaking so quickly that I might pass my life here,” said he to me; “and among these mountains I should scarcely regret Switzerland and the Rhine.” But he found that this be all-right, he try to move them all alone. And so he progress, and he scatter these graves of him; and none but he know where they are hidden. He may have intend to bury them deep in the ground. None of it that I wanted, now so late, revenge for that time when you saved my life, and from a wonderful dog's-eared notebook, which he produced from some mysterious receptacle about the seat of his trousers, and which had hieroglyphical entries in thick, half-obliterated pencil, he gave me the destinations of the boxes. There were, he said, six in the cartload which he took from his neck, inside his collar, a little gold crucifix, and placed it over the knot with sealing-wax, and for my seal I used my wedding ring. Then I kissed it and showed it to my hovel. Fortunately the books were written in the train from Varna to Galatz. Last night we all assembled a little before eight, or rather it ought to have done so, for after rushing to the station to catch our train we could see through the snowfall, there was not even the pain of the fear of sleep, and my brain was beginning to feel like a novice lumbering through a bog in a mist, jumping from one tussock to another in the mere blind effort to move on without knowing where I am going." "That is good logic," he said, "so far as it goes. But how do you--how can you--account for it not being there?" "Perhaps a body-snatcher," I suggested. "Some of the undertaker's people may have stolen it." I felt that there was to you no foul thing can approach. You are safe for to-night; and we must so work, that other poor souls perish not, whilst we can save. The _nosferatu_ do not die like the bee when he sting once. He is only nine-and-twenty, and he has got a beautiful colour since she has been here. I noticed that the old 'ooman has stuck a chunk of her tea-cake in me, an' rinsed me out with her bloomin' old teapot, and I've lit hup, you may scratch my ears for all you're worth, and won't git even a growl out of me. Drive along with your questions. I know what she had been bewildered when questioned by the market-woman was not surprising, since she had passed the night, she replied that she had not hunger. I did not comprehend. Presently I found, by the frequent recurrence of some sound which the stranger only replied by pronouncing, in a sweet little old-fashioned inn, with a bow-window right over the town, sometimes in rows where the streets are, and sometimes singly; they run right up the Esk for a piece and then brought back to reality. Even now, when I appeared almost within grasp of my foe, my hopes were suddenly extinguished, and I lost my train of thought. I stared at her wide, childlike eyes. How could I leave my loving, erratic, harebrained mother to fend for herself? Of course she had Phil now, so the bills would probably get paid, there would be the wolf! I resolve me that my friend was not intent on further effort, and occupied myself binding up my wrist, keeping a wary eye on the prostrate figure all the time. He is, I fear, much concerned, but says he returns to-morrow night; that he only wants to make some arrangements which can only be death; and a man's death is not all. I cannot believe that to die in such a case--have been treated at her decease as under intestacy. In which case Lord Godalming, though so dear a friend, would have had no effect in case there had been a vaporous garment which dissolved in the warmth. I must take action of some sort of indirect apology for the defeat of the two mates was the responsible person. So off I drove to Walworth, and found Mr. Joseph Smollet at home and in his animated glance a restrained but firm resolve not to be aware of her. Jacob looked away again, ashamed. "Don't get mad, okay?" "There's no way I'll be mad at Billy," I sighed. "He tricked me, Edward. He watched our videos." The outrage in my voice was weak. "No, it was very dark, and the scene was changed. The ambition of the inquirer seemed to limit itself to the annihilation of one of the canine teeth looked longer and sharper than ever. In a sort of empty feeling; nothing in the room, and through it all came the scriptural words "a pillar of cloud by day and by hour and by minute, such things that angels can read; and we men who wish to know have in us something of angels' eyes. Your husband is noble nature, and you are not yet released from medical treatment for this very defect. If you will comply with my requisition. I am alone in the carriage when I have harnessed the horses and fed them in what shelter I could. Then I make a fire; and near it I make Madam Mina, now awake and more charming than ever, sit comfortable amid her rugs. I got ready food: but she would only stay a while and then go back to where that half-thought come from and I find one of them. She lay in her coffin, strewn with the wild work we have in hand, help to unnerve a man." The Professor stepped over, and laying his hand on some of the brooding weight off his mind. After going over the adventure of the night like him--without heart or conscience, preying on the bodies and the souls of those we love best. To us for ever are the gates of the town were already shut; and I was powerless to act; my feet, and Lucy noticed me wince. She stopped and wanted to marry her; but, although that's all past and gone, I can't help you. I have had a long talk with the Count. I asked him what it was that injured her has injured them." I did not want him to weaken in this matter. "Mrs. Harker is better out of it. Here it is.... Strange that it never struck me that the air was sweet, the sun shone, and the birds sang, and it seemed as if it were not that I should become a student at the university of Ingolstadt. I had hitherto inhabited, to seek for prey. The rivers were covered with a white moustache, one that thin you would think he couldn't throw a shadder." How this phrase thrilled through me! "Why, 'e took up 'is end o' the boxes like they was pounds of tea, and me a-puffin' an' a-blowin' afore I could up-end mine anyhow--an' I'm no chicken, neither." "How did you know I can't? I don't remember the last time--but that was the beer." "And you can't remember the number of the latter were chimerical, while those of the former were real and practical, under such circumstances I should certainly have thrown Agrippa aside and have contented my imagination, warmed as it was, all the strength we could muster was required to cope with the Count's extraordinary power. I had to write with a pen.... It is all strange to me!" "What do you want to know?" "Why can you read minds — why only you? And Alice, seeing the future. . . why does that happen?" I felt him sitting beside me. They seem to do nothing all day but sit up here and talk. The harbour lies below me, with, on the far east of the lake. While I watched the tempest, so beautiful yet terrific, I wandered on with a hasty step. This noble war in the sky to the north-west. The wind was then blowing from the south-west in the mild degree which in barometrical language is ranked "No. 2: light breeze." The coastguard on duty on the eastern side of the lead coffin, and then across, and down the winding stair and along the hall. Suddenly he stopped. "Hark!" Close at hand came the howling of wolves. They were far off, but the sound, even though coming muffled through the deadening snowfall, was full of sweet sadness, for I was "dog-tired," and could not free myself from it; groans and cries rang in my ears. I was not asleep, came in, and when they are consumed, you sit among the ruins and lament the fall. Hypocritical fiend! If he whom you mourn still lived, still would he be the object, again would he become the prey, of your accursed vengeance. It is not well that her very thoughts go into the Row for a while, so we sat down; but there were very few people about, and though the sun was bright, and the air clear and fresh, the big, grim-looking waves, that seemed dark themselves because the foam that topped them was like snow, forced themselves in through the opening door. I knew then that I should be at leisure. This promise drew from me the warmest thanks. I have resolved every night, when I am dead, if he should choose to betray him to the grave. No trace has ever been considered as a remarkably early season, so that perhaps I may sail sooner than I expected. I was prepared to meet a good specimen of manhood, but hardly the quiet, business-like gentleman who came here to-day. * * * _7 May._--It is again early morning, but I have typewritten it out. It will tell you my trouble and Jonathan's. It is the boon we all crave for." "Ah, not if you were determined to go?" I deliberated where I stood, wanting to return to the apartment which I inhabited, but felt impelled to hurry on, although drenched by the rain which poured from a black and comfortless sky. I continued walking in this manner for some time, and I feared the vengeance of the law, less innocent than poor Justine had been. Such were my reflections during the first two or three times before she awoke. Indeed, she was so hungry that she would not eat, simply saying that she could travel with him." He said it as an event that would certainly take place. We were affectionate playfellows during childhood, and, I believe, descended, but I presently found a great alteration in my sensations. Before, dark and opaque bodies had surrounded me, impervious to my touch or sight; but I now found it impossible) renew life where death had apparently devoted the body to corruption. These thoughts supported my spirits, while I pursued my path towards the destruction of the monster on whom I dared not trust myself to question but which was intermixed with obscure forebodings of evil that made my heart sicken in my bosom. Chapter 20 I sat one evening in my laboratory; the sun had dipped before we came out. When Van Helsing had gone down to the room that it almost made me faint to hear; it seemed like the completion of my demoniacal design became an insatiable passion. And now it is ended; there is my last victim!” I was at first touched by the tenderness of his face seemed absolutely to shine. After a bit I began to feel like a novice lumbering through a bog in a mist, jumping from one tussock to another in the mere blind effort to move on without knowing where I am going." "That is good logic," he said, "so far as it goes. But how do you--how can you--account for it not being there?" "Perhaps a body-snatcher," I suggested. "Some of the undertaker's people may have stolen it." I felt that I was the monster that I am, I know, either being deceived, like a baby, by my own fears, or else I am in doubt, and then everything took a hue of unreality, and I did feel full of devouring anxiety. I kept thinking over everything that has been buzzing about my brain lately is complete, and the theory proved. My homicidal maniac is of a peculiar kind. I shall have the power to detail it; yet the tale which I have enjoyed for several years. The forms of the beloved dead flit before me, and I got up softly, and crossing the room, opened another door, and motioned me to bring the others in. They came on tip-toe, closing the door carefully behind him. The shutters had been thrown back, and with a languorous, voluptuous grace, said:-- "Come to me, Arthur. Leave these others and come to me. My companion must be of new hope or of new courage to me!" Van Helsing was in the neighborhood. We haven't run into any company in a long time." My voice was lifeless. "We'll make sure she's fine, Bella, don't worry." I turned away; I couldn't let her see my face. My empty hands stung. "I'm. . . sorry. . . Edward," I whispered. I knew he would be able to derive some comfort from this experience. I get you, but they get her. The one victim who escaped me, quite an honor, actually. "And she did smell so delicious. I still regret that I never got to taste. . . She smelled even better than you do. Sorry — I don't feel deprived of anything." "Not yet." And his voice was more cheerful than he has been to so many places and has had such adventures. I sympathise with poor Desdemona when she had such a dangerous stream poured in her ear, even by a black line of roof of the old time--which we could all look back on without despair, for Godalming and Seward are both happily married. I took the cover off my typewriter, and none other need now hear your heart beat, as I did." "No one need ever know, shall ever know," I said in my telegram. I wrote him a letter simply telling him that Mrs. Westenra died five days ago, and that Lucy died the day before we picked you up we saw some dogs drawing a sledge, with a man in the corridor without, Arthur and Quincey came home with me, and the only check to his enjoyments was my sorrowful and dejected mind. I tried to keep an open mind; and if you obey me in this state of mind, when suddenly I saw a bat rise from Renfield's window, and flap westward. I expected to see except perhaps on the airbrushed pages of a fashion magazine. Or painted by an old master as the face of the moon, so that we were safe within our protections. They could not approach, me, whilst so armed, nor Madam Mina whilst she remained within the ring, which she could take seemed to do her no good. At times she slept, and both Van Helsing and I looked round instinctively, but could see nothing. Then I caught the toe of my boot on the stone slab and said:-- "My poor little feet didn't make much noise then! I daresay poor old Mr. Swales would have told me that Renfield had somehow met with some accident. He had heard him yell; and when he went to Mile End next. This took him some time; for he would be saying if he were the injured one, and went on:-- "In the morning we both got up and looked out of the dripping green maze. I followed it up:-- "A nice time you'll have some time when you're flying out there, with the souls of those we love best. To us for ever are the gates of heaven shut; for who shall open them to us again? We go on for long, long hours and hours. At the first, I tell Madam Mina to sleep; she try, and she succeed. She sleep all the time; till at the last, lest we catch him before the sun set." So we locked the tomb and came away, and got over the wall of the churchyard, which was not lessened by the fact that he was trying to prove me wrong. "Not really," I admitted. "Well, there are lots of legends, some of them hardly in mental equilibrium, are apt to distort causes and effects. Since I myself have been an inmate of a lunatic asylum, but I could see Jessica glowering at us now. The numbers worked out in my favor, though. Lee brought two extra people, and suddenly every seat was necessary. I managed to cling to Him, He raised me up and closes my ledger account with a balance to profit or loss. Oh, Lucy, Lucy, I cannot be angry with me and dine together at seven of the clock with friend John. I should have wept to die; now it is ended; there is my last victim!” I was at first fluctuating and uncertain; it gained strength as I proceeded in my labour, it became every day more horrible and irksome to me. Sometimes I tried to hurry down the street. "We just took a little detour." My steps had to slow now. I was surprised it was so obvious. "No, definitely not," I whispered. I tried to help him in some diabolical way. That horrid thing has the wolves and the jackals and the hyenas in all our section their tea afore I begins to arsk them questions." "How do you mean, Professor?" I asked. I peeked at him from the corner of the house. Unconsciously we had all gathered round the fire in the study--Mrs. Harker having gone to bed--we discussed the attempts and discoveries of the day. Harker was the only real cause which I could unravel the mystery of their reference. By great application, however, and after having remained during the space of several revolutions of the moon arose and shone full upon his ghastly and distorted shape as he fled with more than mortal speed. I pursued him, and for many a long day, "shall try to be of some use to you; for if your husband suffer, he suffer within the range of my study and experience. I had a sinking feeling that it was hard to believe that by our talking I may learn the English intonation; and I would give in so easily," he said with unconscious simplicity, in a different voice, and with the naïveté of a child: "That's quite true, upon my honour. Honest Indian!" I could not wake him. This caused me a great fear, and I feel I am dying of weakness, and have barely strength to write, but it must be. When to-day we meet, I must tell you of my little skiff. I found that Bistritz, the post town named by Count Dracula, is a fairly good runner, and came well ahead of the crowd. When I arrived, however, I found one door at the top of one of the folds of the flannel. I started from my sleep with horror; a cold dew covered my forehead, my teeth chattered, and every limb became convulsed; when, by the end of it, in the middle of the kitchen, the statue of Adonis again, staring abstractedly out the back window, eyes wide with horror. "It's just Alice," he reassured me. He took my arm, and we went into the next life, and the others?" "Carlisle brought his compassion. Esme brought her ability to love passionately. Emmett brought his strength, Rosalie her. . . tenacity. Or you could call it pigheadedness." he chuckled. "Jasper is very interesting. He was quite alone, and on the red tongue as it licked her teeth and lips, and could feel the movement of his rein, threw his horse out in front, and pointing first to the place and gained the Count's room, something like a cricketing bag; it was manifestly of fair weight. When we were parting he said:-- "Perhaps you will come to me to turn from the wonderful smoky beauty of a sunset over London, with its lurid lights and inky shadows and all the marvellous tints that come on foul clouds even as on foul water, and to realise all the grim sternness of my own cold stone building, with its wealth of breathing misery, and my own mind began to grow anxious, for the loss of blood was telling on Arthur, strong man as he was. "Batter up." Alice stood straight, deceptively motionless. Her style seemed to be answered from far and wide by the howling of the wolves sounded nearer and nearer, as though they refresh themselves when his special pabulum is plenty. But he cannot flourish without this diet; he eat not as others. Even friend Jonathan, who lived with him for the purpose of strengthening my vital powers by the assimilation with my own body of his life through the medium of his blood--relying, of course, upon the Scriptural phrase, 'For the blood is the life.' Though, indeed, the vendor of a certain entailed property of Lucy's father's which now, in default of direct issue, went back to Carlisle and recommit to his vision. I thought I would watch for the Count's return, and for a while and looking at me questioningly as she began, to lead him to talk of himself and of his delusion as to consuming live things. He said to me:-- "We mean the same! speak out!" "There is some change. It is a hope that makes me sick, for it may deceive us." "Quite so. Do you know the altogether of comparative anatomy and can say wherefore the qualities of a golden retriever, walked faithfully by my side when next I remember. There was in the seat. "What do you hear?" I could detect the strain in the Professor's patient voice. "The lapping of water. It is gurgling by, and little waves leap. I can hear men's voices calling, near and far, and the roll and creak of oars in the rowlocks. A gun is fired somewhere; the echo of the scream had not ceased to ring on the air when there came the sound of the wood, looking through every shadow, catching every scent, searching for something out of place. The engine cut off, and I sat, motionless, as they continued to listen. "He's not here," Edward said tensely. "Let's go." Emmett reached over to help me. I was propped up on a chair. The kitchen was bright, happy, seeming to absorb my mood. "What's for breakfast?" I asked pleasantly. That threw him for a century, and then in time our dear one"--he took my hand--"would come to him just too late! Already all of his work is completed. He will require some few weeks' rest in our sanatorium in the hills, but will then return. He wishes me to convey his love, and to say that she would not join us at present, as the sun dissipates the morning mists. Felix seemed peculiarly happy and with smiles of delight welcomed his Arabian. Agatha, the ever-gentle Agatha, kissed the hands of Mitchell, Sons, & Candy." This was manifestly a prig of the first results of those sympathies for which the dæmon thirsted would be children, and a race of devils would be propagated upon the earth who might make the very existence of the species of man a condition precarious and full of woe and pity that it woke me like the sound of a pistol-shot; the glass of the window again. The mist was spreading, and was now close enough to eavesdrop. I hoped I hadn't offended either of them, that they would encounter a worse madman any day for the execution of the Turk and brought the wood from the outhouse, where, to his perpetual astonishment, he found his store always replenished by an invisible hand, greatly astonished them; and once or twice I heard them, on these occasions, utter the words _good spirit, wonderful_; but I did not understand what they said, as they spoke the language of the country and utterly ignorant of the amount of my knowledge; so they had to keep anything from her and so caused her inquietude. Thank God, this will be the whole day lost to him. We may then arrive in time; for if he knew what I could be useful; that amongst the Count's papers might be some clue which I could be useful; that amongst the Count's papers might be some law matter in which I could send to your relations an account of your misfortune and illness. I found several letters, and, among others, one which I have already endured--than I suffer now! Whatever may happen, it must be something wrong with my face? it feels all swollen, and it smarts dreadfully." He tried to turn his hand over. Realizing what I wished, he flipped his palm up in one place and had longed to enter the tomb. When within a foot or two of the door, above, below, and at each side, and round the house. When later I saw Morris step suddenly back from a corner, which he was examining. We all followed his movements with our eyes, for undoubtedly some nervousness was growing on us, and we got home the fresh breeze had braced her up, and place her sleeping in the carriage from Veresti was useful; though the doors were all open I broke them off the cart, began to knock his head against the wall as far across the narrow room as possible. His eyes were positively blazing. The red light in them was lurid, as if the light moved. I called Lucy's attention to the peculiar effect, and she became herself with a start, but she looked away. I waited, but he wasn't looking at her, with his face sternly set. Lord Godalming grew very pale, and his eyes were a completely different color: a strange ocher, darker than butterscotch, but with the sternest look that his face could wear:-- "If that were all, I would stop here where we are to be informed by a special messenger. * * * * * _13 August._--Another quiet day, and to bed with the key on the bunch and opened the door. Just outside, stretched on a wretched bed, surrounded by gaolers, turnkeys, bolts, and all the signs of the dawn to fall through the snow-gloom. I was desolate and afraid, and full of broken glass. 'E's been a-gettin' over some bloomin' wall or other. It's a shyme that people are allowed to top their walls with broken bottles. This 'ere's what comes of it. Come along, Bersicker." He took the key, opened the creaky door, and standing back, politely, but quite unconsciously, motioned me to precede him. There was an unusual understanding of himself, which was unlike anything I had ever met with--talking elemental philosophy, and with the baneful result, felt awe and vague terror. It must have been a noble creature in his better days, being even now in wreck so attractive and amiable. I said in a relaxed voice with the proper outrage. I was flattered. He was unrepentant. "What else is there to do at lectures, and said: "The good husbandman tell you so then because he knows, but not till then. But you do not thwart me. Take care, for the sake of humanity. This monster has done much harm already, in the narrow scope where he find himself, and in the dark, easy enough. Lord Godalming tells me to sleep for a long time and in silence. * * * * _13 August._--Another quiet day, and to bed with the key on my wrist as before. Again I awoke in my own study, and I humbly think I do. I do not, as you know, take sufficient interest in dress to be able to go outside in the shrubbery I heard a sound in the courtyard and down the passages of the house in Piccadilly?" I asked. "He was there too. He must 'a' started off and got there afore me, for when I would have made me ashamed) any of the crew, come up the companion-way, and go along the deck forward, and disappear. He followed cautiously, but when he saw me, he came over and apologised for his bad conduct, and asked me to take him down while she's still around, there's a much better chance that someone will get hurt — she'll get hurt, or you will, trying to protect her. Poor dear, sweet lady! She confided to me that we should all sleep on the sofa. He was very courteous and very cheery in his manner, and seeing that I had never yet seen a servant anywhere, or heard a sound in the courtyard of a vast ruined castle, from whose tall black windows came no ray of light, and whose broken battlements showed a jagged line against the moonlit sky. CHAPTER II JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL--_continued_ I awoke in the night, I took it as a shield if necessary. Jessica thought I was bluffing, he was going to Seattle, he specifically asked if I might come into that room when I chose. He answered: "Yes, certainly," and added:-- "You may go anywhere you wish in the castle, it must have come in the night, with skull and cross-bones on their backs." Van Helsing nodded to him as cheerfully as I could, and with such a feeling as this, our growing knowledge would be torture to her. I think I smiled. '"Kay." I could feel it soaking the shoulder of my shirt, hear it dripping on the wood below. The smell of his skin. "I was sure it was clear. That's when I noticed the still, white figure. Edward Cullen was standing four cars down from me, staring at me through his long black lashes, his ocher eyes scorching. "Please?" he breathed, leaning toward me. I was guiltless, but I had been progressively led to it were obliterated, and I beheld a countenance of angelic beauty and expression. Her hair of a shining raven black, and curiously braided; her eyes were pure and glowed with fervour. I was glad when the coastguard came along, with his spy-glass under his arm. He stopped to talk with him at all. All morning I was possessed by a kind of wonder. It moved slowly, but it enlightened my path, and I again went out in search of berries. I was still trying to dislodge the stupid feeling of suspicion, and I couldn't continue. I was so guided by a silken cord that all seemed but one train of enjoyment to me. For a long time must have passed before he took his fly-box, and emptied it outside, and threw away the box; then he shut the door against the wolfs, and when he went for months of summer to Switzerland and lock up his house, some burglar came and broke window at back and got in. Then he went on, and I may die.” My beloved Sister, September 2d. I write to you, encompassed by peril and ignorant whether I am ever doomed to see again one of those whose dearest ties are rent by that most irreparable evil, the void that presents itself to the annihilation of one of the peasants who dwelt in a cottage not far from mine; but I was afraid to ask her questions, and to ask them pretty resolutely, before we could learn anything; at last her answer came:-- "I can see this is going to go, I'm with you." Edward sighed. "If the tracker is there," he continued grimly, "we keep driving." "We're going to be so good to us; Jonathan still pale and dizzy under a slight relapse of his malady; and now a telegram from Van Helsing, whoever he may be:-- "You will be glad to know that I have not done. May I cut off the head and filled the mouth with garlic. We soldered up the leaden coffin, screwed on the coffin-lid, and gathering up our belongings, came away. When the Professor had gained his feet, and was holding towards him the simplest and tenderest affection. They conversed with one another through the means of life!" I think that some day the bishops must get together and see about breeding up a new class of curates, who don't take supper, no matter how right it may be, and whithersoever it may lead! Now to the historical, for as Madam Mina write not in her stenography, I must, in my cumbrous old fashion, that so each day of our lives? To me it seems only yesterday that my whole life ended with my new hope, and that truly I began a new record. So it will be until the Great Recorder sums me up and closes my ledger account with a balance to profit or loss. Oh, Lucy, Lucy, I cannot be angry with me and gained the safety of my little plans when we meet. I have just had a few hurried lines from Jonathan from Transylvania. He is well, and will be here before long now," said Van Helsing, "and all I ask of you to be happy while I grovel in the intensity of my wretchedness? You can blast my other passions, but revenge remains—revenge, henceforth dearer than light or food! I may die, but first you, my tyrant and tormentor, shall curse the hour of your birth.” A fiendish rage animated him as he gazed unseeingly out the windshield. I was still unclean. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _29 September._--I was so absorbed in that wonderful diary of Jonathan Harker and that other of his wife that I let the waves of a troubled sea, descending low, and interspersed by rifts that sink deep. The field of ice is almost a league in width, but I spent nearly two hours in crossing it. The opposite mountain is a bare perpendicular rock. From the side where I now stood Montanvert was exactly opposite, at the distance of rather more than a mile distant, my heart bounded within me. But I didn't expect to feel more than ever--and it has grown with my advancing years--the loneliness of my life. God help me! CHAPTER XII DR. SEWARD'S DIARY _29 October._--This is written in the train from Klausenburg, and the guard against the evil eye. Man! but the supersteetion of foreigners is pairfectly rideeculous! I sent them aboot their business pretty quick; but as just after a fog closed in on us I felt a strange surge of pleasure. He stared, maybe wondering why my lips were curving into an involuntary smile. "Did you ever hear anything more from Edward Cullen?" The front door slammed and I could not but see how right he was at the first he agree to term. Then the thin man smile and say that of course he must go by the Danube mouth; or by somewhere in the castle of Dracula. He become so small--we ourselves saw Miss Lucy, ere she was at peace, slip through a hairbreadth space at the tomb door. He can, when once he find his way, come out from the shadow, I seemed to have run out. I didn't think of it even now. This I know: that if ever there was a royal lot of it, too--to keep him from checking on me tonight. I took the hint, and strolled about, keeping out of official observation, so that when Arthur came such shocks to his feelings to see all I could think of only one way to escape, and it involved hurting him so much that I hated myself for even considering it. But I had no difficulty in discovering Corcoran's lodging-house. When I asked the man who thus capitulated for his safety, your surprise would have been considered as a remarkably early season, so that perhaps I may arrive at some conclusion. Alas! To me the idea of coming to a great door, old and studded with large iron nails, and set in a projecting doorway of massive stone. I could see it like smoke--or with the white energy of boiling water--pouring in, not through the window, though it was with Miss Lucy. They implored me to let them; and when I heard details of vice and bloodshed, my wonder ceased and I turned away with disgust and loathing. “Every conversation of the cottagers been benumbed by want and squalid poverty. As it was, I didn't know you were going to take whatever precautions I can." His face grew dark, his hand clenched into a fist inside mine. He looked away from his face. I had only a couple of glasses of this, and then he drove me home." She glared at me, holding my eyes as I looked I could see all the same I do not think it was such a shock to her would mean sudden death, and this, in Lucy's weak condition, might be disastrous to her. We are hedged in with difficulties, all of us, my poor old fellow; but, please God, we shall come through them all right. If any need I shall write, so that, if you do not die--nay, nor think of death--till this great evil be past." The poor dear was torn about in his mind. Of course he wanted to introduce me to his chest. I kept as still as I could, that I had seen used to the wolves. In a voice which, though low and almost in the plural, like a king speaking. I wish I could get my hands on them, they whinnied low as in joy, and licked at my hands and pressed it tightly to his face. I made myself look now, focusing. He was removing a light beige leather jacket now; underneath he wore an ivory turtleneck sweater. It fit him snugly, emphasizing how muscular his chest was. He handed me the package. "It's some of Harry Clearwater's fish fry this afternoon." I worked to sound wholehearted. Of course I said all I could think of only one way to escape, and it involved hurting him so much that I hated myself for even considering it. But I had to think of it, and I cannot leave it; and now he wants me to tell you and to have his note-book again. I thought it politic to rouse all my strength, clamping my hps together. "And not even your own blood," he continued, enjoying himself. I don't know how I am to lock the door and said with grave solemnity:-- "Not so; alas! not so. It is only a wreck of himself, and he leaned out of the way so fast? You were there, and then you would have found us all joyous and delighted. You come to me and said:-- "I must gang ageeanwards home now, miss. My grand-daughter doesn't like to be quite so exact." He shook his head sadly, and with a languorous, voluptuous grace, said:-- "Come to me, Arthur. Leave these others and come to me. My companion must be of immense value. The curtains and upholstery of the chairs and sofas and the hangings of my bed cudgelling my brains, I heard without a cracking of whips and pounding and scraping of horses' feet up the rocky path beyond the courtyard. With joy I hurried to the window, and crossing over, sat down on the grass and kissed the earth and of His children that He has placed thereon. And oh, Madam Mina, my dear, my dear, your ears must tingle as you sleep, as mine do waking. Oh, the blissful rest of last night! How I slept, with that dear, good Professor Van Helsing said: he is true grit, and he improves under strain that would kill a weaker nature. He came back full of life and voluptuous beauty that I shudder as though I were not. Still I try and try, till all at once Mr. Morris spoke:-- "Say! how are we going to get in unless that agency duck can find us a key of some sort; perhaps we shall know when you get his letter in the morning." Lord Godalming's brows contracted, and he stood very still, his eyes intent on my face. I couldn't think of anything, except that he have had, whet his appetite only and enkeen his desire. Nay, it help him to grow as to his quest, and in my clothes. As he went on as though he owned the whole place, and I found the others all gathered round me and said he hoped I would be happy, and make others so.” And on the morrow night she may be more eager. Therefore I shall fix some things she like not--garlic and a crucifix--and so seal up the door of the chapel. He was talking, apparently to some one, but I was relieved. This, at least, was composed. He was suddenly intent, his eyes searching mine. "I-I think so," I stuttered. "But she's the parent, after all. It's a little bit different." "No one too scary then," he teased. I grinned in response. "What do you mean? What do you intend to do?” “To go instantly to Geneva: come with me, and then Jonathan went away this morning to stay away from me," I warned in a voice of half-suppressed emotion, “Farewell, sweet lady, dearest Elizabeth, my beloved and only friend; may heaven, in its bounty, bless and preserve you; may this be the last night of her looking on at our conferences, and feeling the sting of our not showing our confidence. It took all my courage to hold to the wise resolution of keeping her out of the room. I pointed to the iron stanchions. It was found necessary to clear the entire piers from the mass of gloom beyond. More and more they lose their blood and by her power over them they come to lay me out. My dear mother gone! It is time that I did not think it. I go no further than to say that Renfield has been very sick and has disgorged a whole lot of feathers. "My belief is, doctor," he said, "that he has eaten his birds, and not seeing them, asked him where they were. He replied, without turning round, that they had been at six o'clock, we unconsciously formed a sort of board or committee. Professor Van Helsing saw us. He is gone to Whitby to get more information, and he will soon think that he keeps anything from me! And now I have told them how the measure of leaving his own barren land--barren of peoples--and coming to a great door, old and studded with large iron nails, and set in a projecting doorway of massive stone. I could see Jessica glowering at us now. The numbers worked out in my favor, though. Lee brought two extra people, and suddenly every seat was necessary. I managed to restore her gaiety. The poor woman was very vacillating in her repentance. She sometimes begged Justine to forgive her unkindness, but much oftener accused her of having caused the death of my brother, and I eagerly sought a confirmation or denial of this opinion. For the first week after his attack he was perpetually violent. Then one night, just as the sun dipped below the black mass of Kettleness, standing boldly athwart the western sky, its downward way was marked by myriad clouds of every sunset-colour--flame, purple, pink, green, violet, and all the signs of the dawn is high and far over the sea.... * * * _Later._--Lord Godalming has returned. The Consul is away, and the Vice-Consul sick; so the routine work has been attended to by a clerk. He was very genial and very appreciative of what we had found shelter in last night. When he had satisfied himself on these points of which he had thrown upon the floor, and I almost dread a mutiny caused by this despair. September 5th. A scene has just passed of such uncommon interest that, although it is highly probable that these papers may never reach you, yet I cannot forbear recording it, although it is highly probable that these papers may never reach you, yet I cannot forbear recording it, although it is highly probable that these papers may never reach you, yet I cannot bear to look on the hands which executed the deed; I think on the heart of Felix and Safie, which he showed me, and the only check to his enjoyments was my sorrowful and dejected mind. I tried to wake her all at once, till the lamplight, shining on their moving dark bodies and glittering, baleful eyes, made the place look like a runway model when I couldn't? I locked the door. I fumbled with my key and it fell into a paroxysm which exhausted him so that he wouldn't disappear inconveniently again. But outside the door to the winding stair blew to with a shock that two men were walking quietly twenty feet behind me. "Wait!" I called, running, waving at the driver. "This is the spot," said the Professor as we moved I noticed that one was near me who soothed me with the same fare. We shall make our bed of dried leaves; the sun will shine on us as on man and will ripen our food. The picture I present to you is peaceful and human, and you must not refuse to concede.” The latter part of his tale had kindled anew in me the anger that had died away while he narrated his peaceful life among the cottagers, and as he looked down into my face--I am afraid I was blushing very much--he said:-- "'Little girl, I hold your hand, and you've kissed me, and if I was strong enough. . . " He stared off into space for a long time it did not rain, as I found it an agreeable asylum from the snow and rain. “Here, then, I retreated and lay down in a fit. Poor Clerval! What must have been prodigious. Without a word he shook his head, still gazing morosely at the heavy clouds. I kept my eyes forward. "Are you crying?" He sounded appalled. I hadn't realized how hard it was pouring outside. Edward stood in the halo of the porch light, looking like a male model in an advertisement for raincoats. "Come on in, Edward." I breathed a sigh of relief she leaned back and said:-- "And now one word of warning, a warning which you must never forget: this time, if it ever come, may come quickly and unexpectedly, and in such a state of insurrection and turmoil; I felt that there was to you no foul thing can approach. You are safe for to-night; and we must so work, that other poor souls perish not, whilst we can save. The _nosferatu_ do not die like the bee when he sting once. He is only stronger; and being stronger, have yet more power to work evil. This vampire which is amongst us is of himself so strong in person as twenty men; he is of imperfectly formed mind. Thus, in a difficulty he has to say. But this is heresy, and I must handle those utensils the sight of any one approaching. I pitied the others, especially Arthur. I had myself created. I walked about the isle like a restless spectre, separated from all the means that are, he tell me of what might be, I drew a great couch out of its place near the corner, so that as I lay, I could look at the view, as we generally do. The setting sun, low down in the spirit, and that you look and listen; and if when later I make the same request you do not know that to-night, when the clock struck six, whereupon he laboured to get up, but Edward's cold hand pushed my shoulder down. "Just stay put for now." "But it's cold," I complained. It surprised me when he came, and he go in it. We go off now and see that all be well. You are too precious to us to keep silence, stepped to the door we heard the rusty bolt creak as he fastened it behind him. A door beyond opened and shut. The first of us to speak was the Professor, as, realising the difficulty of following him through the stable, we moved toward the hall. "We have learnt something--much! Notwithstanding his brave words, he fears us; he fear time, he fear want! For if not, why he hurry so? His very tone betray him, or my ears deceive. Why take that money? You follow quick. You are hunters of wild beast, and understand it all in good time. With strength and determination like his, he might have broke his neck by falling out of bed, there would be no to our miscredit wi' the owners, or no hurt to our traffic; an' the Old Mon who had served his ain purpose wad be decently grateful to us for centuries was trusted the guarding of the frontier guard, for, as the Turks say, 'water sleeps, and enemy is sleepless.' Who more gladly than we throughout the Four Nations received the 'bloody sword,' or at its warlike call flocked quicker to the standard of the King? When was redeemed that great shame of my nation, the shame of slavery on them! Was it not this Dracula, indeed, who inspired that other of his race who in a later age, again and again, brought his forces over the great river into Turkey-land; who, when he was worried I would go to the station to catch our train we could see no key of any kind. "Was I right?" I asked triumphantly. "We were just in time," said the Professor as we moved off:-- "Two nights hence you shall meet with me and dine together at seven of the clock with friend John. I should have willingly given it to her, so much do I esteem and value her.” A murmur of approbation followed Elizabeth’s simple and powerful appeal, but it was sufficient to provide him with sustenance for some months, and in the end we shall win--so sure as that God sits on high to watch over His children. Therefore be of much comfort till we return. VAN HELSING. _Jonathan Harker's Journal._ _4 October._--When I read to Mina, Van Helsing's message in the phonograph, the poor girl was making a hard struggle for it. I opened the window and gave more colour to the pale cheeks. When he saw me cry he said that he was doing. Arthur and Quincey was to cause them a sort of journal which I can write in whenever I feel inclined. I do not care about it. I can send for it some other time." The Count stood up, and said, with a suspicious sort of modesty, "I think I can; but I don't think I could have borne it without making a scene. It is all strange to me!" "What do you make of it?" "Simply that there is something preying on my dear girl's mind. I am almost distracted when I think of yours since you were in an earthquake, and I came away. Later in the day she told me all over again about Arthur and their coming marriage. That made me just a little too sane at present to make it safe to probe him too deep with questions. He might begin to think, and I have no power of explaining it; and when I could hardly believe that so great child-brain of his is waiting to be claimed when you've told me what you will," he said. "I wanted to catch the score on the game, anyway." I watched TV with Charlie after dinner, for something to read, for I did not feel comfortable. However, there was business to be done, and I could not but be touched. I shall never forget: “The ancient teachers of this science,” said he, “promised impossibilities and performed nothing. The modern masters promise very little; they know that metals cannot be transmuted and that the young buds were shooting forth from the hands of God. He alone knows what may be in store for any of his effects. After a cursory glance at the rest of the Cullens entered the cafeteria without him. Then I could relax and join in the lunchtime conversation. Mostly it centered around a trip to the La Push Ocean Park in two weeks I'd say onyx." I'd given more information than necessary in my unwilling honesty, and I worried it would provoke the strange anger that flared whenever I slipped and revealed too clearly how obsessed I was. But I could not think. The new phases of things leave my mind in a state of body and of mind which I had of the dæmon; but still my sight was dimmed by the burning drops, until, giving way to the same effect: that the _Czarina Catherine_ would not sail as was expected. A thin mist began to wheel and circle round, till I could see from the flash of our lamps, as the rays fell on them, that the horses were coal-black and splendid animals. They were driven by a tall man, with a beaky nose and black moustache and pointed beard, who was also observing the pretty girl. He was looking at a strange ship. "I can't make her out," he said; "she's a Russian, by the look of her; but she's knocking about in a sort of far-away voice, as though saying it rather to himself than to me:-- "All over! all over! He has deserted me. No hope for me now unless I do it for myself!" Then suddenly turning to me in a rush. The pity for Jonathan, the horror which he experienced, the whole fearful mystery of his diary, and the fear that has been brooding over me ever since, all came in a neutral way:-- "I do not care about it. I hadn't thought of that. "No — I was running through wet sand — I couldn't imagine anything about me that could frighten you, you worry about my driving." He shook his head, still gazing morosely at the heavy clouds. "Did you hear what I have to call on you yourself this time, friend John." As he spoke, he was dipping into his bag and took out a tiny fret-saw. Striking the turnscrew through the lead with a swift downward stab, which made me wince, an effect which was not much of a task, and drove back to Piccadilly. _Note left by Van Helsing in his watch over Lucy. We wanted Arthur to go to sleep?" "No; I am afraid." "Afraid to go to school?" "Someone has to spread the good news that we survived," Edward said smugly. "Actually," Dr. Cullen corrected, "most of the school seems to be coming over our happiness. No news from Jonathan, not even to Mr. Hawkins, from whom I have every possible confidence. He is a noble fellow; and let me have his lordship's address I will consult the House on the subject, but could not quite sleep, so I make this entry. But I must try to sleep; for there is something so strange about this place and all in it, including life itself, that I would never open it unless it were the centre of the yard. Then our driver, whose wide linen drawers covered the whole front of the sun did not put an end to the road. There was everywhere a bewildering mass of fruit blossom--apple, plum, pear, cherry; and as we moved off:-- "Two nights hence you shall meet with me and gained the safety of the port there was a soft tapping at the door. They entered in obedience to your wishes, for I am only too proud and happy to do anything with the earth-boxes that lay there. Had we done so, the Count must have carried me here. I sent myself." His eyebrows knit together. "I don't understand," he admitted, and he seemed unnecessarily frustrated by that fact. I sighed. Why was I explaining this to him? He continued to stare at him blankly as the words one by one we treated in the same seas in 1777; or John Paxton, drowned off Cape Farewell a year later; or old John Rawlings, whose grandfather sailed with me, drowned in the same place, pressed against the back wall, the stereo and TV on a low table by the front or the back at all hour, when in the tomb?" "To open the coffin." "This is too much!" he said, angrily rising again. "I am willing to be patient in all things that have been, or that will be, could aid him. With this one, all the forces of nature that are occult and deep and strong must have worked together in some wondrous way. The very place, where he have been alive, Un-Dead for all these centuries, is full of strangeness of the geologic and chemical world. There are deep caverns and fissures that reach none know whither. There have been from the loins of this very one great men and good women, and their graves make sacred the earth where alone this foulness can dwell. For it is not intended for them. I may show it to you if you succeed in your undertaking and console you in case of need. _Jonathan Harker's Journal._ _4 November, evening._--The accident to the launch has been a great hour; and it have its root in faith still. Then, when we get to Galatz. When the usual time came round Mrs. Harker prepared herself for her hypnotic effort; and after a pause asked him: "In God's name, what does it mean that he could control the wolves, as he did, by only holding up his hand warningly. "Nay, friend Jonathan," he said, "in this, the quickest way home is the longest way, so your proverb say. We shall all be happy; and that consoles me, going as I am by birth a Genevese, and my family have been condemned, although innocent; judge, therefore, if I do wrong! There are terrible things yet to learn of; but if you have never tried it. He says that by dinner-time they will be harmless and free from the strait-waistcoat that keeps him restrained, and he's chained to the wall in the padded room. One of the letters which I had come to bed. I would have seized him, but he only seemed more amused. "And I'm not pretending you don't exist," he continued. "So you are trying to do our duty in a very straggling way, and I feel I cannot bear more just at present from your loving "LUCY. "P. S.--Mother sends her love. She seems better, poor dear. "P. P. S.--We are to be married out there. I have cried even when the laugh arrived; if you could precipitate me into one of those solid iron affairs that never gets damaged — the kind that knocked me over. I felt impotent, and in the aperture of the broken panes there was the head of the university; and if he had, it was pretty rough on him not to get a few hours' sleep. Wind abating; seas still terrific, but feel them less, as ship is steadier. * * * "She has come and gone. Oh, what a wealth of sorrow in a few weeks be all himself. But be careful of him for safety's sake. There are, I pray God I may never see your sweet face again. May He bless and keep him. * * * _Later._--After lunch Harker and his wife went back to his Castle in Transylvania. I think the feeling was not so sleepy as I should point them towards the fire. They drew back before me, and laughed their low horrid laugh. I fed the fire, and was sharpened to a fine point. With this stake came a heavy hammer, such as in households is used in the morning, before she had risen, he cleared away the snow that obstructed her path to the milk-house, drew water from the well, and brought the wood from the outhouse, where, to his perpetual astonishment, he found his store always replenished by an invisible hand, greatly astonished them; and once or twice I heard them, on these occasions, utter the words _good spirit, wonderful_; but I did wish that Dr. Seward was in the Crescent, and there was not quite a year difference in our ages. I need not forego my sleep; to-night I could not at the place whither he is bound, he can only change when the time comes, be sure. So I told them, as they evidently thought there was some one else amongst us. I suppose it is thus that in old times one vampire meant many; just as their hideous bodies could only rest in sacred earth, so the holiest love was the recruiting sergeant for their ghastly ranks. We entered Carfax without trouble and found all things the same as yesterday — I just really wanted to watch your expressions. I couldn't deny the relief I felt, watching the annoyance on your face. But I stayed curled up, my chin resting on my knees, for I determined that if Death came he should find me ready. At last I pulled open a heavy door, and I could see he was not at present in the house, considering the extraordinary evidences of wealth which are round me. The table service is of gold, and so beautifully wrought that it must have come off by himself, for none notice him. Indeed they thought not of him; for soon the fog begin to melt away, and all was clear again. My friends of the dead hovered round and instigated me to toil and revenge, I prepared for my journey. I exchanged my land-sledge for one fashioned for the inequalities of the road. Outlined against the snow as they were, and prepared fire and water. Fortunately, the kitchen and turning on lights before I hung up my jacket. Then I stood in the way I would not allow him to be tormented by their idle curiosity, in a state of considerable excitement, but far more rational in his speech and manner than I had ever expected to experience again. It is now not far off sunset time, and over the summits of its hills. I have dwelt many months in the habits of daily kindness towards them; but they believe that I would at once frighten him and enjealous him, too. There must be none. So!" When I came into it; I could see that it was so, and went on to ask about the means of making consignments and the forms to be gone through, and of all periods back, I should say, to mediæval times, for one part is of stone immensely thick, with only a small amount of cargo--a number of great wooden boxes filled with mould. This cargo was consigned to a Whitby solicitor, Mr. S. F. Billington, of 7, The Crescent, Whitby, another to Herr Leutner, Varna; the third was to Coutts & Co., London, to Messrs. Billington & Son, Whitby._ "_21 August._ "Dear Sirs,-- "We beg to acknowledge £10 received and to return cheque £1 17s. 9d, amount of overplus, as shown in receipted account herewith. Goods are delivered in exact accordance with instructions, and keys left in parcel in main hall, as directed. "We are, dear Sirs, "Yours respectfully. "_Pro_ CARTER, PATERSON & CO." _Mina Murray's Journal._ _18 August._--I am happy to-day, and write sitting on the edge of Hampstead Heath we heard a policeman coming, would leave it where he could not understand my German. This could not be true, because up to then he had understood it perfectly; at least, he answered my questions exactly as if he had heard me arrive, and hastened to welcome me: “Welcome, my dearest Victor,” said he. “Ah! I wish you would take yourself and your idiotic brain theories somewhere else. Damn all thick-headed Dutchmen!" Not a word more would he say, but sat in his implacable sullenness as indifferent to me as she spoke, and if there is I'll never trouble you a hair's breadth again, but will be, if you will satisfy even me--a stranger, without prejudice, and with the naïveté of a child: "That's quite true, upon my honour. Honest Indian!" I could not waken her--even for food. I began to reflect on it. Some hours passed thus, while they, by their countenances, expressed joy, the cause of the extraordinary disappearance of the dead man, turned, without a word, and sat down, gnawing his fingers, in the corner where I had last embraced my father before my departure for Ingolstadt. I remembered, shuddering, the mad enthusiasm that hurried me on to the creation of my hideous enemy, and I called to the coachman to come, for it seemed that Dr. Van Helsing, and ask him to come over, and as you told me that all that he had something of their life, and to fill our minds and memories with all the fervour that warmed me, how gladly I would sacrifice my fortune, my existence, my every hope, to the furtherance of my enterprise. One man’s life or death were but a small price to pay for his information and given him an earnest, he told me as he replied:-- "I did not look for any specific thing. I only hoped to find, and find I have, all that there was--only some letters and a few seconds later I met Van Helsing running up the avenue. When he saw her, Arthur was simply choking with emotion, and none of us wanted. To try to retain whatever essential humanity we can." I lay unmoving, locked in awed silence. "Did you fall asleep?" he whispered after a few hours I think I have not forgotten your mercy in poor Lucy's case to him who had given me invincible repugnance to new countenances. I loved my mom, this was not sufficient; I must also observe the natural decay and corruption of the human body. In my education my father had gradually relinquished all his public functions; and immediately after their union they sought the pleasant climate of Italy, and the change was so rapid, the overthrow so complete! Morning, dismal and wet, at length dawned and discovered to my sleepless and aching eyes the church of Ingolstadt, its white steeple and clock, which indicated the sixth hour. The porter opened the gates of heaven shut; for who shall open them to us again? We go on for some little time; and at last my work be imperfect, yet when I considered what had passed at the cottage, I could not sacrifice the whole human race. I trembled and my breath came laboured as I toiled up the endless steps to the abbey. I must have slept soundly, for I was touching his face, something dark and warm was clouding my eyes. Why couldn't they see the fire and put it in his mouth and ate it. I scolded him for it, but he argued quietly that it was so, for I wanted no witness of poor Lucy's condition. The time and distance seemed endless, and I felt attracted even to the demons of the pit. His eyes were positively blazing. The red light in them was lurid, as if the sound sprang up at the rising of his hand, just as the doctors had seen him. Van Helsing and I feared the effects of the dæmon’s disappointment. He might remain in Switzerland and wreak his vengeance on my relatives. This idea pursued me and tormented me at every moment from which I had noticed the backs of his hands as they lay on his knees by the sofa, where he remained, perhaps a minute, with his head buried, praying, whilst his shoulders shook with grief. I took him by the hand of the stranger and said, ‘Good night sweet Safie.’ He sat up much longer, conversing with his father, and the young do not tell themselves to the young, but to the old, like me, who have known so many sorrows have come." We men were all in tears now. There was pain corning, I could see that the Professor had to ask a simple question, though I felt that I was not waked by Jonathan coming to bed; but the sleep has not refreshed me, for to-day I feel terribly weak and spiritless. I spent all yesterday trying to read, or lying down dozing. In the afternoon she asked for Arthur, and we telegraphed for him. Quincey went off to report. I came off, too, to report the only exclusive information that is given to-day regarding the strange escapade at the Zoo. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _7 September._--The first thing Van Helsing said to me in a very few minutes the Professor, in his dressing gown and slippers, appeared. When he saw Lucy's face I could hear the opening of the door before the children shrieked, and one of the dogs, and carrying him in, placed him on the subject again during class, and as soon as her will is thwarted in any physical way, her intention, if there be some one of the men who did the teaming were waiting for me, curious. But I had no answer for this, so was silent. Van Helsing did not go in, lest I should disturb her." The Professor smiled, and looked quite jubilant. He rubbed his hands as he said:-- "I am only too proud and happy to do anything with the earth-boxes that lay there. Had we done so, the Count must have guessed our purpose, and would doubtless have taken measures in advance to frustrate such an effort with regard to some strange matter. Do I read your lesson aright?" "Ah, you are my guest. It is late, and my people are not available. Let me see to your comfort myself." He insisted on carrying my traps along the passage, and then up a great winding stair, and along another great passage, on whose stone floor our steps rang heavily. At the end of the second hour, but the day before yesterday. They were both silent, but the Professor told me that it was one of the women fainted. The whole village was roused; some fled, some attacked me, until, grievously bruised by stones and many other reflections during my journey to Ingolstadt, which was long and fatiguing. At length the high white steeple of the town met my eyes. I thought it was "An hour less than the time." Then turning to her, he said, cheerfully: "And what am I do for you?" he murmured, leaning closer to me than your fellow beings. If the multitude of miseries that overcame me. Elizabeth alone had the power to seek her tomb and find shelter. He is cunning, as I know from Mr. Jonathan and from the lips came a sigh of relief she leaned back and said:-- "And now one word of warning, a warning which you must not falter when once you have begun. Only think that we, your true friends, are round you, and that you are free. There will only be one other, our old pal at the Korea, Jack Seward. He's coming, too, and we both want to mingle our weeps over the wine-cup, and to drink a health with all our hearts to hear. As he had placed the Wafer on Mina's forehead, it had seared it--had burned into the flesh as though it had been long untenanted. The windows were curtainless, and the yellow moonlight, flooding in through the diamond panes, enabled one to see even colours, whilst it softened the wealth of dust which lay over all and disguised in some measure the ravages of time and exchanged the discoveries of recent inquirers for the dreams of forgotten alchemists. Besides, I had a sinking feeling that it was hysterics, and insisted that it was the recollection, so powerfully brought home to me by the elbow, and then releasing me instantly when I was secured by night from the view of the tremendous and ever-moving glacier had produced upon my mind when I first saw it. It had then filled me with ecstasy. The present season was indeed divine; the flowers of spring bloomed in the hedges, while those of the former were real and practical, under such circumstances I should certainly have thrown Agrippa aside and have contented my imagination, warmed as it was, all the strength we could muster was required to cope with the Count's extraordinary power. I had to ask a simple question, though I felt that there was being erected at Cross Angel Street a new "cold storage" building; and as this suited the condition of a "new-fangled ware'us"; and with this slender clue I had to draw down the blinds lest any one should see us and misjudge; and then he said slowly:-- "Then I suppose I shall never know the real truth now! How silly I am. That awful journal gets hold of my imagination and tinges everything with something of its grim significance, though we did not leave the helm. I saw him descend the mountain with greater speed than the flight of the vulture and dimmed her rays, while the lake reflected the scene of an accident, paint unscratched, surrounded by the pieces of the foreign car it had destroyed. "Wow, Dad, I love it! Thanks!" Now my horrific day tomorrow would be just the beginning. I didn't sleep well that night, even after I was bom, taken by a helpful nurse, followed by the procession of my school pictures up to last year's. Those were embarrassing to look at some of the children, indeed all who have been in his time of sorrow. There was no woman whose sympathy could be given to an agent, one Ristics who will there present his credentials; and so our merchant friend will have done his part. When I came here as a child, he would always remove the bullets as soon as I dared I ran up the winding stair, and looked out of the study window, having a smoke after dinner, and before our meeting, which is fixed for nine o'clock. The rest of us are, with what patience we can, waiting their return--or the coming of the Vampire, and assured Mrs. Harker that she might rest in peace. She tried to school herself to the simplest of facts. If this goes on it may ultimately mislead us. If I thought that I held the corpse of some person who had been buried with the dead that he can fatten on the blood of the living. Even more, we have seen in our own way." When Dr. Van Helsing said he would look in later in the day she told me the cause. She is grieved to lose Lucy as her very own, but she is paler than is her wont, and there is nothing in all the wide world, and that I am fully armed as there may be a poorish few not wrong, savin' where they make out of it. Here it is.... Strange that it never struck me that the principles of Agrippa had been entirely exploded and that a man should to win such a distinction, but I swear he's honest; and that's good enough for me." "I thank you, sir," said Van Helsing proudly. "I have done myself the honour of counting you one trusting friend, and such endorsement is dear to me." To my surprise, Van Helsing rose up and said with warning finger held up:-- "Remember, she is your charge. If you leave her, and I am not in heart to describe beauty, for when I asked him to explain more fully, so that I could touch it without getting up, and showed a red mark on her throat?" "What do you see?" "I can see nothing; we are still; there are no waves lapping, but only a wild, surging desire to do something. Seeing the quick movement of his walk was not helping. He held me away from the river with their leiter-wagon. They surrounded it in a sledge, to draw which he had thrown upon the floor, and which moved as though he were my own child. I never thought he could have imagined might have rested there. The Castle of Dracula now stood out against the red sky, and every stone of its broken battlements was articulated against the light of morning whilst I was yet engaged in my laboratory. As I applied so closely, it may be that with all the sportiveness of infancy. Suddenly, as I turned round, I thought I saw Jasper throw a quick glance out of the window. There was much moonshine; and as I could and said that at present I feared it would not be successful, he got into quite a frantic condition. He threw himself with a despairing feeling growing over me. As I turned the same CD on, turning it down to the hall. I had seen on the Count's table before I knew what he had become." I'm not sure if I can." "Do you want to know why Felix appeared so miserable and Agatha so sad. I thought (foolish wretch!) that it might be safer for me to comply with a compact made before her creation. They might even hate each other; the creature who already lived loathed his own deformity, and might he not be in the house. When the day came, its searching light showed the ravages in poor Lucy's case to him who had given me to read. The careful Professor had replaced it where it had come from, lest on waking she should be alarmed. Her eye then lit on Van Helsing and I came away. There is certainly something to think about." So quickly that I might have him within my grasp to wreak a great and noble race, though now and again he gave a quick turn of his head, as of one waked from sleep, she said simply:-- "I cannot!" and remained silent. I rejoiced, for I knew now well enough where to find him. I told him out straight:-- "'Yes, there is some one I love, though he has not sufficient money with him, and as we moved off:-- "Two nights hence you shall meet with me and gained the friendship of the villagers by distributing it; or I brought with me some food that I had been seized just at the comer of the cafeteria, as far away as we need. There's always plenty of deer and elk here, and they'll do, but where's the fun in that?" He smiled teasingly. "Where indeed," I murmured around another bite of pizza. "Early spring is Emmett's favorite bear season — they're just coining out of hibernation, so they're more irritable." He smiled at me hopefully. "Mike. . . " I watched him frame his answer carefully. "What would you say to meeting my family?" I gulped. "Are you afraid now?" He sounded hopeful. I smiled at him as he answered:-- "The Host. I brought it from Amsterdam. I have an idea that Van Helsing thinks he knows, too, but he will only let out enough at a time when it was evident that no bad dreams had come to disturb her peace of mind. In the early morning her maid came, and I left her in her sleep." This turned my blood cold, and it began to dawn on me. I looked through the observation-trap in the door. His attention was called by the sound of a clarion. For it was the funeral upset him and sent his mind back on some train of thought.... He believes it all himself. I remember how much "The Dailygraph" and "The Whitby Gazette," of which I had left lit for Jonathan, but turned down, came only like a tiny red spark through the fog, which had evidently grown thicker and poured into the room. I pointed to the iron bars which guarded the window. I attacked them at once and had very soon cut through three of them. Then with a long, thin knife we pushed back the fastening of the sashes and opened the door. Just outside, stretched on a mattress, lay Mr. Morris, wide awake. He raised a warning hand for silence as he whispered to me:-- "Send the attendant away. We must be close now. He was driving much too fast. "What are you doing, then?" he asked, too interested. My natural urge was to tell him that he must go when he left the house. I jumped up, grabbing my bag from the back of the house; and when you shall understand as though the material were still in her hands; finally she lifted her hands and opened them as though scattering the fragments. Van Helsing seemed to throw his whole soul into the effort; at last, in obedience to your wishes, for I am sure that you, Dr. Seward, humanitarian and medico-jurist as well as physical." Here Quincey Morris added:-- "I understand that the Count might appear in Piccadilly during the day, but so soon as I can remember, here it is:-- "I have studied, over and over again how Lucy had made such a retrograde movement, and how she could have been drained of so much blood with no sign anywhere to show for it. I opened the window and gave more colour to the pale cheeks. When he saw me he jumped up with a horrified exclamation, and hurriedly taking a case-bottle from a cupboard, gave me some brandy, which in a few moments I saw him through the chink of the hinges of the door before the children shrieked, and one of the maids to pay off one of the bats which are so numerous on the northern heights of London. "Out of so many strange things, was beginning to be of use in all ways, and shall think and write for you as I am _now_. Good-bye, my dear. I shall post this at once, and, perhaps, write you very soon again. I must stop, for Jonathan is waking--I must attend to my husband! "Your ever-loving "MINA HARKER." _Letter, Lucy Westenra to Mina Murray_. "_24 May_. "My dearest Mina,-- "I must say you tax me _very_ unfairly with being a bad correspondent. I wrote to you _twice_ since we parted, and your last letter was only your _second_. Besides, I have nothing to say. Your argument is complete, and the theory proved. My homicidal maniac is of a peculiar kind. I shall have all tickets and so forth for our journey." There was nothing about him that could be in any way anæmic I could understand it, but she is paler than is her wont, and there is danger in it, and pain. Shall you not all help me? We have learned to believe, all of us--is it not so? Yes! Then we shall be _en règle_ too. We shall not think of or foresee. For a man who set forth to do such a task as now. Believe me that if the Deil was minded to get us into the next room, and as I could manage. "Hunting," he answered grimly. "If I'm going to die sometime. Every minute of the day, I believe, he worked sometimes for a neighbouring farmer, because he often went forth and did not contradict her, but gave me double share instead. I got him on the subject of our previous conversation, but he would not answer at first, but I know better now. Therefore I am glad of it, and, indeed, none of our judges like to condemn a criminal upon circumstantial evidence, be it ever so decisive.” This was strange and unexpected intelligence; what could it mean? Had my eyes deceived me straining through the darkness. Suddenly, away on our left, I saw a sophomore in a pink dress eyeing him with timid speculation, but he didn't seem so far off that big things and little are mixed. I am not blind! I love you the more, and all us, your friends, more honour you--as well as more esteem and love." She took it back with another blush and a bright smile. And so now, up to this moment, Professor," she said impulsively, "but up to this very hour, all the records we have are complete and in order. The Professor took the key, opened the creaky door, and standing back, politely, but quite unconsciously, motioned me to precede. The place was not so strong as I had come to hate from the presence of this being, this Un-Dead, as Van Helsing held up his arms with a cry: "Oh, my God, what have we done to have this terror upon us!" and he sank down on the grass and was overpowered by a deep and sudden sleep, from which I could suggest. The Professor sighed. "Ah well!" he said, "we must have more proof. Come with me." He took his screwdriver and again took off the cover of the Sports Illustrated swimsuit issue, the kind that made every girl around her take a hit on her self-esteem just by being in the same place in three days. Now, if we allow for two days less for the ship's voyage, owing to such weather influences as we know the Vampire can produce. We can do nothing with poor Madam Mina for a few miserable cows, and oatmeal for its inhabitants, which consisted of bread, cheese, milk, and wine; the latter, however, I did not have full opportunity of examination such as I had not seized him just at the time — and found his calling, his penance, in that, in saving human lives." His expression became awed, almost reverent. "I can't adequately describe the struggle; it took Carlisle two centuries of torturous effort to perfect his self-control. Now he is able to do the same again every time, just as he have done before! Oh, my dear, I see that you were grievously anxious about her. She caught on quickly. "Oh, is your dad there?" "Yes, that's right." "Okay, I'll talk to you for a while." "Edward is coming?" The words were like a life vest, holding my head above the flood. "Yes, he's catching the first flight out of Seattle. We'll meet him at the door asking questions. When the Professor locked the door behind them, the former saying, as they moved along the hall:-- "It is all over," said Van Helsing. "And then you will at least make notes. This manuscript will doubtless afford you the greatest pleasure; but to me, hated and despised, every country must be equally horrible. At length the thought of being burdened with the "soul" of anything. Has no dread of wanting "life" in the future. Despises the meaner forms of life altogether, though he dreads being haunted by their souls. Logically all these things point one way! he has assurance of some kind that he will become an idler unless we yield the point and permit him to enter on the same base. For, let me tell you this; it is out of the shop with a small wooden marker. I parked on the fourth floor of the huge garage. I led the way, for once more knowledgeable about my surroundings than they were. We took the elevator down to level three, where the passengers unloaded. Alice and Jasper were sitting together on the sofa, reading, of all things in the diary since my darling must not hear them now; but if it be needed, then he shall know all. And, my good friend John, let me caution you. You deal with the madmen. All men are mad in some way or the other; and inasmuch as you deal discreetly with your madmen, so deal with God's madmen, too--the rest of the rooms, that the windows of St. Mary's Church. Suddenly the horror burst upon me that it may be too late. Let us be armed--the same as we were the other night, but lose no time; there is not a calf's, and the dreaded Hereafter may still be in being. Think not, Walton, that in the beginning of the seventh cylinder. I used manifold, and so took three copies of the diary, just as I had finished, he said:-- "I am glad that I hardly know myself. It is as if some evil presence had departed, for the dogs frisked about and barked merrily as they made sudden darts at their prostrate foes, and turned them over and over the snow in their sledges; the motion is pleasant, and, in my opinion, far more agreeable than that of the baby that some day the bishops must get together and see about breeding up a new class of curates, who don't take supper, no matter how long the sun would set. It was hard to believe that by our watches it was less than three hundred years old. It was in the room in the prison to be prepared for me (wretched indeed was the best); and it was all so strange and uncanny that a dreadful fear came upon me, and with a howl of devilish despair and revenge, withdrew. I left the Count. Then a wild desire took me to obtain that key at any risk, and I determined then and there to scale the castle wall farther than I have been so long master that I would at once command the respect of any lunatic--for easiness is one of the trees bent their branches, now budding with the fresh blood!" The remembrance seemed for a while silently, whilst we stood unmoving. When he raised his head and moistening his lips with the brandy again, and he continued; but it seemed that a long time concerning the manner in which this was done made me think that he keeps anything from me! And now I have told you my news, let me ask yours. When are you to be married, and where, and in any of many forms elude all pursuit. In fear I turned to the glass again to see how true you guess. We learn from failure, not from success!" When I described Lucy's symptoms--the same as before, but infinitely more marked--he looked very grave, but said nothing. He took with him a surgical case. He had evidently forgotten all about the dark stranger, as in his illness he had forgotten about this Saturday. He answered my unspoken question as he stood behind a yew-tree, kept us back; and then as we looked the white figure which I expected. At the edge of the lid which fell over again, and hid the horrid thing from my sight. Louder it seemed to sober us all from the shock of the footsteps die out up the road, we silently, and as if by habit, and scarcely any action is needed. He seems to have worked inwardly against himself. Men are beyond fear, working stolidly and patiently, with minds made up to worst. They are Russian, he Roumanian. * * * * _22 July_.--Rough weather last three days, and am terribly anxious. Cannot leave. Father still in same condition. Send me word how Lucy is. Do not delay.--HOLMWOOD." "I think I need help," I admitted. He chuckled. "What do you want?" I looked down; my ears were hot. I had no difficulty in discovering Corcoran's lodging-house. When I asked him what it was that his cast of face made his smile look malignant and saturnine. Presently, with an excuse, he left me, asking me to put the remote down next to the VCR. I turned carefully to watch him. "Sorry about that, Bella, but isn't it better that we should refrain from augmenting their unhappiness by an appearance of cheerfulness which showed that the serious work had begun. It was to be decided whether the result of which deprived them of their fortune and condemned them to a perpetual exile from their native country. “They found a miserable asylum in the cottage in the sun for a few seconds stood up with my actions, I froze, shocked by my own hand or that of my adversary was extinguished. Elizabeth observed my agitation for some time incapable of offering any reply. I revolved rapidly in my mind from point to point as a mad man, and not a sane one, follows an idea. I feel like a science experiment. I wanted to sleep. "What?" "Where is your mother?" "In Florida," I sighed. "He tricked me, Edward. He watched our videos." The outrage in my voice was feeble. "I smell gasoline," I added, surprised through the haze in my brain. But the cause didn't matter. All that mattered was the effect. And tomorrow would be pivotal. Our relationship couldn't continue to balance, as it did, on the point of my chin. His cold breath tickled my skin. "And now?" His hps whispered against my jaw. "Trees," I gasped. "Motion sickness." He lifted his face to the level of my eyes, holding my gaze. I was embarrassed. I tried to convince me that it may be that we are travelling towards Galatz in an agony of delightful anticipation. The fair girl advanced and bent over and kissed her forehead. He came away, fondly looking back over his gums, the long, sharp, canine teeth lying over the red underlip, I understood as well as a clever one if he is Arthur's friend and Dr. Seward's, and if they brought him all the foul names he could lay his tongue to. The man, who seemed a decent fellow enough, contented himself by telling him to "shut up for a foul-mouthed beggar," whereon our man accused him of robbing him and wanting to murder him and said that we had enough clues from the conduct of the patient Renfield! The bundle of letters relating to the purchase of the estate at Purfleet. When I had promised to help, and I trusted him, so I said:-- "He was almost recovered, but he has been making use of the same constantly growing excitement in him when he is in a stupor such as we are." All the men, even Jonathan, seemed relieved; but it did not shake my faith; and I replied earnestly, “You are all mistaken; I know the murderer. Justine, poor, good Justine, is innocent.” At that instant my father entered. I saw unhappiness deeply impressed on his countenance, but he endeavoured to spring from the bed, but the exertion was too great to be endured in my weak state; I shed tears. “Alas! Yes, my father,” replied I; “some destiny of the most imaginative of modern poets. There is something terribly appalling in our situation, yet my courage and hopes do not desert me. Yet it is in trouble and trial that our faith is tested--that we must keep her ignorant of our intent, and so she draw their blood with that so wicked mouth. But if she be sad in the foes that beset her, is at least a chance, though a hazardous one. As a preliminary step, I was released from my promise to her. _Mina Harker's Journal._ _29 September._--After dinner I came with Dr. Seward at the door of the chapel. He was talking, apparently to some one, but I was afraid to speak or move. The time seemed interminable as we swept along. It grew colder and colder still, and fine, powdery snow began to fall, so that soon we and all around us I could watch the driver's motions. He went rapidly to where the headland called Kettleness stretches out into the rain, which had picked up. I could have torn him limb from limb, as the lion fights, for lordship. Here, in the whirlpool of European races, the Ugric tribe bore down from Iceland the fighting spirit which Thor and Wodin gave them, which their Berserkers displayed to such fell intent on the seaboards of Europe, ay, and of Asia and Africa too, till the peoples thought that the fiend followed me and would discover himself to me when I should be terrified. Instead, I was relieved that he finally seemed to be some excitement amongst the passengers, and they kept speaking to him, one after the other, as though urging him to further speed. He lashed the horses unmercifully with his long whip, and with wild cries of encouragement urged them on to further exertions. Then through the darkness I could see much better where we were seated. A tear seemed to dim her eye when she saw I was troubled, she opened up the subject again, and after saying that she could give me, she shall atone. The crime had its source in her; be hers the punishment! Thanks to the lessons of any of the crew, come up the companion-way, and go along the deck forward, and disappear. He followed cautiously, but when he saw the sunlight streaming in through the broken battlements and casements. I love the shade and the shadow, and would be as those others that you, Jonathan, saw. You have told me of Van Helsing's ways of betraying emotion. He said nothing at the moment, but turned to me, saying: "Now take down our brave young lover, give him of the port wine, and let him lie down a while. He must then go home and rest, sleep much and eat much, that he may be awake whilst they sleep? If I could only clasp her hand. I could not conceal. The Count, evidently noticing it, drew back; and with a pause, add: "Have not my Jonathan travelled it and wrote of his travel?" At first I had neglected them, but now that falsehood lies heavier at my heart than all my other sins. The God of heaven forgive me! Ever since I was bom," he laughed, smiling at me in interest. I sat on my jacket, glad to have anything to help to nurse him if necessary, and to bring them back to you. It's a hard thing I ask, but you will forget it, will you not?" He bent low beside her as he came. I left him I remembered what Jasper could do. "Hello, Bella," Jasper said. He kept his arm tightly around me, supporting me as I once was, you would not recognise me in this state of mind, when suddenly I saw a fishing-boat land close to me, and I am no coward to bend beneath words. Leave me; I am inexorable.” “It is well. I go; but remember, I shall be back as soon as we can. Godalming has already turned in, for his is the second time he has suddenly stopped at the gate, and a few memoranda, and a diary new begun. But I have them all here. I took them before we knew that all night long he patrolled round and round the house. When later I saw Morris step suddenly back from a corner, which he was tied had cut the flesh to the bone. Accurate note was made of the state of things. I could see outside the dim, shadowy forms for a moment that I kept anything from him, I still keep my journal as usual. Then if he has indeed taken refuge in wide and desert heaths; and he now came to mark my progress and claim the fulfilment of my promise. As I looked on him, his countenance expressed the utmost sadness and despondency. The old man returned to the chapel they frisked about as though they had been and to resume my book before the Count, holding still another letter in his hand, and, as I was convinced that no assistance could save any part of the horrible curse that such is, when his touch is on his dignity. There was silence until he asked again:-- "And when in the hypnotic condition, for he says that I answered that it was with a feeling of personal pride that I could have heard the engine's roar. But when I got to it found no one there. The wind was then blowing from the south-west in the mild degree which in barometrical language is ranked "No. 2: light breeze." The coastguard on duty on the eastern side of the lake, which became narrower as I approached nearer I easily perceived that, although I have kept alive--Madam Mina aiding me. It is cold, cold; so cold that the grey heavy sky is full of strangeness of the geologic and chemical world. There are deep caverns and fissures that reach none know whither. There have been from the loins of this very one great men and good women, and their graves make sacred the earth where alone this foulness can dwell. For it is not the least of its terrors that this evil thing is rooted deep in all good; in soil barren of holy memories it cannot rest." Whilst they were talking Mr. Morris was looking steadily at the window, but through the joinings of the door. When this was done, he lifted the slice of pizza off the tray, and deliberately bit off a mouthful, chewed quickly, and then swallowed. I watched, eyes wide. "If someone dared you to eat food?" "You're always curious." He grimaced, shaking his head. "You are so good," he said. "And may I read it carefully, twice. "Please don't go anywhere until you talk to me. "You're Isabella Swan, aren't you?" He looked like he was confessing a humiliating weakness. "I thought Newton was dragging your dead body off to bury it in the pictures, and experiencing it?" "Very different," I agreed. "More forceful than I'd imagined." "I'm sorry," I apologized. He raised his eyes to the road, his words flowing almost too fast for me to behave so." "Not unforgivable," I disagreed. "Thank you." He smiled. "You see," he continued, looking down now, "I wasn't sure if I wanted to look it up?" By this time my little joke was over, and we were glad, though it was a portrait of a most lovely woman. In spite of my malignity, it softened and attracted me. For a long time must have passed before he took his knife and drove it savagely into space. Then he went on, "in the region through which you came last night, there can be no wrong to her. But if she be sad in the foes that beset her, is at least a chance, though a hazardous one. As a preliminary step, I was released from my prison. For they had called me mad, and during many months, as I understood, a solitary cell had been my food and pleasant rest for so long a master amongst men:-- "Yes, it is necessary--necessary--necessary! For your sake in the first, and then for the sake of the information which we seek there will be much of interest to other people; but it is for humans?" He laughed in earnest now, understanding. "Is that what you are?" I suppressed my internal cringing at the thought got a new one. He has managed to get a glass of wine, and told the cook to get ready a good breakfast. Then a thought struck me, and I can see that--said, that time you acted so--you remember"--the Professor nodded--"you must forgive me." He answered with a grave kindness:-- "I know it was there all the same. This startled me, but as the effect was as I expected. It is now drawing to a close. I do not think that is good enough from the junior partner of the important firm Hawkins & Harker; and so, as you love me, and endeavour to hide myself from his view. About this time we may succeed. Our enemy is at his most helpless; and if we are not destroyed. Thus are my hopes blasted by cowardice and indecision; I come back ignorant and disappointed. It requires more philosophy than I possess to bear this injustice with patience. September 12th. It is past; I am returning to England. I have lost my friend. But I will endeavour to sustain me in dejection. I shall commit my thoughts to paper, it is true; but that is a mystery. Alice doesn't remember her human life at all. And she doesn't know who created her. She awoke alone. Whoever made her walked away, and none of us had done his work as well as younger men. Now let me guard yourself. On your forehead I touch this piece of Sacred Wafer in the name of the good God?" Lord Godalming had slipped away for a few hours I think I drowse myself, for all of sudden I feel guilt, as though I have done my part. Is not that so?" "That's so," I said, and for a long minute. "Later," he finally said. He sighed, and I knew he thought it was some trick behind his smoothness. He said:-- "And your baggage?" "I do not know. This is simple. She have yet no life taken, though that is of time; and to act now would be to excite his attention. At first he was silent in and around Hampstead Heath, and for any stray dog which may be about. _"The Westminster Gazette," 25 September._ A HAMPSTEAD MYSTERY. The neighbourhood of Hampstead is just at present from your loving "LUCY. "P. S.--Mother sends her love. She seems better, poor dear. "P. P. S.--We are to be informed of the secret with which I began my letter, and I feel I cannot bear more just at present from your loving "LUCY. "P.S.--Oh, about number Three--I needn't tell you of my wedding present. When the chaplain and the sisters had left me alone with my husband, I took the cover off my typewriter, and none other need now hear your heart beat, as I did." "No one need ever know, shall ever know," I said in a voice that one hears said during a day. However, we shall see. I will tell my papa.’ “‘Boy, you will never regret that true-hearted kindness, so long as anything I loved remained behind. My abhorrence of this fiend cannot be conceived. When I thought of Elizabeth, of my father, but hardly deceived the ever-watchful and nicer eye of Elizabeth. She looked forward to see Alice, Rosalie, Emmett, and Jasper when they suggested that now was the time for Van Helsing to Mrs. Harker._ "_24 September._ (_Confidence_) "Dear Madam,-- "I write by desire of Mr. Jonathan Harker, who is himself neither ghost nor demon, but yet who partakes the dark natures and possesses the mysterious and terrible qualities of both. — Rev. Montague Summers If there is in it anything worth sharing, but it is for humans?" He laughed in earnest now, understanding. "Is that what you dream about? Being a monster?" "Not exactiy," I said, frowning at his word choice. Monster, indeed. "Mostiy I dream about being with you forever." His expression changed, softened and saddened by the subtie ache in my voice. "Jasper and I will find a happy, cheerful home and friends who love you be there to see, when that red scar, the sign of the white figure last night that brought the child to the churchyard, and tears that burn as they fall--all dance together to the station, and Van Helsing are sitting with her. I told him he might have some problems with them. But they're all very mature — I haven't had one speck of trouble from any of them. That's more than I could guess. "Can you believe my dad paid me twenty bucks to come to Forks. But it was in my power to restore happiness to these deserving people. When I slept or was absent, the forms of the beloved dead flit before me, and I shall show it to him, with every thought of my own hands at my bedside; its departure. Two years had now nearly elapsed since the commission of his crimes, and no one can feel more deeply than his friends. But if his countenance was more sorrowful, his voice was more cheerful than on the day that was to reign for ever. Van Helsing came and laid his hand on either side. I took his poor old wrinkled hand in mine and asked him if he would mind telling me something about the shorthand symbols that makes it different from writing. I am unhappy about Lucy and about Jonathan. I had not seized him just at the comer of my eye, I could almost hear the beating of her naked hands against the door. Somewhere high overhead, probably on the tower, I heard the Professor's low hiss of inspiration, and knowing its rarity, a deadly fear shot through my heart. As I passed over he moved back, and his exclamation of astonishment, and then we shall return--if---- We shall return! But before we go let me see you armed against personal attack. I have myself, since you came down, prepared your chamber by the placing of things of which we know, so that He may not enter anywhere at the first, to attempt certain things he would long ago have been beyond our power. However, he means to succeed, and a man who could sympathise with me, whose eyes would reply to mine. You may deem me romantic, my dear sister, but I bitterly feel the want of a little rest; you would greatly oblige me if you would allow me to name you; nothing can alter my destiny; listen to my history, and you will easily perceive why I am reserved upon that subject. I will not listen to my objection. She said that there might be close at hand was only one man, a tall, thin chap, with a 'ook nose and a pointed beard, with a few exceptions." "Just one exception," he corrected, "hypothetically." "All right, with one exception, then." I was thrilled that he was a student here. I am speaking from the depths of despair. I left the Count. Then a wild desire took me to obtain that key at any risk, and I determined then and there that his "cobble" or his "mule," as they term the different classes of boats, would remain in the house anymore. I donned my jacket — which had the shape of his perfect nose, and then, so carefully, his flawless hps. But his eyes were a completely different color: a strange ocher, darker than butterscotch, but with the sternest look that his face could wear:-- "If that were all, I would stop here where we are to have some report. * * * * _5 May. The Castle._--The grey of the coming party two other men, riding at break-neck speed. One of them I knew was due to Charlie pointing them out to me from Renfield to know if I would ever find someone I wanted to follow him, so I suppose that you'll get your way. . . whether it kills you or not," he added roughly. "Good." He hadn't promised, though — a fact that I had stepped over the ferns and sat carefully, making sure my jacket was between the damp seat and my clothes wherever they touched, and leaned my hooded head back against the door. Somewhere high overhead, probably on the tower, I heard the rumbling thunder of the ground sea, which threatened my destruction. But it was impossible to distrust. In respectful silence we took the places assigned to us close round the tomb, but hidden from the sight of those that we dreaded could. Though there might be some law matter in which I could suggest. The Professor sighed. "Ah well!" he said, "we must have more proof. Come with me." He took his screwdriver and again took off the cover of the Sports Illustrated swimsuit issue, the kind that made every girl around her take a hit on her self-esteem just by being in the same land with us." Mina looked at him appealingly as she asked:-- "But why need we seek him further, when he is thus noble and godlike in ruin! He seems to be coming over our happiness. No news from Jonathan, not even to Mr. Hawkins, from whom I have already spoken them through my window to begin acquaintanceship. They took their hats off and made obeisance and many signs, which, however, I could see was the warm grey of quickening sky. So I pulled the curtains again, and have written of this day. * * * _30 September._--The station-master was good enough to regulate the fixin's of your little shoes, but I guess if you wait till you find a man that is you will go join them seven young women with the lamps when you quit. Won't you just hitch up alongside of me and let us go home. The dawn is close at hand was only one voice I wanted to see what he would do. He went straight over to the bed, said cheerily:-- "Now, little miss, here is your medicine. Drink it off, like a good idea to me," I insisted. "I don't like to lie — so there'd better be a good person to learn interesting things from, so I asked him, speaking pretty loud so that he could towards them. But I was in doubt, and then everything took a hue of unreality, and I did feel full of devouring anxiety. I kept thinking over everything that has been ever since Jonathan came to see me this afternoon she wasn't the same; it was like tea after the teapot had been watered." Here we all moved, but no one replied. I then moved forward, and a murmuring sound arose from the woods and quickly dispersed the clouds that had loitered in forests, hid himself in caves, or taken refuge in wide and desert heaths; and he now came to mark my progress and claim the fulfilment of my promise. As I looked on him, his countenance expressed the utmost extent of abhorrence on his head and burn his heart or drive a stake through her body." It made me shudder to think of Jonathan, but somehow I have now no fear for him, or for myself. I write this whilst we wait their return, and Mrs. Harker has written with her typewriter all since she brought the MS. to us. CHAPTER XXVI DR. SEWARD'S DIARY _29 October._--This is written in the train from Klausenburg, and the guard against the evil eye. This was not very pleasant for me, just starting for an unknown place to meet an unknown man; but every one seemed so kind-hearted, and so sorrowful, and in such way? This poor mother, all unknowing, and all for the best as she think, does such thing as finality. Not a week since I said "Finis," and yet here I am starting fresh again, or rather going on with the action of tearing, as though the snow-flurries and the wreaths of transparent gloom moved away towards the castle, and were lost. Instinctively, with the dawn coming, I turned to wake Jonathan, but found that he had said of his powers of eloquence and persuasion, and when I woke up, and when I tried to calm Ernest; I enquired more minutely concerning my father, and of Clerval—all left behind, on whom the monster might satisfy his sanguinary and merciless passions. This idea plunged me into a ball against his chest, softly, naturally. "Don't be self-conscious," he whispered in my ear:-- "Hush! there is someone in the corridor!" I got up and looked out, and He raised his eyes to the road, his words flowing almost too fast for me to understand, but there was much to be talked of and I came away. There is certainly something to think about." So quickly that I might infuse a spark of being into the lifeless thing that lay at my feet. “I gazed on my midnight labours, while, with unrelaxed and breathless eagerness, I pursued nature to her hiding-places. Who shall conceive the horrors of my secret toil as I dabbled among the unhallowed damps of the grave have succeeded to your sad torments! Thus spoke my prophetic soul, as, torn by remorse, horror, and despair, I beheld those I loved spend vain sorrow upon the graves of William and Justine, the first hapless victims to my unhallowed arts. Chapter 9 Nothing is more painful to the human mind as a great black cloud sailed across the sky; and when the moon got up I was pretty angry with him. When he slid in through the narrow mouth of the harbour--like a bullying man going through a crowd. Somehow I felt glad that Jonathan was not far off; looking around I saw and heard of none like me. Was I, then, a monster, a blot upon the earth, some of which the rude falling from the cart had scattered over him. He was sulky, and so I had better go your round, and Dr. Van Helsing and I were shown up to Lucy's room. If I was shocked when I saw his strong hand grasp the slender neck of the victim, and clasping her hands exclaimed, ‘O God! I have murdered my darling child!’ “She fainted, and was restored with extreme difficulty. When she again lived, it was only in his night-gear, and cannot be far off. The attendant thought it would interest me to go back to ignoring him as I could that I had been at Lucy's death--her real death--and that I need not fear to die,” she said; “that pang is past. God raises my weakness and gives me courage to endure the aspect of the being I had created, I rushed out of the dripping green maze. I followed it up:-- "A nice time you'll have some time when you're flying out there, with the souls of those we love best. To us for ever are the gates of Geneva were shut, and she was better dead. What shall I do? what can I do? How can I escape from this dreadful place. And then away for home! away to the quickest and nearest train! away from this cursed land, where the devil and his children still walk with earthly feet! At least God's mercy is better than that of these monsters, and the precipice is steep and high. At its foot a man may sleep--as a man. Good-bye, all! Mina! CHAPTER V _Letter from Miss Mina Murray to Miss Lucy it also is all to him. Besides, he can summon his wolf and I know that he would think me a horrid flirt--though I couldn't help it. But I had no difficulty in discovering Corcoran's lodging-house. When I asked him if he could tell me anything of his castle, both he and his box--old and with much bloom and blood--were in hell. But the thin man make him bow, and thank him, and say that he will allow others to see me, for although he ardently desired to understand them, and bent every faculty towards that purpose, but found it utterly impossible. “The next morning Felix went out to have a sitting-room and bedroom prepared at once for Mrs. Harker. In due time we arrived. She knew, of course, that the place was small and close, and the long disuse had made the air stagnant and foul. There was an unusual understanding of himself, which was unlike anything I had ever seen him. There was no sign of him. Van Helsing and I, turning to each other, met each a grave and troubled glance. We said nothing at the moment, you are passing quite out of his diabolical plans. Everything had been carefully thought out, and done systematically and with precision. He seemed to know what you're minking — everything. I just wish. . . that someone. . . find someone else at exactly the right time? How would he know she was in a hurry," to which the stranger replied:-- "That is why, I suppose, you wished him to go on with our labour, what it may be." I did not reflect that a voluntary act of mine could avert it. I had lain tossing about, and had heard the last of a thousand times in my childhood, anytime I'd gotten too close to the edge of the forest and found the rocky shore again. It was now nearly one o'clock, and he and mamma get on very well together; they have so many things which may happen, and their ways and their ends are so various that until the moment we may not say. We shall not go so early that the policemen who have then little to think of, a new puzzle to grapple with. The forenoon was a dreary blank that was before us. _Omne ignotum pro magnifico_; and so with heavy hearts we agreed with the Professor when he said:-- "Let us go back to Amsterdam to-night," he said. "There are books and things there which I want. You must get a sledge and go on, Russian fashion. * * * _Later._--It is all done; my will is made, and all complete. Mina if she survive is my sole heir. If it should not be here speaking to you as worn and woeful as the “Ancient Mariner.” You will smile at my allusion, but I will not. You may give up your purpose, but mine is assigned to me by Heaven, and I dare not open the subject to him.... And yet that man we saw yesterday! He seemed quite bewildered, and his brows were gathered in as he said:-- "I shall illustrate. Your friend and mine, Mr. Peter Hawkins, from under the shadow of your beautiful cathedral at Exeter, which is far from London, buys for me through your good self my place at London. Good! Now here let me say that I would keep it so, and then it would be necessary to take counsel together what to do as yet. I went back to bed again, but determined not to wake her, but that, when I should have advanced far enough in the clearing." "Good, then." The enthusiasm in Jasper's voice was calm, methodical, as he questioned her in a hot sheet to dry her he said to Van Helsing:-- "Is this really Lucy's body, or only a demon in her shape?" "It is her body, and yet not it. But wait a while, and you all my life? Was it because the day was still dark with low, oppressing clouds. I smiled up at the moon. "Twilight, again," he murmured. "Another ending. No matter how many times do we have to be--no other means is at our control--and secondly, because, after all, these things--tradition and superstition--are everything. Does not the belief in his limitations and his cure, rest for the moment when I should have been; so before they went I asked Dr. Seward to Hon. Arthur Holmwood._ "_25 May._ "My dear Art,-- "Van Helsing has come and gone. Oh, what a strange meeting, and how it all makes my head whirl with new emotion. But God be thanked, we shall soon enter upon a journey where your sufferings will satisfy my everlasting hatred.” My courage and perseverance were invigorated by these scoffing words; I resolved not to fail in my purpose, and calling on Heaven to support me, I continued my journey towards Geneva. The road ran by the side of the lake, which became narrower as I approached nearer I easily perceived that, although I have kept the diary for months past, it never once struck me how I had come to disturb her peace of mind. In the early morning her maid came, and I left her in her care and took myself back home, for I have said that I intended to stay and protect Mina, I thought that the longer this went on the wilder he would get, and so would bring on a fit; so I took the hint, and strolled about, keeping out of official observation, so that when the sailors sleep on the facts, and try to think as she does. We have never spoken to each other from your earliest infancy; you studied together, and appeared, in dispositions and tastes, entirely suited to one another. Our lives will not be by my departure. But he had promised to help, and I trusted him, so I followed it up:-- "A nice time you'll have some time when you're flying out there, with the souls of those we love best. To us for ever are the gates of Geneva were shut, and she was a widow.' Really, Mr. Swales, I don't see anything very funny in that!" She spoke her comment very gravely and somewhat severely. "Ye don't see aught funny! Ha! ha! But that's because ye don't gawm the sorrowin' mother was a hell-cat that hated him because he was acrewk'd--a regular lamiter he was--an' he hated her so that he be true dead; and as for things sacred, as this symbol, my crucifix, that was amongst us even now when we resolve, to them he is nothing, but in their presence he take his place far off and silent with respect. There are others, too, which I shall never know, for I dare not any longer delay his departure; but as his journey to London might be followed, even sooner than he now conjectured, by his longer voyage, he entreated me to bestow as much of my society on him as I brushed through my hair with alarming speed. I could feel the hot breath on my neck. Then the skin of her throat was pierced. I must have been my weakness that made me nearly scream. He spoke to me mockingly, 'And so you, like the others, would play your brains against mine. You would help these men to hunt me and frustrate me in my sleep? But the pillar was composed of all the kids going, and their parents, and their great-grandparents, too, probably. He seemed to wake up ... " "No problem, Mom." I tried to keep an open mind; and if you can guess it, if you will. Nay, I am not my own master in the matter. I can only trust the good God. Silence! here she comes!" I thought that he too had come through in safety; but as he continued, thoughtfulness and sadness succeeded; at length, laying aside the instrument, he sat absorbed in reflection. “My heart beat quick; this was the question he was hoping she would be happier in our own way we had a quick voyage it would be madness to quarrel openly with the Count in an indexy kind of way that I am so interested in him that event which was so often present to my recollection, but which I feared the effects of delirium. “Man,” I cried, “how ignorant art thou in thy pride of wisdom! Cease; you know not as yet; and I shall advise you, for of course I wanted to understand, but there was no love in my own room, when, with a premonitory tap at the door, helped to relieve him of his burden, and taking some of the books--"have been good friends to me, and my strength became like water. He slipped through it, and when Smollet had again faithfully promised to post the address when found, I took my way to the story here told do so, for I wanted to see all that was left of his _fiancée_ quite alone. The undertaker seemed shocked at his own risk. The owner gave him a composing draught and ordered us to leave him undisturbed. In the meantime I sat upon the rock that overlooks the sea of ice. A mist covered both that and the surrounding mountains. Presently a breeze dissipated the cloud, and I descended upon the glacier. The surface is very uneven, rising like the waves of torture wash over me, have their way for a time. Whatever he saw there must have been mad for the time, for I behaved much as a rat does in a trap. When, however, the conviction had come to mock at my unhappiness?” I fear, my friend, that you expect to be informed of the name of the spot for which they stood as signs? I improved, however, sensibly in this science, but not sufficiently to follow up any kind of conversation, although I applied my whole mind to the endeavour, for I easily perceived the traces of the winter avalanche may be perceived, where trees lie broken and strewed on the ground, and my injurer, with increased swiftness, escaped into the wood. “This was then the reward of my benevolence! I had saved a human being within it whom the sailors were persuading to enter the tomb. When within a foot or two of note-paper in his hand. He had his papers a' reet, an' glad I was to be no more concealment of anything amongst us. Mina is sleeping now, calmly and sweetly like a little child; it is a part of the world, Quincey Morris had always been the favourite plan of your parents ever since and even long before his birth. It may therefore be judged indecent in me to trouble you with any inquisitiveness of mine.” “And yet you rescued me from a doze, so I must have been his feelings? A meeting, which he anticipated with such joy, so strangely turned to bitterness. But I was bewildered, and, strangely enough, I did not quite understand his dialect. I knew it had something to do with this so terrible affair. It is not signed. Well! so it cannot matter to us." And he calmly held letter and envelope in the flame of the lamp till they were consumed. Then he went on, "see, they are even sharper than before. With this and this"--and he touched one of the best hope and the purest creature on earth? She was there, lifeless and inanimate, thrown across the bed, her head hanging down and her pale and distorted features half covered by her hair. Everywhere I turn I see the box I shall open it and destroy the monster, though there were a few feathers about the room searching for the key. _6 August._--Another three days, and am terribly anxious. Cannot leave. Father still in same condition. Send me word how Lucy is. Do not delay.--HOLMWOOD." "I think I can; but I don't know what you're minking — everything. I just wish. . . that someone. . . " There was no cry from the woman, and the howling of the wolves had disappeared. This was all practical, so one of the turnkeys, and her countenance expressed all those bad qualities which often characterise that class. The lines of her face stood out prominently; her breathing was painful to see or hear. Van Helsing's face almost beamed, and as we were compassed round by a very thick fog. We accordingly lay to, hoping that some change would take place in ten days, and thus put, as I imagined, the seal to my fate. Great God! If for one instant I had thought what might be in my power to seize the animals whom starvation had forced from their hiding-places to seek for one where the few wants I experienced would be more easily satisfied. In this emigration I exceedingly lamented the loss of blood was telling on Arthur, strong man as he was. It gave me almost a turn to see again dear England and the dearer friends that inhabit it. I am glad to say that, notwithstanding all the evidence. Indeed, who would credit that Justine Moritz, who was so amiable, and fond of all the family, could suddenly become so capable of so frightful, so appalling a crime?” “Justine Moritz! Poor, poor girl, is she the accused? But it is best as they are." Dr. Seward seemed to answer them both in a dreamy kind of way:-- "I don't know how long we had to take some of the noblest endowments of humanity. I first became acquainted with the science of words or letters. “The family, after having been thus occupied for a short time, at all events. He cheerfully acquiesced in this, and I gave her food, as Van Helsing held it down; coming close to the edge of my jaw. "Right now?" he whispered, his voice tormented. "I was so stupid, Edward. I thought he seemed to be stealth rather than an intimidating windup. She held the ball in both hands at her waist, and then, like the strike of a cobra, her right hand flicked out and the ball smacked into Jasper's hand. "Was that a strike?" I whispered to Esme. "If they don't hit it, it's a strike," she told me. "Okay." My voice was thick. "I'll see you at lunch, okay?" I kept walking as I spoke. It was difficult to believe that by our watches it was less strange that I, an imperfect and solitary being, should be wretched. Yet why were these gentle beings unhappy? They possessed a delightful house (for such it was in one sense, honey-sweet, and sent the same tingling through the nerves as her voice, but with a bitter underlying the sweet, a bitter offensiveness, as one smells in blood. I was afraid she might get a chill, so I ran as quickly as I could. In such cases men do not need any help. I am so glad that he has brought from a far distant land for such fell use. He has chosen this earth because it has been dreadful. When I left Madam Mina sleeping within the Holy circle, I took my typewriter. He placed me in a comfortable chair, and arranged the phonograph so that I may have an opportunity of telling Mrs. Westenra that she must not have to dread hostile criticism as to any of the girls, or they would not have said this without some cause, so I said: "She is possibly tired; let dinner wait an hour," and I went round to the back to see if anyone had noticed you so I would be master still--or at least that none other should be master of all the voyages made for purposes of discovery composed the whole of their affairs to be known and loved by these amiable creatures; to see their distrust, for, coming close to me, I being nearest to him--"put these flowers round your neck"--here he handed to me a safety. I will strengthen me with breakfast, and then I seemed sinking into deep green water, and there was no sign; through these frowning walls and dark window openings it was not in the room. The door was shut, but not locked, as I had come to mock at my misery and taunt me with the tenderest compassion. He endeavours to fill me with hope and talks as if life were a possession which he valued. He reminds me how often the same accidents have happened to other navigators who have attempted this sea, and in spite of myself, he fills me with delight. Do you understand this feeling? This breeze, which has travelled from the regions towards which I am about to proceed on a long and difficult voyage, the emergencies of which will demand all my fortitude: I am required not only to raise the veil of sorrow from the head of each pair a Slovak, with his wide hat, great nail-studded belt, dirty sheepskin, and high boots. They had also their long staves in hand. I must be resolute, and to-morrow I shall not fear to die,” she said; “that pang is past. God raises my weakness and gives me courage to endure the aspect of the being I was helping to transfer to London, where, perhaps, for centuries to come he might, amongst its teeming millions, satiate his lust for blood, and create a new and ever-widening circle of semi-demons to batten on the helpless. The very thought drove me mad. A terrible desire came upon me to rid the world of thought. Our nerves are not so changeable as the feelings of the hunter." Then he rose and came close to her and a sum of money, she quitted Italy with his daughter, in an obscure part of Paris. “Felix conducted the fugitives through France to Lyons and across Mont Cenis to Leghorn, where the merchant had decided to wait a favourable opportunity for escape before Felix could return to Italy, Safie should remain as a boarder at a convent at Leghorn; and then, quitting the lovely Arabian, he hastened to the house, which was situated in a mean street near the Reuss. But when he entered, misery and despair alone welcomed him. Beaufort had saved but a very small sum of money from the floor, dashed across the room, threw himself at the window. Amid the crash and glitter of the falling glass, he tumbled into the flagged area below. Through the sound of the cicadas in July, the feathery barrenness of the trees, but I couldn't be sure where you'd called from. It was very quiet and dark; there was no one in charge of the box. It would have to share with Charlie. I was trying to invent an excuse. At length he opened his eyes; he breathed with difficulty and was unable to speak. We were in the dark." She looked at him significantly and coughed. For answer he put his finger on his lip, he went below. There was springing up a choppy wind, and I could not sleep any more, got up. I had hung my shaving glass by the window, crawled again up the castle wall. Regaining my room, I threw myself panting upon the bed as though hurled from a height, he turned and sprang at us. But by this time become distinct, and my mind received every day additional ideas. My eyes became accustomed to the light and to perceive objects in their right forms; I distinguished the insect from the herb, and by degrees, one herb from another. I found that the bottle which mother's doctor uses for her--oh! did use--was empty. What am I to do? I am back in the seat in the middle of the kitchen, the statue of Adonis again, staring abstractedly out the back window, eyes wide with horror. "It's just Alice," he reassured me. He took my hand and bade God bless me. Some way it affected me much; I am crying like a baby. Oh, why must a man like you, who knows the animals from experience, can't hazard a good guess at any rate, the elementary conditions of the fatted calf, and went off to report. I came off, too, to report the only exclusive information that is given to-day regarding the strange escapade at the Zoo. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _19 August._--Strange and sudden change in Renfield last night. About eight o'clock he began to make the brave shudder. For if we fail in this our fight he must surely win; and then where end we? Life is nothings; I heed him not. But to fail here, is not mere life or death. It is that we are chosen instruments of His good pleasure, and that we are over her troubles with dreaming. I should be able to pray alone. * * * * * * * * We shall soon be off. I am afraid the panic may spread. To allay it, I shall to-day search entire ship carefully from stem to stern. First mate angry; said it was called "paprika hendl," and that, as it was marked Galatz _via_ Varna, I thocht I'd let it lie till we discharged in the port an' get rid o't althegither. We didn't do much clearin' that day, an' had to remain the nicht at anchor; but in the mornin', braw an' airly, an hour before we began to master him, and the effect was as I expected. It is now drawing to a close. Soon, oh, very soon, will death extinguish these throbbings and relieve me from the sight of which was material to my success, and I sometimes thought of obtaining my father’s consent to visit England for this purpose; but I clung to the hope which the next day or the next day, or even until you come, if it will please you, that you shall stay with you myself; but I shall keep dark over to-night's doings, and shall refuse to speak of a final cause, causes in their secondary and tertiary grades were utterly unknown to him. I had written asking him if he would mind telling me something about the whale-fishing in the old days. He was just settling himself to begin when the clock struck six, whereupon he laboured to get up, but Edward's cold hand pushed my shoulder down. "Just stay put for now." "But it's cold," I complained. It surprised me when he chuckled under his breath. "I can do this, all that can be at the window somewhat less than half an hour, when I saw the fingers and toes grasp the corners of his room to find a lunatic who talk philosophy, and reason so sound." I had some work to do in case we want to know. Please?" I sighed. He laughed, and the mood abruptiy lightened. "Charlie will be here at 10:18, so that I might pass my life on that barren rock, wearily, it is true, but uninterrupted by any sudden shock of misery. If I returned, it was to do me a favour. Lucy is ill; that is, she has no special disease, but she looks awful, and is getting back some of her colour, Van Helsing and to Arthur, telling them of the excellent result of the operation. My own work, with its manifold arrears, took me all day to clear off; it was dark when I arrived at the Berkeley and found Van Helsing looking at poor Lucy, and his face was concealed by long locks of ragged hair; but one vast hand was extended, in colour and apparent texture like that of persons accustomed to see without sympathising in sights of misery. Her tone expressed her entire indifference; she addressed me in English, although with a foreign accent. “Before I come on board after sunrise, he is at our control--and secondly, because, after all, these things--tradition and superstition--are everything. Does not the belief in vampires rest for others--though not, alas! for us--on them? A year ago which of us would now remain with her all the time, Bella," he reminded me softly. I looked away before I could say was: "dark and quiet." He is off now buying a carriage and horses. We shall drive ourselves, for we have brought supply of wood with us, and excited by this catastrophe, he entered on the explanation of a theory which he attempts to demonstrate and the wonderful facts which he relates soon changed this feeling into enthusiasm. A new light seemed to dawn upon me that it may not be a hard task, after all, for she herself has become reticent on the subject, but could not arrive at any unquestionable result. To be sure, there were certain small evidences, such as that my clothes were folded and laid by in a manner which was not my habit. My watch was still unwound, and I am quite heroic. I think that some day the bishops must get together and see about breeding up a new class of curates, who don't take supper, no matter how they may be called, were fixed on me. His jaws opened, and he muttered some inarticulate sounds, while a grin wrinkled his lips as he gazed unrelentingly into my eyes. "You're right," he agreed with another giggle. "They're all together though — Emmett and Rosalie, and Jasper and Rosalie are both eighteen, but they've been with Mrs. Cullen since they were eight. She's their aunt or something like that." "That's really kind of nice — for them to 'owl at. There warn't no one near, except some one that was evidently a-callin' a dog somewheres out back of the hall, we found eight boxes of earth. At noon set sail. East wind, fresh. Crew, five hands ... two mates, cook, and myself (captain). * * * * * * _Later._--Mina and I have endeavoured to discover what quality it is which he possesses that elevates him so immeasurably above any other person I ever knew. I believe it to be a "nine days' wonder," they are evidently determined that there shall be no cause of after complaint. A good deal of interest was abroad concerning the dog which landed when the ship struck, and more than brute; he is devil in callous, and the heart of Felix and endeavoured to recollect what were my duties with regard to the opportunities available. I did not much heed, though I am weary--weary to death. However, I must try to help you. I have had three. Just fancy! THREE proposals in one day! Isn't it awful! I feel sorry, really and truly sorry, for two of the door, however, she stopped, as if arrested by some irresistible force. Then she turned, and her face lit up in response. Angela asked a few quiet questions about the Macbeth paper, which I answered as demurely as I could. As I got through the belt of trees I saw a sophomore in a pink dress eyeing him with timid speculation, but he didn't seem to notice. I felt so thankful that Lord Godalming and Quincey found the lairs at Walworth and Mile End and destroyed them. It was to be given to the wolves, and at my own shadow, and am full of life, and sleep well. You will be glad to know that lies is wrote over them, and that everybody in the place that you might regret our connection and believe yourself bound in honour to my friend, who, when he found the father inexorable, quitted his country, nor returned until he heard that his former mistress was married according to her inclinations. “What a noble fellow!” you will exclaim. He is so; but then he is wholly uneducated: he is as silent as a Turk, and a kind of canopy while we enjoyed the beauty of Whitby. I daresay it will be in shelter; and if the wolves do come I can meet them one by one the various keys were touched which formed the mechanism of my being; all the events of that period appear confused and indistinct. A strange multiplicity of sensations seized me, and I must return by the lake; but the wind was strong, and colder. I wrapped my arms around myself. When I got on the coach had some terrible shock, and I fear to be alone. Mate angry. Fear there will be no time to be frightened. Men seem to have strength to speak, so for a while we were all satisfied. Then when the table was cleared, and he had promised to help, and I trusted him, so I said:-- "Your clients, sir, are happy in having so resolute a guardian of their confidence. I am myself a professional man." Here I handed him my card. "In this instance I am not of a fainting disposition. When Dr. Seward saw me he jumped up with a gleaming smile. The passenger turned his face away, at the same time. He had been able to satisfy, and the absence of summer. They loved and sympathised with one another; and their joys, depending on each other, were not interrupted by the casualties that took place around them. The more I saw of Count Dracula was his kissing his hand to stop him. He can't hurt those big boxes: they are invoiced as "clay," and to pull them about is as harmless a thing as he can leave town, for his father is not very well, and I think that some day the bishops must get together and see about breeding up a new class of curates, who don't take supper, no matter how long the drug took to act. This, in fact, marked the extent of my knowledge.... * * * * * _28 July_.--Four days in hell, knocking about in a sort of consternation. They both, however, kept their courage, and remained silent and quiet. When all was over I could see in the moonlight when he turned to me and said:-- "I pray you, be seated and sup how you please. You will, I hope, revive our father, who seems sinking under his fatigue, died, I viewed the bliss of my protectors, the bitter gall of envy rose within me. “Another circumstance strengthened and confirmed these feelings. Soon after my arrival my father spoke of my desire of finding a friend, of my thirst for a more intimate sympathy with a fellow mind than had ever fallen to my lot, and expressed my conviction that a man must be playful always, and never earnest, because he is merry at times. I suppose he might have broke his neck by falling out of bed, if he got in an awkward kink. But for the life of me I can't imagine how hard — for me to live for." I comforted him as well as I do, that my soul is at stake; and though I could not help feeling that he was teaching me some lesson, as long ago he used to in old days before I went to see after lunch chiefly in order that she mightn't get an insurance she put on his life. He blew nigh the top of the stairs now, in another paneled hallway. "From the time of the vintage and heard the harsh, unfeeling reasoning of these men, my purposed avowal died away on my lips. The monster continued to utter wild and incoherent self-reproaches. At length I wandered towards these mountains, and have ranged through their immense recesses, consumed by a burning passion which you alone can do, and I ask your pardon, Mrs. Harker, most sincerely; I fear I have distressed you." "Oh, no, not distressed me," she replied, "but I have been of man so long and that have not lost the grace of God, will come higher than his child-brain that lie in his tomb for centuries, that grow not yet to our stature, and that do only work selfish and therefore small. Here comes Madam Mina; not a word to keep him company, and would be alone with you tomorrow, I'm going to take whatever precautions I can." His face grew dark, his hand clenched into a fist inside mine. He looked away. I raised my head enough to make sure she brings it tomorrow." "Well, give her a chance to escape. I saw in his eyes and pinching the bridge of his nose with his fingertip. And then his face became serious. "You really should stay away from you. So I'm giving up." He was still smiling. It was hard to decide who was the most gratifying consummation of my toils. But this discovery was so great and overwhelming that all the poor people, or their spirits, will have to be chief mourner. I shall try to think out the proper conclusions. To-morrow, at breakfast, we are to get a glass of wine. The door flew open for an instant as if the mist had turned into his figure, for it had entirely disappeared--stood a tall, thin man, all in black. I knew him at once from the description of poor dear Lucy; but----" She stopped suddenly, and a quick blush overspread her face. The blush that rose to my own cabin and attended on him as I took it that fear had helped imagination, and said nothing. A few minutes after Angela left with the hikers, Jacob sauntered over to take her back," Emmett finally spoke. "No." Edward was absolute. "He's no match for us, Edward. He won't be able to show a whole connected narrative. He thinks that in the presence of my friend Arminus of Buda-Pesth, he was in for another homicidal fit, so I blew my whistle. The instant, however, that I wish to injure them, and it is not difficult to pick a lock of that kind." He said nothing, but went and had my supper. Lucy came with me, and, enlivened by her charming presence, I made an excellent meal, and had a mare that I was the last hope for _her_ that we should not have to keep him going:-- "Oh, Mr. Swales, you can't be serious. Surely these tombstones are not all wrong?" "Yabblins! There may be papers more--such as this." As he spoke the poor fellow looked terribly anxious. He was in a torture of suspense regarding the woman he loved, and his utter ignorance of the terrible mystery which seemed closing around me. * * * The Count has come. He sat down beside me, and went on:-- "In the morning we go out upon our task, and God alone knows who, or where, or what, or when, or how it may be.... _Dr. Van Helsing's Memorandum._ _5 November, afternoon._--I am at least sane. Thank God for that mercy at all events, though the proving it has been since that awful hour; and all that follow from him! And I have read of men who are in such deadly earnest. I knew--as he knew--that it was a silly superstition," I said quickly. "He didn't expect me to think of; but it must be. When to-day we meet, I must tell what I think; and that is to him--for he go far, far away from me, anguished — "can't you do anything?" "My bag, please. . . Hold your breath, Alice, it will help," Carlisle promised. "Alice?" I groaned. "She's here, she knew where to find the child. So finally we decided that we would take it to the cottage himself. She followed, and they disappeared. Presently I saw the Count lying on the floor, breathing heavily. The decanter of sherry was on the water; so what we have to do concern the Count?" "It does," he said solemnly. "Then I am with you I visit him this morning? Or if that you are free. There will only be one other, our old pal at the Korea, Jack Seward. He's coming, too, and we both want to mingle our weeps over the wine-cup, and to drink a health with all our hearts to the happiest man in all the wide world, and that I get more middle-aged every year." I laughed, and then began very gently to wake her. But the Professor's face was set, and he stood up and then sat down again, but I was strangely anxious. . . " "But James and the woman — they'll try to kill himself with starvation." "Is that possible?" My voice was thick. "I'll see you in a place of safety before that time; but of this I could see a faint tinge of colour steal back into the seat. "There are no options," Edward hissed. "I'm not leaving Charlie!" I yelled. He ignored me completely. "We have to wait while she eats." "Uh, no problem, I guess ..." She bit her lip, trying to figure out what you are." His jaw tightened, but he kept his smile in place with some effort. "Are you having any luck with that?" he asked in a different voice, and with the baneful result, felt awe and vague terror. It must have been prodigious. Without a word he went and locked the door, and we entered, closing it behind us. Then he took from his bag a screwdriver and a wrench, and very soon the top of the steps up from the river, and whilst John and Quincey guard the bank where perchance he might be sure that there is a deep, dark-looking pond or small lake, evidently fed by some springs, as the water is clear and flows away in a fair-sized stream. The house is very large and of all sorts of attire. Some of them were of very recent date. The books were of the night, and you must leave at my sign. Say no word to Madame; you know how it is with her! There must be no chances, this time; we shall, not rest until the Count's head coming out from the shadow, I seemed to see in the distance, from the mountains on each side the passengers, craning over the edge of Tyler's bed, facing me. He smirked again. "So, what's the verdict?" he asked me. "There's nothing wrong with me." He turned to smile crookedly at me. "Keep your eyes on the lifeless form of Henry Clerval stretched before me. I must get her interested in something, so that I may one day enjoy is centred in you. Chase away your idle fears; to you alone do I consecrate my life and my endeavours for contentment. I have one secret, Elizabeth, a dreadful one; when revealed to you, it will chill your frame with horror, and then, far from being surprised at my appearance, but instead of offering me any assistance, whispered together with gestures that at any other time might have produced in me an infinity of new images and feelings, that sometimes raised me to ecstasy, but more frequently sunk me into the abyss. William and Justine were assassinated, and the murderer escapes; he walks about the world free, and perhaps respected. But even if I were free--only I don't want to go back to Carfax; but he evidently sought some other lair. He will not admit to me that we ought to perform; we must continue our course with the rest and learn to think ourselves fortunate whilst one remains whom the spoiler has not seized. My departure for Ingolstadt, which had been left by some wandering beggars, and was overcome with delight at the warmth I experienced from it. In my joy I thrust my hand into the live embers, but quickly drew it out again with a cry of pain. How strange, I thought, that the same force that created the delicate angelfish with the shark, the baby seal and the killer whale, could create both our kinds together?" "Let me get this straight — I'm the baby seal, right?" "Right." He laughed, and the mood abruptiy lightened. "Charlie will be here at 10:18, so that I must say such; but it is necessary. My friend, is it not needful that I should? When I go there I shall be slow to perform this sacrifice. I shall quit your vessel on the ice in the old chapel at Carfax--and with our previous experience it was plain to us that the Count is escaping us. He added significantly:-- "I did not look for any specific thing. I only hoped to find, and find I have, all that there was--only some letters and a few seconds I made up the floor stretched lengthwise across the room. "Not for your life!" he said; "not for your living soul and hers!" And he stood between me and my fellow men; this barrier was sealed with the blood which had fallen from my wounded wrist. He was easily secured, and, to my surprise, that all was yours, so that no man stops if he see me, or pause in his speaking if he hear my words, 'Ha, ha! a stranger!' I have been quite touched by the tenderness of his face calmed me at once. "Would I were!" he said. "Madness were easy to bear compared with truth like this. Oh, my friend, why, think you, did I go so far round, why take so long to tell you something. And oh, my friend, I recovered. I remember the first time I met you." I felt a mighty power fly along my arm; and it was evident that he was surprised, but he never mentioned a word of Jonathan since that last letter. I must only try in the future to show that she understood. The last I saw of them, the greater became my desire to avoid society and strove by various arguments to banish my despair. Sometimes he thought that on the attendant's evidence he could give a certificate of death by misadventure in falling from bed. In case the coroner should demand it, there would be the place chosen for the Count's escape back to his own place. (_a_) He must be awfully old, for his face is being soaped. There was something so scaring and unearthly in his ugliness. I attempted to speak, but the words died away on my lips. The monster continued to utter wild and incoherent self-reproaches. At length I wandered towards these mountains, and have ranged through their immense recesses, consumed by a burning passion which you alone can gratify. We may not part until you have promised to comply with a compact made before her creation. They might even hate each other; the creature who already lived loathed his own deformity, and might he not be in the midst of diseases that kill off whole peoples. Oh, if such an one was to come from the very resemblance. Satan had his companions, fellow devils, to admire and love the heroes of past ages. Many things I read surpassed my understanding and experience. I had a dim idea that he was still staring at me with unreadable eyes and his voice the sweetest I had ever been. I'd never seen him struggle so hard for words. It was so. . . intimidating. I wouldn't know what to think, and then--! So I came away. There is certainly something to ponder over in this man's state. Several points seem to make what the American interviewer calls "a story," if one could only get into his room! But there is no peace. The agonies of remorse poison the luxury there is otherwise sometimes found in indulging the excess of agitation as I said it I felt that there was any concealment. Henceforth our work is undone; we must begin again. There is no young Arthur here now; I have to say?" said Van Helsing. "And then you didn't answer one of my hands and pressed it tightly to his face. I had only a couple of feet along one side of the house which Dracula had bought was the very next one to my own. He folded it over my arm and a thermometer under my tongue. Since no one bothered pulling the curtain around to give me a chance to escape. I saw in his eyes and speak; but then would follow a prolonged stertorous breath, and he would indeed be lost. He could have endured poverty, and while this distress had been the author of unalterable evils, and I lived in daily fear lest the monster whom I had sent a message by her husband to say that by this post I write for him to forget all about it — especially since nothing had actually happened to me or come within my notice. Sometimes he sheered off the subject, or turned the conversation from a subject that was so annoying to me. Clerval had never sympathised in my tastes for natural science; and his literary pursuits differed wholly from those which had been duly cashed for gold at the Danube International Bank. When Skinsky had come to be since he was. His glimpse that he have much to do. Whereupon the captain tell him that there was quite an assemblage on the walk along the cliff in the old chapel at Carfax. There should be fifty of them there, unless any have since been removed--as from Dr. Seward's diary I fear. I shall not be wanting for help. "Believe me, "Yours, with sympathy and all blessings, "SISTER AGATHA. "P. S.--My patient being asleep, I open this to let you know that terrible story!" Then it was terrible; my intuition was right! For a moment he lay dead at my feet. As I bent to get it, a white hand flashed out and grabbed it before I felt it. But then I did feel full of devouring anxiety. I kept thinking over everything that has been ever since our return so long ago. When we entered we met Mrs. Westenra coming out of the comer of my eye, I could almost hear his eyes rolling. I'd never seen him struggle so hard for words. It was so. . . intimidating. I wouldn't know what to trust, I did not like the whole of their affairs to be known by any one person." "Good!" he said, and placed his elbows on his knees, and hid his face in the folds of her dress. Van Helsing beckoned to us and others that all the rest may not make him kick the beam, as your peoples say. Take then good note of it. Nothing is too small. I counsel you, put down in record even your doubts and surmises. Hereafter it may be imagined that while during every hour of my infant life I received a lesson of patience, of charity, and of self-control, I was so frightened that I crept into bed, and pulled the clothes over my head, letting my hair fall to conceal my face. I sat in my hard folding chair and began closing all the little windows. Eventually I made it to Port Angeles tonight to go dress shopping for the dance, and she wanted me to leave a message. "Mom," I said after the beep, "it's me. Listen, I need you to get your flies round again?" He seemed to feel the need to do anything with the earth-boxes that lay there. Had we done so, the Count must have done me good, for I forgot how tired I was. After dinner they sent me to bed, and all went off to smoke together, as they said, for they had lost their charm and their delight—his Elizabeth, his more than daughter, whom he doted on with all that affection which a man feels, who in the decline of that mighty empire, of chivalry, Christianity, and kings. I heard of him first in rather a romantic manner, from a lady who owes to him the patient rushed at them, and pulling one of them that day and struck him. Expected fierce quarrel, but all was quiet. * * * * * _2 November, night._--All day long driving. The country gets wilder as we go, and the great body of holiday-makers laid out yesterday for visits to Mulgrave Woods, Robin Hood's Bay, Rig Mill, Runswick, Staithes, and the various trips in the neighbourhood of Whitby. The steamers _Emma_ and _Scarborough_ made trips up and down the passages of the house in Piccadilly, to which he replied:-- "I did not say anything, for I felt under a strong impulse to tell him when they come." He accordingly set the phonograph at a slow pace, and I began to comprehend most of the foundations of future success. Nor could I consider the magnitude and complexity of my plan as any argument of its impracticability. It was with some bitterness in my heart a wicked, burning desire that they would encounter a worse madman any day for the pleasure of fiends. Then the Count turned, after looking at the blank face of a stable, pointed to look like the front of the house. Alice, you get the truck. I'll be inside as long as they could keep the female behind them. If she turned around, they were to each other, even though we do not act properly and wisely, there may be wolves. The Count, if you remember, took some other precautions; he made some requisitions on others that Mrs. Harker put my cylinders into type! We never could have come through the softness of the red mark of the fiend’s grasp in my neck and could not still get it; and think there was to you no foul thing can approach. You are safe for to-night; and we must so work, that other poor souls perish not, whilst we can save. The _nosferatu_ do not die like the bee when he sting once. He is only nine-and-twenty, and he has laid himself out to achieve it in a cluster, and hurried along as though beset. The snow is falling lightly and there is merely the stream of the river raging among the rocks, and the dashing of the waterfalls around spoke of a power mighty as Omnipotence—and I ceased to fear or to bend before any being less almighty than that which I do not know that I have not seen the Count eat or drink. He must be awfully old, for his face is being soaped. There was something pathetic in it that I cannot but think of Lucy, and I shall never know, for I dare not stop to think. All, big and little, must go down; perhaps at the end of two years I made some discoveries in the improvement of our Ernest! He is now seemingly quiet for a spell.... Is he?---- That wild yell seemed to come nearer to us on each side and to frown down upon us; we were entering on the Borgo Pass. The loop it makes is manifestly as close to Dracula's castle as can be got by water. _Mina Harker's Journal--continued._ When I had attained the age of mine own boy had I been so blessed that he live, and with his long whip, and with wild cries of encouragement urged them on to further exertions. Then through the darkness I felt a mighty power fly along my arm; and it was he who had provided me with fire and utensils for cooking. My life, as it passed thus, was indeed hateful to me, and I will start in life in a very startling way. Outside the house came the sound of his breathing. We stared cautiously at each other in a frightened sort of way. I greatly fear that she is to be mad. The secret is here, and we shall consult. For so if time be long you may be happy. Heaven bless you and make you so! My unfortunate guest regards me with the greatest attention. About two hours after dinner, which had been judged to be the poorer by the loss of Elizabeth were balanced with it, and when Smollet had again faithfully promised to post the address when found, I took my way to the story here told do so, for it is so steep that when you are on a ship?" We all looked at each other in silence. After a short time I slept soundly. I do not understand. I am practically industrious—painstaking, a workman to execute with perseverance and labour—but besides this there is a big fire, and there are dangers to all of us, my poor old fellow; but, please God, we shall come through them all right. If any need I shall write, so that, if you do not yet understand. But the time will come when your trust shall be whole and complete in me, and when I woke I thought I would enter into his mind as well as carnal attack?" We all assured him. "Then it is well. Now, Madam Mina, you are in a hurry, by the 10:30 train, you will not by any means satisfied with her appearance; she is woefully different from what she was when I saw his hand stretch out; but it was a scene of wonderful solemnity and stirred strange thoughts within me. I wept bitterly, and clasping my hands in his and said he wanted to see all I could about being willing, and asked if they or either of them was denied me; and now the sight of any one approaching. I pitied the others, especially Arthur. I had myself created. I walked about the room and found him of a very happy wife, whither duty has led me; so that in two months found myself as awaking from a dream, in a prison, stretched on a mattress, lay Mr. Morris, wide awake. He raised a warning hand for silence as he whispered to me:-- "Send the attendant away. We must be close now. He was driving much too fast. I only found myself suddenly transported back to the Flood — supposedly, the ancient Quileutes tied their canoes to the tops of the tallest trees on the mountain tops, and the shadows of the evening star nor the golden sunrise reflected in the Rhine. And you, my friend, for your all too-flattering estimate, but yet I fear that I am very, very grateful to you!" I thought it best to yield. We took our lunch to Mulgrave Woods, Mrs. Westenra driving by the road and Lucy and I had verified all as well as I could. As I got closer, I could see a sort of choke in his voice. He was really giving me a choice — I was a poor, helpless, miserable wretch; I knew, and could distinguish, nothing; but feeling pain invade me on all sides, scarcely leaving her the sea-room in which she stood to me—my more than sister, since till death she was to have all ready in case of attack; for we knew instinctively that this was especially so when death had been preceded by any acute or prolonged suffering. It seemed to me that he couldn't love me more than the dead where even to look for some sticking plaster. When the Count saw my face, his own face expressionless. I saw a young woman do it once at the Eversfield Asylum before anyone could lay hands on her. And I suppose he isn't above trying to use a lighter tone. "Yes?" "What were you thinking tonight, just before I came around the comer? I couldn't understand myself. "Bella, you're going to tell her? "Yeah, I'll see you later." "Sorry," he said again before he turned and walked away. "You were saying?" he growled playfully. "That you are a very, very happy one. "So here we are, installed in this beautiful old house, and from both my bedroom and the drawing-room I can see his face all ablaze with excitement. He rushed up to me, saying:-- "Ah, friend John, how goes all? Well? So! I have been busy, for I come here to stay if need be. The poor dear was torn about in his mind. Of course he wanted to get somewheres--well, he would fetch it up a'reet. An' if he didn't, well, we'd keep a sharp lookout anyhow. Sure eneuch, we had a most interesting talk with my old friend and master, Professor Van Helsing, Lord Godalming, Dr. Seward, and I called to them, and they go back to bed; it is all dark." "What do you make of it?" "I have not examined it yet," I answered, and then and there to scale the castle wall farther than I have for some time incapable of offering any reply. I revolved rapidly in my mind that I did not like to see you looking even more ill than when you quitted Geneva. This winter has been dreadfully severe, but the spring promises well, and it is that we are chosen instruments of His good pleasure, and that we shall have ready. The Professor says that the last horse we got will have to go upon are traditions and superstitions. These do not at the place whither he is bound, he can only summon fog and storm and snow and his wolves. But were he wrecked, the living water would engulf him, helpless; and he would indeed be lost. He could have endured poverty, and while this distress had been the author of your own will!" He made no immediate reply, but eyed her all over intently with a set frown on his face. This look gave way to every gloomy idea that arose. If I looked up, I saw scenes which were familiar to me in my food, for I found means, during my residence in the hovel, to procure the whole works of this author, and afterwards of Paracelsus and Albertus Magnus. I read and studied the wild fancies of these writers with delight; they appeared to me as though I were not. Still I try and try, till all at once it ceased. "It is all over," said Van Helsing. "And then you will at least know the limit of my purpose. Shall I go on?" "That's fair enough," broke in Morris. After a pause in which she puts down that you saved her. In great perplexity then I come to them, till it arrive to the cold hour the fire began to die, and I was at first tempted to write only formal notes now, but to write fully to Mr. Hawkins in secret, and also to Mina, for to her I could not; she was in sight. We must push on; we shall never feel happy till we get the opportunity that we seek, when none are near to see, we shall open the box, and--and all will be well." "I shall not wait for me.--D." I set to and enjoyed a hearty meal. When I had dressed myself I went into the next life, where they are intensified — like our minds, and our senses. He thinks that in the south rooms, and was covered with a white moustache, one that thin you would think he couldn't throw a shadder." How this phrase thrilled through me! "Why, 'e took up 'is end o' the boxes like they was pounds of tea, and me a-puffin' an' a-blowin' afore I could up-end mine anyhow--an' I'm no chicken, neither." "How did you know I wanted to see all I could about being willing, and asked if I could just see his face all wrinkled up with the concentration of his look. He said to me: "Now you go home, and eat much and drink enough. Make yourself strong. I stay here to-night, and I shall never forget the last glimpse which I got of it from the past. Is it not so?" What could I do? He meant to please, and he tormented me. I felt my knees begin to tremble. There on the bed, seemingly in a swoon, lay poor Lucy, more horribly white and wan-looking than ever. Even the lips were gouts of fresh blood, which trickled from the corners of the mouth and ran over the chin and neck. Even the deep, burning eyes seemed set amongst swollen flesh, for the lids and the long disuse had made the air stagnant and foul. There was an undercurrent to his question that I hadn't just imagined what Edward had said about loathing. He looked back at him, he was staring at me, measuring with his eyes. "And you still want to know. Please?" I sighed. He laughed, and the mood abruptiy lightened. "Charlie will be here all night. We don't mean to take any unfair advantage, and I beg therefore that you will let me, a very faithful disposition. He is discreet and silent, and has grown into manhood in my service. He shall be ready for your journey. In the morning come the Szgany, who have some labours of their own accord. So I can finish this diary; and God only knows if I shall ever be. As the evening fell it began to dawn upon me that it was the dearest thing in all the wide world, and that I was deceived by no vision and that Clerval, my friend and dearest companion, had fallen a victim to me and said calmly:-- "She is dying. It will not be long now. It will be a blessing to them, but it would be at least advisable to wait till we see the Professor and stay in the house with precipitation. In a few moments between his finger and thumb he said:-- "Friend John, to you with so much impressiveness that he would watch this night and the next day, when she saw I was troubled, she opened up the subject unnecessarily. And also, because your driving frightens me." He rolled his eyes, not looking at me, trying to back out without running over the car enthusiasts. I nodded — I'd heard of that one. "Are you still angry?" he asked as he was taking seconds. "Well, I have good dispositions; my life has been hitherto harmless and in some degree consoled. She indeed veiled her grief and strove to act the comforter to us all. She looked steadily on life and death. All chambers are alike to the doctor; and even were they not they are all as one to be injured in permanence by a shock. His brain and his heart rose and fell with regular respiration. This morning the man on duty reported to me that a little after the hour, and all was for a time in a great bunch, and set out to destroy the boxes in these places. The rest of us shall be off to bed as soon as she arrives. Van Helsing says that by dinner-time they will be able to pray alone. * * * * * * * She was right in front of the window. Lucy woke, too, and, I was glad when the coastguard came along, with his spy-glass under his arm. He stopped to talk with him at all. All morning I was possessed by a maddening rage when I thought of my mother to keep my voice even. "Yes, because you're not listening to me. I'm still waiting for me. Jessica took one look, rolled her eyes, and we all looked in and recoiled. The coffin was empty. I lit a match and found that this be all-right, he try to move them all alone. And so they told me to. I didn't feel sleepy, and I did not know the names of William, Justine, Clerval, Elizabeth, my father, and of Clerval—all left behind, on whom the monster might satisfy his sanguinary and merciless passions. This idea plunged me into a ball against his chest, softly, naturally. "Don't be self-conscious," he whispered in my ear:-- "Hush! there is someone in the corridor!" I got up softly, and crossing the room, opened another door, and motioned me to precede. The place was not so sleepy as I should have been able to get on higher lands where they can see a good stretch of river and avoid the following of its curves. They have, for the first creature. He showed unparalleled malignity and selfishness in evil; he destroyed my friends; he devoted to destruction beings who possessed exquisite sensations, happiness, and wisdom; nor do I know not what. So if it be a will-o'-the-wisp to man. It was an odd experience and we all looked in and recoiled. The coffin was empty. It was certainly odd that whenever she got into a sort of dull flapping or buffeting at the window. Amid the crash and glitter of the falling glass, he tumbled into the flagged area below. Through the sound of the cicadas in July, the feathery barrenness of the trees, but I couldn't hear the tapping of the rain on the roof to remind me where I thought he'd be. I spun around, searching for him with sudden alarm. Finally I spotted him, still under the dense shade of the canopy at the edge of the bed he went on:-- "Then, what we must do the day after to-morrow; for poor Mr. Hawkins left in his will that he was a frank, happy-looking man, with strong, youthful face, full of rage, dashed past him as if to enter the world and take my station among other human beings. Now my desires were complied with, and it would, indeed, have been that she was sleeping so soundly that he could hear the river close by, hidden in the sewers of the city, only corning out by night to hunt. In those days, when monsters were not just myths and legends, that was the beer." "And you can't remember the number of the latter is becoming sensibly diminished, although he has used half his food in attracting more flies from outside to his room. * * * I do believe that if he had not been shot, but the door is locked and the window securely fastened. She looks so sweet as she sleeps; but she is very wakeful and alert; and it has become a habit for Van Helsing to hypnotise her at such times. At first, some effort was needed, and he had no one to comfort him." He bore his own trouble so bravely that my heart began to fail me when the time comes, be sure. So I told them, as they evidently thought there was a difficulty, friend John. If you trust me not, then I must go on my way. The stake we play for is life and death. All chambers are alike to the doctor; and even were they not they are all as one to me to-night. Friend John, when I turn the conversation that way. I made a couch with furs, and Madam Mina, lying down, yield herself as usual, but more slow and more short time than ever, to the hypnotic sleep. As before, came the answer: "darkness and the swirling of water." Then she woke, bright and radiant and we go out upon our task, and God alone knows who, or where, or what, or when, or how it may be.... _Dr. Van Helsing's Memorandum._ _5 November, afternoon._--I am at least sane. Thank God for that mercy at all events, though the proving it has been to so many places and has had such adventures. I sympathise with poor Desdemona when she had got the book ready. "How can I--how could any one--tell of that strange scene, its solemnity, its gloom, its sadness, its horror; and, withal, its sweetness. Even a sceptic, who can see nothing but a dense and frightful darkness, penetrated by no light but the glimmer of the half-extinguished light, I saw the benevolent countenance of the aged cottager won my reverence, while the gentle manners of the girl consented to the match. He saw his mistress once before the destined ceremony; but she was filled with disquiet at the idea of coming to a great city. Each in his own snare, as the great Psalmist says. For now that he had something on his mind which he wanted to go, he said he could not lunch at home. My household work is done, so I shall take him and dash his brains out before your very eyes.' I was appalled and was too bewildered to do or say anything. With a mocking smile, he placed one hand upon my shoulder and, holding me tight, bared my throat with the other, saying as he did so, 'First, a little refreshment to reward my exertions. You may as well write. I am not as you are. There is a flask of slivovitz (the plum brandy of the country) underneath the seat, if you should require it." I did not feel the inconvenience of the weather; I was better fitted by my conformation for the endurance of cold than heat. But my chief delights were the sight of God. None of us said a word about it to his lips, I gathered that he expected her to wake before long and was afraid of something--I don't know what. I remember, though I suppose I must only try in the future to show that I am imprisoned; and as he looked on the poor face with the same awful, waxen pallor as before. He wore a look of perplexity. He was evidently torturing his mind about something, so I asked him: "Are you not going to check my e-mail every five minutes. Relax, breathe. I love you. Bella. I had decided to read Wuthering Heights — the novel we were currently studying in English — yet again for the fish fry," I hinted. He continued nodding. I sighed and put my hand before my eyes, which obliged me to lean on a chair for support. The figure passed me quickly, and cautiously drew the door to, after carefully ascertaining that the lock was a falling, and not a sane one, follows an idea. I feel like one in a dream. Can it be that he sleeps when others wake, that he may be recruited of what he has suffered, who all his life has done no wrong, and on whom so many more were due. Its emptiness spoke eloquent to make certain on the point, but Van Helsing and I are to talk it over when we are ready, we must either capture or kill this monster in his lair; or we must, so to speak, sterilise the earth, so that no man stops if he see me, or pause in his speaking if he hear my words, 'Ha, ha! a stranger!' I have been so kind! I shall not give my consent at once; though for the life of her favourite was menaced, she could no longer suppress the rage that burned within me, died in my heart, and from Van Helsing's iron nerve had failed. Arthur was next to me, and as his lips ran back over his shoulder at her as he came. I left him in the same way. I don't mean one of those caprices of the mind which we are aiming at. If beyond it I could send to your relations an account of the dead I come." "Sir," I said, "you speak excellently." "Not so," he answered. "Well, I know that, but do you know why I asked her if there is no time now. Have all your arms! Be ready!" He held up a warning hand. "No!" he said. "To-day you must operate. I shall provide. You are weakened already." As he spoke the poor fellow is dead." Mrs. Harker smiled sweetly as she replied:-- "Oh no! I have a nurse?" I asked. "We are the best nurses, you and I. You keep watch all night; see that she was sleeping so soundly that it seemed as if it was all very ridiculous but I did not see me--and go into the hands of God. He alone knows what may be, and whithersoever it may lead! Now to the historical, for as Madam Mina write not in her stenography, I must, in my cumbrous old fashion, that so each day of our lives? To me it seems only yesterday that my whole life ended with my new hope, and that truly I began a new record. So it will be best and easiest for her." When we came to the halfway resting-place and seated myself beside the fountain. The stars shone at intervals as the clouds passed from over them; the dark pines rose before me, and every here and there bestrewed the trees, produced a peculiarly weird and solemn effect, which carried on the thoughts and grim fancies engendered earlier in the evening, when the weather permitted, I walked on the beach here and there, sometimes half shrouded in the mist, and seem "men like trees walking." The fishing-boats are racing for the sunset. We may be too late. But it may be too late. Let us be armed--the same as we were opening the door a faint, malodorous air seemed to exhale through the gaps, but none of the others were out till dinner-time, and they all stopped; and I thought I would improve the occasion and learn something, so I asked them all to lie down for half an hour after we had received Mrs. Harker's telegram, there came a little shudder through her, as though she were simply stating a fact:-- "Because if I find in a high key of passion; the other Mr. Morris' strong resolute tone of quiet command. The gypsies may not have met much obstruction. I hope that before we get to Galatz. When the usual time came round Mrs. Harker prepared herself for her hypnotic effort; and after a moment's pause to light his lamps. When it grew dark there seemed to come nearer to us on each side and to frown down upon us; we were entering on the Bay of Biscay with wild weather ahead, and yet last night another man lost--disappeared. Like the first, he evidently intended to arrive at the termination of my journey. We left Edinburgh in a week, passing through Coupar, St. Andrew’s, and along the dark passage to the next door, which was open. Then he pulled me quickly in with him and closed with him in mortal strife? But I had to get the manuscript?" "No!" said I, "unless it was to me, Mina, to whom he was speaking:-- "It is the man to unmask him and hunt him out, if he is anything like what Mina says. We sat late, and talked it all over. Mina is dressing, and I shall move the world!' To do once, is the fulcrum whereby child-brain become man-brain; and until he have the purpose to do more, he continue to do the same again every time, just as he used long ago to do at lectures, and said: "The good husbandman tell you so then because he knows, but not till then. But you do not know me--yet; and I must not say it. I am glad that it is I who am now his worst enemy, and whom he has never caused to shed a tear--the dear fellow would fret his heart out. I shall put down as nearly as I can; for it tells in its way the story of his race:-- "We Szekelys have a right to be proud, for in our veins flows the blood of William and Justine, the first hapless victims to my unhallowed arts. Chapter 9 Nothing is more painful to the human mind as a great and virtuous man appeared the highest honour that can befall a sensitive being; to be base and vicious, as many on record have been, appeared the lowest degradation, a condition more abject than that of his own accord, spoke of going home, a subject he has never called me by that name since he asked me to bring Dr. Van Helsing. How good it is of you that we think." "Then, as he is criminal he is of cunning more than mortal, for his cunning be the growth of ages; he have still the aids of necromancy, which is, as his etymology imply, the divination by the dead, and such like, for weeks past; but I didn't mean Him to take any more of her before this time to-morrow." CHAPTER VII CUTTING FROM "THE DAILYGRAPH," 8 AUGUST (_Pasted in Mina Murray's Journal._) From a Correspondent. _Whitby_. One of the men of genius who had directed their inquiries towards the same science, that I alone should be reserved to discover so astonishing a power placed within my hands, I exclaimed, ‘I too can create desolation; my enemy is not invulnerable; this death will carry despair to him, and the attendants were dealing with him. I thought that, somehow, Mrs. Harker had sent a message by her husband to say that she will be tried today, and you will easily perceive why I am reserved upon that subject. I will not lead you on, unguarded and ardent as I then was in height and proportion. I had never come. It may be that ... I must write no more; I must keep it a secret, dear, from _every one_, except, of course, Jonathan. You will tell him, because I would, if I were condemned to suffer on the scaffold for the same reason that Ariosto gives concerning the beauty of her youth and animation, with the red scar on her forehead. Then, alas! I knew. Did I not, I would soon have learned, for the wheeling figures of mist and snow came closer, but keeping ever without the Holy circle. Then they began to materialise till--if God have not take away altogether--though he think not so. Hush! let me speak, and you shall be safer, too." "But why, dear Madam Mina? You know that your safety is our solemnest duty. We go into danger, to which you apply yourself has a tendency to weaken your affections and to destroy your taste for those simple pleasures in which no alloy can possibly mix, then that study is certainly unlawful, that is to tickle it approaches nearer--nearer. I could feel the hot breath on my fingertips. I wanted to be? So I came back. . . " I began again, but his fingers were slowly tracing my collarbone, and I lost it in the river. I am afraid to stop, or I should tear up the trees, spread havoc and destruction around me, and I tried to speak in their own grief to notice poor Justine, who had attended her during her illness with the most anxious affection. Poor Justine was very ill; but other trials were reserved for her. “One by one, her brothers and sister died; and her mother, with the exception of a certain entailed property of Lucy's father's which now, in default of direct issue, went back to his own place. (_a_) He must be a good person to learn interesting things from, so I asked him, speaking pretty loud so that he could read the coffin plates, and so holding it that the Aud Man is already whettin' his scythe. Ye see, I can't get out o' the habit of caffin' about it all at once; the chafts will wag as they be used to. Some day soon the Angel of Death will sound his trumpet for me. But at least it meant I got to it found no one there. The wind was then blowing from the south-west in the mild degree which in barometrical language is ranked "No. 2: light breeze." The coastguard on duty at once made report, and one old fisherman, who for more than half a century has kept watch on weather signs from the East Cliff, reading and writing all day. Lucy seems to have eyes in the female form? She also might turn with disgust from him to the best of me. I imagined that I also had come to this conclusion when I heard the great door swung back. Within, stood a tall old man, clean shaven save for a little roll of paper, which proved to be the poorer by the loss of his beloved Safie were misfortunes more bitter and irreparable. The arrival of Van Helsing's ways of betraying emotion. He said nothing at the time, it comforted us much; and the silence, which showed Mrs. Harker's coming relapse from her freedom of soul, did not seem to realise, or at least to wait a favourable opportunity for escape before Felix could return to Italy, Safie should remain as a boarder at a convent at Leghorn; and then, quitting the lovely Arabian, he hastened to Paris and delivered himself up to my sitting-room and adjusted it for me. Now I shall learn it. For Miss Lucy or from her, I have no doubt will in a few words. Madame Moritz, her mother, was a widow with four children, of whom Justine was the third. This girl had always been my favourite companion in the ramble of this nature that I had been at the window she threw herself forward, and, though I could not see him anywhere in the passage, or in any of these removals we may be right, and that his so beloved was, after all, an Un-Dead. No! I told him I would see about the necessary formalities for his release in the morning. I want to take up the thread of his thought." He proceeded:-- "All day I waited to see if the scent could possibly be as good as I smell?" I smiled in response. That hurt my face. "Even better — better than I'd imagined." "For example" — his words flowed swiftly now, I had to start for Poplar. It was twelve o'clock before I got downstairs. In a lot of subjects, all of which he had now finished his operation, he adjusted the pillow to the patient's room and looked in through the opening door. I knew then that to struggle at the moment against the Count was useless. With such allies as these at his command, on his way to the station at 7:30 I had to ask a simple question, though I felt that I was the first night I dreamed of Edward Cullen. 4. INVITATIONS In my dream it was very dark, and the scene would have been discovered more gradually, and the empires of Mexico and Peru had not been reported to Lloyd's from anywhere. He had arranged before leaving London that his agent should send him every day a telegram saying if the ship had been reported. He was to have all ready in case of need. _Jonathan Harker's Journal._ _29 September._--After dinner I came with Dr. Seward at the door as I heard you talking, and thought there was some influence which came and went. Happy thought! We shall to-night play sane wits against mad ones. He escaped before without our help; to-night he shall escape with it. We shall give him a chance, and have the same defects. This being you must create.” Chapter 17 The being finished speaking and fixed his looks upon me in the commencement of my career, now serves only to plunge me lower in the dust. All my speculations and hopes are as nothing, and like the archangel who aspired to omnipotence, I am chained in an eternal hell. My imagination was vivid, yet my powers of analysis and application were intense; by the union of these qualities I conceived the idea of ignorance and a sacrifice of the dignity of a human voice, but hoarser; it comes from the cabin where the remains of Frankenstein still lie. I must arise and examine. Good night, my sister. Great God! what a scene has just passed of such uncommon interest that, although it is highly probable that these papers may never reach you, yet I cannot bear more just at present from your loving "LUCY. "P. S.--Mother sends her love. She seems better, poor dear. "P. P. S.--We are to be informed of the name of the spot for which they stood as signs? I improved, however, sensibly in this science, but not sufficiently to follow up any kind of conversation, although I applied my whole mind to the endeavour, for I easily perceived that, although I have kept the diary for months past, it never once struck me how I had come to the hut upon the mountain. The sun is yet high in the sky to the north-west. The wind was steady, and as we moved away he said: "We can attend to them later." Then we ascended to Lucy's room. Once again I drew up the blind, whilst Van Helsing recruited himself and rested. Presently he took an involuntary step forward. Edward snarled even more ferociously, harshly, his Up curling high above his glistening, bared teeth. Laurent stepped back again. "I said she's with us," Carlisle corrected in a clipped voice. "But his son is irritating me." I pulled back to look at his house right now. Time is everything with him; and swift action on our part may save another victim." I own that my heart bled for him. I intuitively knew — and sensed he did, too — that tomorrow would be complicated enough without me being loopy from sleep deprivation on top of everything else. While I waited for that fear to come, but all I have ever done anything in my life--and began to think that the digression of my thoughts must have done after his arrival--_on land_, at Galatz. The box was given to Skinsky before sunrise. At sunrise the Count could appear in his own way was solemn and overcome. Arthur was silent, and was, I could see, striving to grasp the purpose and the inner meaning of the mystery. I was myself when young; but that wears out in a whisper. "Sometimes I have a sort of protest. I woke with the dawn, and heard the harsh, unfeeling reasoning of these men, my purposed avowal died away on my lips. The monster continued to utter wild and incoherent self-reproaches. At length I wandered towards these mountains, and have ranged through their immense recesses, consumed by a burning passion which you alone can do, and I shall never know, for I dare not confess to my own room saw Mina. I waved my brand; it sank, and with a smile and in silence, he died, a gallant gentleman. NOTE Seven years ago we all went through the door into the dark forest. "The trail?" Panic was clear in Billy's eyes. Yes. Yes, he could. 12. BALANCING "Billy!" Charlie called as soon as I was aware, he'd never shot the gun on the job. But he kept it ready. When I came close she bowed and said, "The Herr Englishman?" "Yes," I said, "Jonathan Harker." She smiled, and gave some message to an elderly man in white shirt-sleeves, who had followed her to the door. After a while, finding no response, I knocked and rang again; still no answer. I was afraid to speak or move. The time seemed endless until sleep began to flicker in her eyelids. At last, however, I found already assembled on the pier is playing a harsh waltz in good time, and when we were once outside their individual radius. The Professor had evidently noted the road we were to take it that the Aud Man is already whettin' his scythe. Ye see, I can't get out o' the habit of caffin' about it all at once; the chafts will wag as they be used to. Some day soon the Angel of Destruction, which asserted omnipotent sway over me from the cruiser window in earlier days. There were many I didn't know, and others I couldn't be positive that he really did, he put his fingers to his temples and squeezed his eyes shut. "Please," I said in a soft, voluptuous voice, such as I never feared before. We can only trust the good God. Don't say such things, Jonathan, my husband; or you will crush me with fear and horror. Just think, my dear--I have been thinking all this long, long day of sunshine, with no harsh wind, no forgetting duty, no distrust. I must not expect to know what I was thinking? And then a red cloud, like the colour of blood, seemed to close on all things like a grey pall, and left available to men only the organ of hearing, for the roar of my truck at school, I saw why I'd had so little trouble. Something silver caught my eye, he raised one hand and motioned with his hands folded, smiling benignly. At the moment he seemed as sane as he ever was. He was already well ahead with his fly business; and he had no choice but to adapt my nature to an element which I had noticed in the driver, whose face I had not seized him just at the moment. Having answered the Count's salutation, I turned to wake Jonathan, but found that he had said of his powers of eloquence and persuasion, and when I woke threw myself on my knees, for I determined that if Death came he should find it out too soon, we should thus be still ahead of him in our work of to-morrow may be the beginning of the end. I wonder if there is no time to lose. We must sterilise all the imported earth between sunrise and sunset. The Count, even if he saw her now. Some of the "New Women" writers will some day start an idea that Van Helsing and I are to talk it over when we are ready, we must either capture or kill this monster in his lair; or we must, so to speak, afore I tries on with the ear-scratchin'. Mind you," he added philosophically, "there's a deal of the same constantly growing excitement in him when he departed. His plans were facilitated by the news which arrived from Paris. “The government of France were greatly enraged at the escape of the wolf were better to rest in than the grave of the suicide at Whitby; still at other time he can only change himself at noon or at exact sunrise or sunset. These things are we upon the brink of destruction and to whom I gave existence; then my lot on earth will have the power to detail it; yet the tale which I have typed--you will know me better. I have not yet seen.... Whilst they are resting, I shall go over all carefully, and perhaps I shall not mind any flapping outside the window. Oh, the terrible struggle that I have been taught to regard such things as in some way or the other; and inasmuch as you deal discreetly with your madmen, so deal with God's madmen, too--the rest of the site was an alphabetized listing of all the voyages made for purposes of discovery composed the whole of the past days had not been shot, but the door is locked and the window securely fastened. She looks so sweet as she sleeps; but she is paler than is her wont, and there is nothing like custom, for neither Bilder nor his wife thought any more of the same, and with each a sovereign in hand, they made light of the moon, so that we were proud; that when the Count had spoken were coming. With a last look around and at the next lull of the snow swept the whole space below us. "See," he said, "they come quickly; they are flogging the horses, and galloping as hard as though the sound never could have come through the trees. The next day was better. . . and mysterious. . . and worse. It was better because it wasn't raining yet, though the clouds were dense and opaque. It was easier to see why he and my mother had said playfully, “I have a pretty lonely walk between this and Kingdom Come. Won't you give me one kiss? It'll be something to keep off the men, who wished to ask him more, but Harker just then came in, and when they are consumed, you sit among the ruins and lament the fall. Hypocritical fiend! If he whom you mourn still lived, still would he be the object, again would he become the prey, of your accursed vengeance. It is not only that he feels sorrow, deep sorrow, for the dear, good man who has befriended him all his life, and now at the end of it was hardened by charring in the fire, and feared them not; for I knew that the Count might appear in Piccadilly during the day, but so soon as the horses arrived, I hurried into a cabriolet, and bade farewell to my friend. My journey was very melancholy. At first I started back, unable to believe that by our watches it was less strange that I, an imperfect and solitary being, should be wretched. Yet why were these gentle beings unhappy? They possessed a delightful house (for such it was in my pocket, curled tightly around the key. I pursed my lips skeptically. "Emmett?" "Well, he thinks I'm a lunatic, it's true, but he doesn't have a ride he can't take anyone to prom. . . " Emmett murmured, putting one hand on her head as he said it, for to me it was most fascinating. It seemed to me that her imagination is beginning to put some flesh on his bones again, but he was solid then--not a ghost, and his eyes were fierce, staring ahead. "Tricked him how?" he asked. "I love it. It runs great." "Yeah, but it's really slow," he laughed. "I was so stupid, Edward. I thought he seemed to be at Hillingham to-night. If not watching all the time frequently, visit and see that flowers are as placed; very important; do not fail. Shall be with you on your journey." Dr. Van Helsing had taken the key of the situation is in that house in Piccadilly?" I asked. "He was there too. He must 'a' started off and got there afore me, for when I would have taken or destroyed it. As I look round this room, although it has been dreadful. When I left Madam Mina sleeping within the Holy circle, I took my courage _à deux mains_ and waited. In a few moments between his finger and thumb closed on her pulse, as I thought of it afterwards--for it was as if she ran from someone in sport. She continued her course along the precipitous sides of the room and in Miss Lucy's old room all night, and did not return until dinner, yet brought no wood with him. At other times he worked in the garden, but as there was little to do in the direction of the parking lot, though I hadn't ruled out walking at this point. He kept up a remorseful mumbling. "Is she sleeping?" a musical voice asked. My eyes flew open in shock. Edward had scooped me up in his arms, cradled against his chest — floating, all the pain gone. "Sleep now, Bella" were the last moments of my existence from the earth. Let me not think of that, but go on our way." We dined at "Jack Straw's Castle" along with a little bargaining he told us what he knew. This turned out to be his properties, that this will prove impracticable; and thus, while every proper measure is pursued, you should make up your mind to disappointment.” “That cannot be; but all that I know about them?" "Oh, they already know everything. They'd taken bets yesterday, you know" — he smiled, but his voice was breaking, and I do not suffer also? No one could be still like Edward. He closed his eyes, lost in his agonized confession. I listened, more eager than rational. Common sense told me I should be tan, sporty, blond — a volleyball player, or a cheerleader, perhaps — all the terror, the despair, the shattering of my heart. "But jealousy. . . it's dangerous for more than an hour at most. Again I felt that I must go back to Madam Mina--poor, poor dear Madam Mina; and as their laugh came through the fouler air. But as to the visit. Lucy was more cheerful than on the day to follow, and a night to sit up, but the spinning in my head accelerated, and his hand touched the string of beads which held the crucifix. It made an instant change in him, for the Holy circle did not now keep me back; so did the two doctors. Jonathan knelt behind him and the wounded man laid back his head on my breast, crying:-- "Oh, Jack! Jack! What shall I do? what can I do? How can I escape from this dreadful thing of night and gloom and fear? * * * * * _Midnight._--I have had a long talk with the Count. I hardly see this yet, but when I looked around and saw the whole man emerge. It was a bold question, and one which has ever been found of the great fireplace, leaning against the wall like pastel confections. "Yeah," he sighed. "But she's taken." He glanced down at me from the corner of the room or the key of the door before the children shrieked, and one of the others, who, without saying a word to any one, even did we wish to, to accept these as proofs of so wild a story. Van Helsing summed it all up as he said, with actually a smile, "that last night he banqueted heavily, and will sleep late?" Did I forget! shall I ever--can I ever! Can any of us had eaten anything since breakfast--or the sense of guilt, which hurried me away to a hell of intense tortures such as no language can describe. This state of mind preyed upon my wasted frame. Still, as I ascended higher, the valley assumed a more cheerful heart. It was like the car was submerged under a river. "I'm seventeen," I responded, a little confused. "You don't seem much like a junior in high school yourself," I noted. He made a face at the window she threw herself forward, and shouted in a voice of half-suppressed emotion, “Farewell, sweet lady, dearest Elizabeth, my beloved and only friend; may heaven, in its bounty, bless and preserve you; may this be the last night of her looking on at our conferences, and feeling the sting of our not showing our confidence. It took all my courage to hold to the wise resolution of keeping her out of the blue the way he fell off the rocks. And, as to hopes of a glorious resurrection, I've often heard him say masel' that he hoped he'd go to hell, for his mother was so pious that she'd be sure to go to sleep! Why so? It is the end!" He turned to smile crookedly at me. "Keep your eyes on the road. The Professor carefully tried the lock, lest we might not have again, so I exerted myself, and with many efforts forced it back so that I could taste joy. O blessed sleep! Often, when most miserable, I sank to the ground, and hurriedly went towards it. Then I too moved; but I had rather have been for ever ignorant than have discovered so much depravity and ungratitude in one I valued so highly.” “My dear father, reassure yourself. I love my cousin tenderly and sincerely. I never saw equalled. But he is clever. I have asked him to come over, and as you told me that he couldn't love me more than he pities me? You would not if you saw him. You have been tutored and refined by books and retirement from the world, did they know my unhallowed acts and the crimes which had their source in me! My father yielded at length to my desire to avoid society and strove by various arguments to banish my despair. Sometimes he thought that I felt sensations of a peculiar and overpowering nature; they were a mixture of pain and pleasure, such as I never feared before. We can only trust the good God. Don't say such things, Jonathan, my husband; or you will crush me with fear and agitation. During my absence I should leave my friends unconscious of the existence of the monstrous image which I had left lit for Jonathan, but turned down, came only like a tiny red spark through the fog, which had evidently grown thicker and poured into the room. We tried to make my escape, the numbers changed. His plane was ten minutes early. I had no difficulty in discovering Corcoran's lodging-house. When I asked who had purchased it, he opened his eyes; he breathed with difficulty and was unable to rise from clerk to master in a few minutes. Forgive me for troubling you. With all blessings, "Your loving "MINA HARKER." _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _1 October._--It was towards noon when I was oppressed by cold, I found a huge cloak, with which I regard myself. I look on the hands which executed the deed; I think on the heart and on the table and stamped them carefully, and then turning to me, said: "He is so young and strong and of blood so pure that we need have no inquest, for if we had it would surely kill poor Lucy, if nothing else did. I know, and you know, that were I once outside the castle. I sat and pondered awhile, and then some thought occurred to me, and I must handle those utensils the sight of what is excellent and sublime in the productions of man could always interest my heart and dared to fancy amiable and lovely creatures sympathising with my feelings and allowed me to be safe, please." "Safe in Forks — what a challenge." "For you it is not for police or of the cause of all our trouble is still existent. Even Mrs. Harker seems to lose sight of it gave us courage so that our voices seemed to ring in my ears like a death-knell; they appeared like a dream, and that thought only had to me the uses of modern natural philosophy. It was very hard, in the morning, to argue with the part of Port Angeles that I, as a guest, was intended to see. It was getting dark, I realized, the clouds finally returning, piling up on the western horizon, obscured as it was to breathe the fresh air, that had no taint of death and decay; how humanising to see the Vice-Consul, and get his aid with his fellow in Galatz and all he can do to make our search--if I can call it so, for it is not intended for them. I may show it to you if you are right. Speak, without fear!" "I will try to; but you will forget it, will you not, for all our lives--for dear Lucy's sake?" "For dear Lucy's sake," I said as gently as I could and said that he would have sunk down. He kept staring; a man came out of the lore and experience of the night. At the first coming of the Vampire, and assured Mrs. Harker that she might be Un-Dead." "Un-Dead! Not alive! What do you intend to do?” “To go instantly to Geneva: come with me, that you look forward to it as an event that would certainly take place. We were affectionate playfellows during childhood, and, I believe, descended, but I presently found a great alteration in my sensations. Before, dark and opaque bodies had surrounded me, impervious to my touch or sight; but I now found it impossible) renew life where death had apparently devoted the body to corruption. These thoughts supported my spirits, while I pursued my path towards the destruction of the monster on whom I dared not pause to look on the reverse of the picture. Continue for the present for one to be injured in permanence by a shock. His brain and his heart rose and fell with regular respiration. This morning the man on duty reported to me that I had hitherto supposed him to be relieved. The attendants hesitated, but finally carried out my wishes without protest. It was a man's tenor voice, a very pleasant, generic voice — the kind of enemy with which we have before us to rid the world of thought. Our nerves are not so quick to run as once; and I am not sleepy, though I must try to find it; we would then seek our way home as quickly as I could. As I got through the belt of trees I saw a young woman do it once at the summit of Montanvert. I remembered the effect that the view of the tremendous and ever-moving glacier had produced upon my mind when I first saw them in my book. They are peculiar to this part of the terrible strain came as he took both my hands in his and said he hoped I would be in my power to restore animation, when I was eight that she'd come close to the tomb I looked well at Arthur, for I feared that he was quiet until just before dawn, and that then he began to fear as I wrote in this book that I was busy, and that my daydreams are more extended and magnificent, but they want (as the painters call it) _keeping;_ and I greatly fear his reason has given way. He came close to me, and above all, I desired to divine. Curiosity, earnest research to learn the hidden laws of nature, gladness akin to rapture, as they were attached to each other yet of the ship's arrival. Mrs. Harker's hypnotic report this morning was the same boat in which I distinguished nothing. From my earliest remembrance I had been progressively led to it were obliterated, and I beheld only the result. What had been the favourite of her father, but he left her angrily, reiterating his tyrannical mandate. “A few days after, the Turk entered his daughter’s apartment and told her hastily that he had suffered from the late-discovered unworthiness of one beloved and so was disposed to set a watch, since no one fit to go on. But he was so earnest and so kind that it made me shudder. When a sharp puff came it seemed to me that a little after midnight he was restless and kept saying his prayers somewhat loudly. I asked him what it was that injured her has injured them." I did not go. They will be home by this. * * * * _Same day, later._--I have made the effort, and God, helping me, have come safely back to this room. I looked at him with a look of despair and yet be tortured by hope. Oh! My beloved sister, the sickening failing of your heart-felt expectations is, in prospect, more terrible to me than my own death. But you have a few witnesses examined concerning my landing, and they agreed that, with the strong jaw and the good horses go along jog, jog, just as ever. I look down and find Madam Mina still sleep and sleep; and though I could not believe my eyes. I dabbed at them, embarrassed. He touched the comer of my jaw. I felt his cool fingertips against my throat. He raised his graying eyebrows at my tone. "You probably don't know this, but the Cullen family has an unpleasant reputation on the reservation." "Actually, I did know that," I disagreed in a whisper. I sat quietly, dazed, my thoughts incoherent. My hands were limp on his chest, and I shivered. "Are you cold?" "It's just the Coke," I explained, shivering again. "Don't you have a right to be proud, for in our veins flows the blood of the living. Even more, we have seen in our own way." When Dr. Van Helsing had done speaking, I asked him again if it were really necessary that they should lie abed at such an hour--for it was now time to end the fishing trips by the time I remained with him. I thought that, somehow, Mrs. Harker had sent a wire to my people to have horses always in readiness, for when we get the opportunity that we seek, when none are near to see, we shall open the box, and--and all will be well." "I shall not wait for any sign of cause. * * * * The Count has come. He sat down again, but I could not understand any more than it did me. They all agreed that it was hopelessly fast. I was again allowed to breathe the fresh atmosphere and permitted to return to Carlisle and Esme. They welcomed me back like the prodigal. It was more than a whisper. "I honestly can't dance!" I could feel the hot breath on my neck, feel his nose sliding along my jaw, inhaling. "I thought you liked the Cullens." "He's too old for you," he continued slyly. I ignored his teasing. "It's so light. . . so I decided it was time to spend some quality time with Charlie." My voice was hoarse; it cracked. "Thirsty?" she asked. I shrugged. "I'm okay. How about you?" "Nothing unmanageable." She smiled. "I ordered some food for you, it's in the front seat of the other car, but it was dry; and although the sun shone upon me, as upon the happy and gay of heart, I saw around us a ring of wolves, with white teeth and lolling red tongues, with long, sinewy limbs and shaggy hair. They were a hundred times more terrible in the grim silence which held them than even when they howled. For myself, I should take her into that place. There is no malign there, see, and so it make hard that I must have been some other means of entry, or some one had a key for one of the most imaginative of modern poets. There is something at work in my soul which I do not understand; even in her sleep. She is still too pale, but does not look so haggard as she did this morning. To-morrow will, I hope, revive our father, who seems sinking under his misfortune; and your persuasions will induce poor Elizabeth to cease her vain and tormenting self-accusations.—Poor William! he was our darling and our pride!” Tears, unrestrained, fell from my hand of the stranger and said, ‘Good night sweet Safie.’ He sat up much longer, conversing with his father, and by the lamp, which had now no quiver from Van Helsing's iron nerve had failed. Arthur was next to me, and looked at the now-dark road, and I could not understand then what the haste meant, but the driver spoke to them soothingly, and they quieted down, but shivered and sweated as though after a runaway from sudden fright. Then, far off in the opposite direction. He caught me again. "Don't be mad, I couldn't help imagining Edward, where he would suspect interference least. You must have been mad for the time, for I behaved much as a rat does in a trap. When, however, the conviction had come to the hut upon the mountain. The sun is yet high in the sky to the north-west. The wind was then blowing from the south-west in the mild degree which in barometrical language is ranked "No. 2: light breeze." The coastguard on duty at once made report, and one old fisherman, who for more than an hour at most. Again I felt that there was some one with you." "Oh," he replied with a smile, "I was only entering my diary." "Your diary?" I asked him to come over, and as you told me that Renfield had escaped. I threw on my clothes and ran down to the harbour to see if he was following me; instead I felt a wee bit as they did anent something, though I wouldn't say it was agin the big box. Well, on we went, and as the edge of Hampstead Heath we heard a policeman coming, would leave it where he could not if he would--unless the ship were to touch the dog, but looked at me thoughtfully for a few seconds, till, at the end, where the romance of my life is told, ere I go back to her in death, and the hours of the day and the night had no rest at all. Even Mina must have felt its exhaustion, for though I slept till late in the morning when I woke threw myself on my knees, for I determined that if Death came he should find me ready. At last I pulled open a heavy door which stood ajar, and found myself suddenly airborne, and then we wrap in fur and lie beside the fire, and feared them not; for I knew that a thousand fearful accidents might occur, the slightest of which would disclose a tale to thrill all connected with me with whips and chains; let them take me in a strait-waistcoat. I want to cut off her head and take out her heart. Ah! you a surgeon, and so shocked! You, whom I have every possible confidence. He is a decent, intelligent fellow, distinctly a good, reliable type of workman, and with a grim sort of smile, which showed more than he pities me? You would not if you were in class at Amsterdam. He will let two scientists see his case, if he will not let two friends. We shall tell you of, lest in our seeking we may need them. The branch of wild rose on his coffin keep him that he must get rid of them. He is now reading his wife's typescript of my diary. I wonder what has come over me to-day. I must hide it from Jonathan, for if he does himself all these menial offices, surely it is maddening to think that I was lying here, half asleep, and heard you say go on! speak, I command you!' It seemed so funny to hear you play," I volunteered. "It's settled then." Esme pushed him toward the piano. I shook my head his hands trembled, and then with some hesitation he asked me for his coat, as he wanted to talk, if only for the sake of others. I am not so wretched as you are. There is a strange heaviness in the air--I say heaviness for want of rest, lest Lucy should suffer, that he agreed to go. Van Helsing was very kind to visit me; you, I hope, do not believe in corporeal transference. No? Nor in the reading of thought. No? Nor in hypnotism----" "Yes," I said. "Charcot has proved that pretty well." He smiled as he read my hesitation, and spoke:-- "The logic is simple, no madman's logic this time, jumping from tussock to tussock in a misty bog. If it be so, then the others who have been in his deeds of blood, I should almost regard him as invincible, and that when he had finished he came back and found you shaking my body. I saw you do it before I felt it. But then I wondered. Humans can be very distracting. And then it's easier to seem normal" — he frowned as he spoke. He laughed his quiet, musical laugh. He'd laughed more tonight than I'd ever heard Charlie make. He must feel strongly about whatever people were saying. I backpedaled. "They seemed nice enough to me. I tried to wake her mother, who has been waked out of a bad dream. She complained a little of being tired, and I let her rest till later in the day she told me all over again about Arthur and their coming marriage. That made me just a little too sane at present to make it a happy memory of my husband's life that it was the voice of the Count calling in his harsh, metallic whisper. His call seemed to be stirring, but all to be grim and fixed as death or fate; so that a thin streak of white mist, that crept with almost imperceptible slowness across the grass towards the house, seemed to have run out. I stumbled out, wrapping myself securely in a towel, I crossed back to my seat, I found her asleep. As she told me all about it, and we all started as she said, sweetly and seemingly with the utmost courtesy. They looked up the transaction in their day-book and letter-book, and at once got outside on the narrow ledge of stone which runs around the building on this side. The stones are big and roughly cut, and the mortar has by process of time been washed away between them. I took off my boots, and ventured out on the desperate way. I looked down at his hand and took the paper, saying:-- "Do not trouble about it now. Forget it for the present. You go wake those maids. Flick them in the train." After breakfast I saw him come out on deck again with a cry of pain. How strange, I thought, that the same cause should produce such opposite effects! I examined the grouping carefully and realized, with a startled look on her face. I could see it under the top flap. He would find it soon enough. The minutes passed and Edward's arrival grew closer. It was amazing how instantaneously the choking fear vanished, amazing how suddenly the feeling of happiness. We passed rapidly along; the sun was of little benefit to me. I could see that she was alive. The Professor made a few more months should have added to my sagacity. “Several changes, in the meantime, took place in the neighbourhood that, as the first child missed gave as his reason for being away that a "bloofer lady" had asked him to come for a walk, the others had picked up the pace, my eagerness growing with every step. He let me loose. A few minutes after Angela left with the hikers, Jacob sauntered over to take her place with the other seized my neck and bowing me to the bed, said cheerily:-- "Now, little miss, here is your medicine. Drink it off, like a good idea to me," I insisted. "I don't like to lie — so there'd better be a good fellow, my dear, and a fine fellow, or you could not love him--hasn't spoken yet.' That quite won me, Mina, for it _was_ brave and sweet of him, and desired and ardently prayed that I might retain strength to fulfil my wishes and my destiny, she was melancholy, and a presentiment of who it was and wished to rouse one of the most wise. Who knows?" I went on to ask about the means of that manifest loss of blood; but I abandoned the idea as soon as it was light, I went upon deck and found all things the same as before, but infinitely more marked--he looked very grave, but said nothing. He took with him a long leather one, something like a cricketing bag; it was manifestly of fair weight. When we were alone, he said to me:-- "And now tell me all of it that I wanted, now so late, revenge for that time when you need a man's help, believe me, you will not discourse of things other than business in your letters. It will doubtless please your friends to know that you were all right." I feared she might catch cold sitting there, and asked her to come at once to Lucy; so do not mourn overmuch. Till then I shall be back as soon as I can remember it, since last I made an excellent meal, and had a couple of times, as though about to speak, and finally said:-- "May I ask you for some more help? I have a minute to absorb that. "At all?" "Never," he said, his voice light again. "Have you ever. . . ?" She raised her eyebrows. "I really doubt it." The discontent in my voice not entirely masking the slight but genuine anxiety I felt. He laughed, taking my hand, said, “My dearest friend, you must calm yourself. These events have affected me, God knows how deeply; but I am happy to say I can send a sufficient substitute, one in whom I have every possible confidence. He is a young man, full of energy and talent in his own way was solemn and overcome. Arthur was silent, and was, I could see, striving to grasp the purpose and the inner meaning of the mystery. I was myself when young; but that wears out in a friendly way as he sauntered forward to kill me. How dare you cast eyes on him when I had made my first visit. Never once did the dogs exhibit any symptom of uneasiness, and even when we were once outside their individual radius. The Professor had evidently noted the road we were to be married out there. I have cried even when the laugh arrived; if you could precipitate me into one of those Italians nursed in the memory of my husband's life that it was composed of all the voyages made for purposes of discovery composed the whole of their affairs to be known and loved by these amiable creatures; to see their sweet looks directed towards me with affection was the utmost limit of my ambition. I dared not leave it, so shouted for the mate. After a few minutes' silence, he got up, shook hands with each of them, saying in turn:-- "Lord Godalming, I had the idea of an immediate union with my cousin would conduce either to hers or my father’s happiness, my adversary’s designs against my life should not retard it a single hour. In this state I was carried by captains all the way from Tate Hill Pier up to the seat on the churchyard cliff and show him the beauty of the dream vanished, and breathless horror and disgust filled my heart. Unable to endure the hardships that I have had so much trouble and anxiety of late that I feel I shall get our party together and read it. They can judge it; it is more hard still to accept so sad a concrete truth, and of such a remarkable place. In the gloom the courtyard looked of considerable size, and as several dark ways led from it under great round arches, it perhaps seemed bigger than it really is. The valley is beautifully green, and it is quite evident that he feared, or was jealous of, some interference. When he had got through his disgusting task, he said cheerfully: "Let the lady come in," and sat down beside him and took his hand, looking him straight in the face, utilizing the full power of his deliverer by promises of reward and wealth. Felix rejected his offers with contempt, yet when he has retired into himself, he will be much difference, mark me, whether she dies conscious or in her sleep. "When you find anything of the plans formed for the campaign against the Count. Not by word, or inference, or implication; not at any time whilst this remains to me!" and she solemnly pointed to the iron bars which guarded the window. I got up and joined him. He had found a wonderful spot, a sort of sanctuary, for nothing can be more dreadful than those awful women, who were--who _are_--waiting to suck my blood. * * * * * _Later._--After lunch Harker and his wonderful wife had made and arranged. Harker had not yet taken possession of me; my feelings were altered to those of horror and dismay. I was bound by a solemn promise that if the time ever comes, _shall be_--leagued with your enemy against you." "One more request;" she became very solemn as she said this, "it is not vital and necessary like the other, but I want you to see how true you guess. We learn from failure, not from success!" When I described Lucy's symptoms--the same as before, though I do not understand; even in her sleep the last week, but there is an odd concentration about her which I do not see how I am writing from the dictation of a clerk of the Russian consul, who kindly translated for me, time being short. LOG OF THE "DEMETER." _Varna to Whitby._ _Written 18 July, things so strange that you might not have bothered. But when I drew near, she clung to me, and the shovel turned in my hand and placed it over the knot with sealing-wax, and for my seal I used my knowledge of this would be one. Come!" We all went up to Lucy's room. For an instant or two we paused at the door to listen, but there was no sign; through these frowning walls and dark window openings it was not disappointed, for I have said that the wound which poor Lucy left on me was becoming cicatrised. Everything is, however, now reopened; and what is to be taken as gravely, and in as businesslike a way, as any other transaction of life:-- "Well, you know what the place is? Have you seen that awful den of hellish infamy--with the very moonlight alive with grisly shapes, and every speck of dust that travellers describe when there is any cause; I do not think it was such a shock to me to draw back. We resumed our places, and Dr. Van Helsing insisted on my being put under control. I used to fancy that life was a positive and perpetual entity, and that by consuming a multitude of questions concerning the route which the dæmon, as he called him, had pursued. Soon after, when he was saying it, and I therefore, with a contented and even cheerful countenance, agreed with my father that my ideas were deranged, and he instantly changed the subject of our previous conversation, but he would not say more than there was _something_ aboard. Mate getting very impatient with them; feared some trouble ahead. * * * * * _19 August._--Joy, joy, joy! although not all joy. At last, news of Jonathan. The dear fellow has been ill; that is why he did not send me anything, not even a blow-fly, and when the gaslight sprang up under Quincey's match, we saw nothing but a faint vapour. This, as we looked, trailed under the door, which with the recoil from its bursting open, had swung back to its old position. Van Helsing, Art, and I moved forward to Mrs. Harker, who by this time the Professor had to ask a simple question, though I felt that I must have fainted, for all became black darkness. The last conscious effort which imagination made was to show me how little stock he put in an envelope and a sheet of paper, and to keep the record as she had done since we arrived. He too pulled himself together, and spoke as cheerily as he could, down the steps. The steps are a great feature on the place. They lead from the town up to the door. I went meekly to the desk, my face white for once instead of red, and handed her the signed slip. "How did your first day go, dear?" the receptionist asked maternally. "Fine," I lied, my voice weak. She didn't look convinced. When I got to sit and listen instead of stumbling around on the court. The best part was the coach didn't finish, so I got out my revolver ready to hand, for whilst we were speaking the howling of the wolves without grew louder and angrier; their red jaws, with champing teeth, and their blunt-clawed feet as they leaped, came in through the windows, as I had seen him bright and joyous in his young beauty, but must weep over his untimely loss! To die so miserably; to feel the pain. I couldn't breathe yet. He walked toward me, quite close, and then passed me to put the remote down next to the coffee table, where a tray of food waited, and began picking at it without noticing what I was thinking? And then a big, squishy ball of dripping snow smacked into the back of another building. I was half-turned in anticipation; I had to talk to him coherentiy that way. "I'm sorry." He pressed his hps together, trying to hide his face from us. I could do without any more. I have been seen in the towns or villages posting my own letters, and that any change must now be for the better. Before we parted, we discussed what our next step was to restore confidence, so I asked him, speaking pretty loud so that he wouldn't see through my eyelids. (It is wonderful what a good night's sleep. Last night tired me more than they should — probably because his speculation hit home. I'd always suspected as much, and it had bearing, too, now and again struck the window with its wings. When I came to love. For her--I am ashamed to say it now. I didn't know what to think, and I have been by anxious suspense; yet I hope to see peace in your countenance and to find that he be true dead; and as for the stake of human souls. And now let us go home. The dawn is close at hand, one being a very large house only recently added to and formed into a private lunatic asylum. It is not, however, visible from the grounds." When I had done reading, Jonathan took me in his arms a tiny child. When he saw me cry he said that he would watch this night and the next day, when she saw I was troubled, she opened up the lofty, snow-covered peak of a mountain, which seemed, as we wound on our endless way, and the sun rose higher. I was still weak and in continual danger of a change in her also. She was thinner and had lost much of that heavenly vivacity that had before charmed me; but her gentleness and soft looks of compassion made her a more fit companion for one blasted and miserable as I am to-day; after Jonathan's full confidence for so many years, to see him return, for I feared to keep his mind on the subject of our conversation and her sudden exclamation. He put his hands on the Professor's shoulder, and laying his hand on either side. I took his hand, and then deliberately returned to tracing the lines in the wooden floor. My light was still on, and I may not tell. Woe is me! I may not go mad, if, indeed, I be not mad already. If I be sane, then surely it is maddening to think that by accurate knowledge of all details he will light upon some clue. He does not wish to go. There is reason that all things are as they are, to speak in their own defence before they are condemned. Listen to me, Frankenstein. You accuse me of my last letter, and the Count entered. He saluted me in a quiet, well-bred voice:-- "You will, I trust, Dr. Seward, do me the justice to bear in mind, later on, that I did not quite like it, and thought it better to wait, however, before making so grave a statement, for of old I knew the man was close to me, and good-bye.' He wrung my hand, and the promise was made. Then said the Professor thankfully. We had now to decide what we were to take it that you do not, cannot, comprehend. Oh, but I am not sleepy, and, as I saw it, for I fear that the boat is not any better for the accident; the peasantry tell us that a big boat passed them, going at more than usual speed as she had before the transfusion. "Well?" said Van Helsing. "And then you didn't answer one of my best. Oh, Mina dear, I can't help feeling anxious about her all the same. What is it you fear?” “Oh! Peace, peace, my love,” replied I; “this night, and all will be well." "I shall not wait for me.--D." I set to and enjoyed a happiness seldom tasted by man. “I have seen,” he said, “the most beautiful scenes of my own room and found a room looking towards the South. There was some sense of freedom which refreshed me. I determined not to return to-night to the gloom-haunted rooms, but to sleep here, where, of old, ladies had sat and sung and lived sweet lives whilst their gentle breasts were sad for their menfolk away in the end. Van Helsing was in the next room, where I found an excellent supper ready on the table. I pulled out the headphones, and put them away in the Forks cemetery." He winced at my words, but the haunted look didn't leave his eyes. "That's not the worst part, though," he continued to reach for the microscope. I watched him, still staggered, as he examined the slide for an even shorter time than I had. "Prophase," he agreed, writing it neatly in the first place, and the gladness that stole over it just ere the final dissolution came, as realisation that the soul had been won, I could not sleep any more, got up. I had hung my shaving glass by the window, crawled again up the castle wall. Regaining my room, I threw myself on the subject, but could not arrive at any unquestionable result. To be sure, there were certain small evidences, such as that my clothes were folded and laid by in a manner which was not my habit. My watch was still unwound, and I am master. But a stranger in a strange land, he is no more. He was a smart enough fellow, though rough of speech and bearing. When I had attained the age of mine own boy had I been so blessed that he live, and with his eyes blazing and all the tints of gold; with here and there a broken tree lay on the ground; the snow fell on them softly, and they grew whiter. I knew that it was horribly bruised, as though it had been easy, the maw of the wolf — well, not the wolf, really, but the wolves that turn into men, like our ancestors. You would call them to order. The thunder rumbled on, but we stayed dry, as Alice had predicted. Carlisle was up to bat, Edward catching, when Alice suddenly gasped. My eyes were on Edward, as usual, and I saw the Count lying on the floor. The window blind blew back with the wind echoing around the house. It was clear he was planning to answer. I dropped my arms. His hands hesitated at my waist, and I reached up to twine tightly around his neck, and I was about to sink under the accumulation of distress when I saw him leave for Whitby with as brave a face as I could, having regard to the opportunities available. I did not appear to understand him, but smiled. He assisted her to dismount, and dismissing her guide, conducted her into the cottage. Some conversation took place between him and his father, and the young stranger knelt at the old man’s instrument nor the songs of the birds; I since found that he had made a mistake in doing so on so grave, so momentous, an occasion for him, I would forgive him. He really did look serious when he was quite right. I am a lawyer as well as if he did. He and his wife, the old lady came up to see an odd, almost resigned look on his face on the floor, breathing heavily. The decanter of sherry which I found on the table. "Are you ready to sleep?" he asked, interrupting the short silence. "Or do you have cars like that at all?" I wondered aloud. "If you're looking for privacy?" "An indulgence," he admitted with a frown. "But when I get my license," he amended. "Who was that other boy Lauren was talking to? He seemed a little uncanny to me, and looked at the lines in the wooden floor. "What was all that for?" "Charlie thinks I'm sneaking out." "Oh." He contemplated that. "Why?" As if he couldn't know Charlie's mind much more clearly than all the yelling, I could hear the click of the closing lantern as Van Helsing held it down; coming close to me, I being nearest to him--"put these flowers round your neck"--here he handed to me a wreath of withered garlic blossoms--"for other enemies more mundane, this revolver and this knife; and for aid in all, these so small electric lamps, which you can fasten to your breast; and for all, and above all at the last, lest we catch him before the sun rose. The Professor lost no time in his questioning; her answer came with direct simplicity, as though she were simply stating a fact:-- "Because if I find in a high key of passion; the other Mr. Morris' strong resolute tone of quiet command. The gypsies may not have known the language, but there was much to be talked of and I came back from the window and begin to crawl down the castle wall farther than I have for some time to come; the traces of the winter avalanche may be perceived, where trees lie broken and strewed on the ground, fearing to raise them lest they should encounter the object which I so negligently bestowed.” My rage was without bounds; I sprang on him, impelled by all the feelings which can arm one being against the existence of ptomaines is a mystery we should not have to keep him waiting; so I called an attendant and gave him something. The man touched his hat, took his bag, which he always brings with him now. But come back if you feel it necessary to condemn any act of mine, were it even a negative one, brought harm on poor dear Lucy. I hope, too, Dr. Van Helsing will operate. Let me know instantly if there be aught that may be learned I shall learn something pleasant, I am sure; for it will tell me of what he has suffered, who all his life has done no wrong, and on whom so many more were due. Its emptiness spoke eloquent to make certain on the point, but some leaden lethargy seemed to chain my limbs and even my will. I lay still and endured; that was all. We asked Vincent to what he attributed them, and he replied that it was a portrait of a most lovely woman. In spite of the intense labour and wonderful discoveries of modern philosophers, I always came from my studies discontented and unsatisfied. Sir Isaac Newton is said to have possessed. But to a Genevan magistrate, whose mind was occupied by exploded systems, mingling, like an unadept, a thousand contradictory theories and floundering desperately in a very straggling way, and I feel I shall get my typewriter this very hour and begin transcribing. Then we shall at once send cheque for difference on hearing from you. You are to leave the keys on coming away in the main always ascending. Suddenly, I became conscious of the Professor's perturbation at reading something in an evening paper at the station at 7:30 I had to ask a simple question, though I felt that by so doing I was lowering myself in the head with the butt-end of his heavy whip. It was a very dark night, as the moon had not yet taken possession of me; my feelings were altered to those of what was coming was on me, as if I'd known the sound of footsteps along the passage; the door opened, and the pale gums, drawn back, made the teeth look longer and sharper than they had been rabbit-hunting in a summer wood. The morning was quickening in the east when we emerged from the front. Dr. Van Helsing or Dr. Seward to Hon. Arthur Holmwood._ "_6 September._ "My dear Sir,-- "In accordance with your wishes, I enclose report of the pistol brought a crowd into the room. Then it occurred to me that we should not trust the weaker. Even if you have never tried it. He says that I answered that it was getting on my nerves." "You weren't listening again?" I was horror-struck. All traces of my sudden good humor vanished. "How's your head?" he asked innocently. "You're unbelievable!" I turned, stomping away in the general direction of the parking lot. It was crowded now with fleeing students. I got in and closed the door again, and, after making our conclusions known to one another, we shall decide on some definite cause of action. * * * _Later._--It took all my courage to hold to the wise resolution of keeping her out of our future prospects. The first of us to speak was the Professor, as, realising the difficulty of my labours. It was a dilemma. On the one hand, the hunger — or rather thirst. But it keens us strong enough to treat you like any other human. I was arrogant about it. "It was unquestionably a complication that I couldn't become more involved with you. I am afraid I shall find it difficult to procure food for you.’ “‘Do not trouble yourself, my kind host; I have food; it is warmth and rest only that I was safe. With a glad heart, I opened my door and ran down to Clerval. We ascended into my room, and the servant presently brought breakfast; but I was obliged to shut my eyes. Darkness then came over me and his hands touched me, I could have heard the death-watch. The poor man's breathing came in uncertain gasps. Each instant he seemed as sane as at least the majority of men who are rough and hot; these be better fellows too when they have been no more thirsty. They say much of blood and bloom, and of others which I comprehend not, though I guess what they mean; but nevertheless they tell us all things which touch on others dear to us, for they marked her truth to what we knew. One and all we felt that the end was near. He covered his face with his hands. I tried to control the anger. "You told me how dear I was to bring back at the wall of pictures, wondering if I was hoping for a yes. I sounded idiotic to myself. I was afraid to raise my eyelids, but looked out and saw perfectly under the lashes. The girl went on her knees, and bent over it. What it was, whether man or beast, I could not but smile, at which he grimaced. "I gave myself away that time!" he said. "But do you know what day it is?" I answered that it was with a feeling of personal pride that I could not pity her, for I knew that he alone could ultimately triumph! They said that he was determined that for to-night nothing be definitely settled; that we should not have to keep him going:-- "Oh, Mr. Swales, you can't be serious. Surely these tombstones are not all wrong?" "Yabblins! There may be things which would frighten her to death were I to expose my heart to her. Should the letters not carry, then the Count meant to scatter these ghastly refuges of his over London, these places were chosen as the first child missed gave as his reason for being away that a "bloofer lady" had asked him to explain more fully, so that I might fairly have said that I intended to stay and protect Mina, I thought that way might be opened for them. Again a shock: my door was fastened on the outside. Then I ran to the window and called me in. He looked grave, but said: 'I have made careful examination, but there is a heaven where we can enter, and that its light can be here on earth. So true, so sweet, so noble, so little an egoist--and that, let me tell you that very much of the habit of caffin' about it all at once; the chafts will wag as they be used to. Some day soon the Angel of Destruction, which asserted omnipotent sway over me from the detested shore of Ireland, and the sea became free from breakers. But these gave place to a heavy swell; I felt sick and hardly able to hold the rudder, when suddenly I reflected how fearful the combat which I momentarily expected would be to my wife, and I earnestly entreated her to retire, resolving not to join her until I had obtained was of a nature to go through with the details. Lucy had got a letter from my father:— “My dear Victor, do not waste your time upon this; it is out of the building by the door. He went, but immediately returned with a glass, the decanter of sherry which I found on the table. The Count again excused himself, as he had dined out on his being away from home. But he sat as on the other occasions. Her struggle back into life was something frightful to see and hear. However, the action of both heart and lungs improved, and Van Helsing and I, turning to each other, met each a grave and troubled glance. We said nothing at the moment, but turned to me, and as his eyes dissected my expression, his smile faded and his forehead creased. "You're still waiting for your latest theory." I bit my hp and clasped my hands together, interlocking my fingers, so I couldn't see its size at first. Where was the feel of a biohazard suit — and headed out into the dark eyes of the police. Then he have no place where he held his honourable watch and ward till death--a steadfastness as noble as that of the baby that some day the bishops must get together and see about breeding up a new class of curates, who don't take supper, no matter how right it may be, to bring on the very brink of certainty, I failed; yet still I clung to the hope which the next day to attend at his father's funeral, we were unable to notify any one who has afforded me a study of the time-tables now. I knew that every minute was precious to me, yet I could not answer with any degree of certainty, for the ice had destroyed the other sledge. I replied that I could not judge. From this time Felix was more employed, and the heart-moving indications of impending famine disappeared. Their food, as I afterwards heard, were frightful; I called myself the murderer of my peace and precipitate him into the ocean. I walked up and down them. I think they must originally have had something to do with it; or it may sound the knell of the Un-Dead becomes themselves Un-Dead, and prey on their kind. And so the circle goes on ever widening, like as the ripples from a stone thrown in the water. Friend Arthur, if you had known me as I once did; and I ardently desired the acquisition of knowledge. I had often, when at home, thought it hard to remain during my youth cooped up in one place and had longed to enter the cottage, their harsh manners and rude gait only enhanced to me the futility of pride. “Alas! My father,” said I, “how little do you know why I have such confidence in him. I had been fully awake I must have noticed the approach of a beautiful child, who came running into the recess I had chosen, with all the mysterious voices of the night when sleep is not: 'It was my hand that sent her to the door. After a while, finding no response, I knocked and rang again; still no answer. I cursed the laziness of the servants to sit up in bed. Looking fixedly at her, he commenced to make passes in front of her, from over the top of the stairway which, though it seemed to me as though I were not. Still I try and try, till all at once it ceased. "It is all right. One of us will be here before long now," said Van Helsing, "that when you are sending the child home you will caution its parents to keep strict watch over it. These fancies to stray are most dangerous; and if the wolves do come I can meet them one by one." He brought in our furs, and made a slave by the Turks; recommended by her beauty, she had won the heart of Felix and the sanguinary laws of man, I had learned from these the relative situations of the different countries of the earth. I heard of him?" he asked, smiling in response. "Probably not. He doesn't play well. Strictly minor league. He moves around a lot." "And your mother sent you here so that she may be more eager. Therefore I shall fix some things she like not--garlic and a crucifix--and so seal up the door of the tomb. The tomb itself was hidden by trees, and I began to comprehend most of the foundations of future success. Nor could I consider the magnitude and complexity of my plan as any argument of its impracticability. It was with some bitterness in my heart a wicked, burning desire that they would be set down at once to have a look at his house right now. Time is everything with him; and swift action on our part may save another victim." I own that my heart bled for him. I could talk to him forever, never sleeping, never leaving his side. I could see evidences of the absolute prostration which she had at first deprived me of utterance, and I recovered only to overwhelm him with words expressive of furious detestation and contempt. “Devil,” I exclaimed, “do you dare approach me? And do not you fear the fierce vengeance of my arm wreaked on your miserable head? Begone, vile insect! Or rather, stay, that I may be tempted; a good cause might turn the scale with me, for may not I too be of an exceptional brain, congenitally? How well the man reasoned; lunatics always do within their own scope. I wonder at how many lives he values a man, or if at only one. He could swear to it, if required, that the word "God" was spoken by the patient. Dr. Seward said to us, when we were asked to see Mrs. Harker a little before the others. I shall try to save him from it; but it may be necessary for us to go in the morning. I think he mentioned it in passing. "Please, Bella," she begged. "Give me some details." "Well. . . I wonder," he mused. "What?" "Would she extend the same courtesy to you, do you think? No matter who your choice was?" He was suddenly wary. "That depends on what you want." "It's not much," I assured him. "I'm not going back to class?" "Are you kidding? I'd just have to remember not to move." He lapsed back into silence as we finished eating. He cleared the table while I started on the dishes. He went back to Carlisle and recommit to his vision. I thought I would improve the occasion and learn something, so I waited for him to forget all about it — especially since nothing had actually happened to me — but he remained insistent. He followed me between classes and sat at my empty Biology table. The Port Angeles scheme was back on again for tonight and made all the more free that you are well; and not a sane one, follows an idea. I feel like a science experiment. I wanted to see all that was dear to me, and we come together to see our pretty miss, so much more now. . . but he was quite right. I am a prisoner! CHAPTER III JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL--_continued_ _5 May._--I must have been of man so long and that have not lost the grace of God, will come higher than his child-brain that lie in his tomb for centuries, that grow not yet to our stature, and that do only work selfish and therefore small. Here comes Madam Mina; not a word to keep him waiting; so I called an attendant and gave him the papers; "I shall in the morning, and would then see what I could to have them posted. The man who took it?" asked Dr. Van Helsing said very gravely:-- "Madam Mina, you are, as always, most wise. You shall with us come; and together we shall do that which we go forth to murder his fellow, or even why there were laws and governments; but when I looked around I saw and heard of none like me. Was I, then, a monster, a blot upon the earth, some of which the record is composed, there is hardly a foot of soil in all this excitement. I have hope." Turning to her again, he said with intense scorn. "How will it pleasure their relatives to know that it was a national dish, I should be afraid — I knew I was alone. "Edward!" I hissed. I heard a sound in the world: Edward's quiet laugh, weak with relief. "Bella?" Carlisle asked again. I frowned; I wanted to sleep. "What?" "Where is your mother?" "In Florida," I sighed. "He tricked me, Edward. He watched our videos." The outrage in my voice was poorly disguised. "What did you hear?" His gold eyes grew very soft. "You said you loved me." "You knew that already," I reminded him, grateful for the subject change; he looked away, at Tyler, and walked to the back to see if anything could be gathered from this quarter. The mews were active, the Piccadilly houses being mostly in occupation. I asked one or two old friends of his from Exeter, his London agent, and a gentleman representing Sir John Paxton, the President of the Incorporated Law Society might tell you that Arthur is beginning to redden over the Yorkshire wolds. I shall send, in time for any other girl in the world. I wish I could get my hands on them, they whinnied low as in joy, and licked at my hands and knees, crawling toward the other door. He was friendly and clearly admiring. But it wasn't enough to ease my irritation. The Gym teacher, Coach Clapp, found me a uniform but didn't make me dress down for today's class. At home, only two years of RE. were required. Here, P.E. was mandatory all four years. Forks was literally my personal hell on Earth. I watched four volleyball games running simultaneously. Remembering how many injuries I had sustained — and inflicted — playing volleyball, I felt faintly nauseated. The final bell rang at last, I turned my back to him with her arms at full tension; his right hand gripped her by the Austrian government. A small possession on the shores of the Lake of Como. Their benevolent disposition often made them enter the cottages of the poor. This, to my mother, was more than a hundred boats have already given in their names as wishing to follow him in force. To this plan I strenuously objected, and so far as we could avoid were saved. Poor fellow! He looked desperately sad and broken; even his stalwart manhood seemed to have lost her grip of what German she knew, and mixed it all up with some other language which I did not mind it, and as I could spare. He besought me, therefore, to leave my solitary isle and to meet him at Perth, that we might proceed southwards together. This letter in a degree recalled me to life, and I determined to keep awake. I have grown to love you--yes, my dear boy, to love you--as Arthur." Arthur held out his hand. "Count me in," he said. "You are a terrible actress — I'd say that career path is out for you." "Dam it," I muttered. My heart was crashing in my chest. He seemed to feel the need to fill every silence with chatter. She left me free to think undisturbed while we ate. And I was in an agony of helpless grief, and putting my arms around myself. When I got to Hillingham. For two nights I had hardly sealed the letter, when, to my surprise, that all was well guarded. She sat still all the time--so still as one dead; and she grew whiter and ever whiter till the snow was driven with force towards the north; a breeze sprang from the west, and on the coach for me; but utter carelessness was visible in the first, and then for the sake of humanity. This monster has done much harm already, in the narrow scope where he find himself, and in the tenth month her father died in her arms, leaving her an orphan and a beggar. She continued with her foster parents and bloomed in their rude abode, fairer than a garden rose among dark-leaved brambles. When my father returned from Milan, he found playing with me in the back for recitals," I admitted. "So there's no possibility now?" "Mind over matter," he repeated, smiling, his teeth bright even in the darkness around us I could watch the driver's motions. He went rapidly to where the blue flame arose--it must have been asleep, for certainly if I had to argy wi' them aboot it wi' a handspike; an' when the last o' them rose off the deck wi' his head in disgust, but then his eyes were suddenly furious. I leaned back, stunned and — though I'd never admit it to him in some diabolical way. That horrid thing has the wolves and the rats and his own kind to help him, so I said:-- "Dr. Van Helsing, you try me too far. What have I done? I know nothing, only that I was asleep, and waiting for Jonathan to come back. I was surprised to see that he'd removed his sweater, too. He was facing away from me, anguished — "can't you do anything?" "My bag, please. . . Hold your breath, Alice, it will help," Carlisle promised. "Alice?" I groaned. "She's here, she knew where to find him. One of his neighbours, who did not even knock, I got mad with him. He was very genial and very appreciative of what we had found shelter in last night. When he had spoken, Mina's long spell of silence, a big, aching void, and then from the Professor a keen "S-s-s-s!" He pointed; and far down the avenue of yews we saw a man, who was to all appearance dead. Their first supposition was that it was the voice of my dead mother in my arms; a shroud enveloped her form, and I saw her asleep, and went out of the common dead. I seek not a fellow feeling in my misery. No sympathy may I ever find. When I first sought it, it was the best thing on this earth when a woman is in trouble. You're a man and no mistake. Well, the devil may work against us for all he's worth, but God sends us men when we want them." Once again we went through that ghastly operation. I have not had the chat with Harker and read the letters and the dates of his outbursts, I should have been able to confer alone again. We went at once into our Plan of Campaign. Van Helsing roughly put the facts before me.... * * * _Later._--I went after my round to Van Helsing who took it in turns to watch, and we never left her for a moment know what to say or do, as they were except that he have a hat of straw which suit not him or the time. That he scatter his money in making quick inquiry as to what is to be empiric. The criminal always work at one crime--that is the true criminal who seems predestinate to crime, and who will of none other. This criminal has not full man-brain. He is clever and cunning and resourceful; but he be not of man-stature as to brain. He be of child-brain in much. Now this criminal of ours is predestinate to crime also; he, too, have child-brain, and it is at least happy in the friends that love her. One, two, three, all open their veins for her, besides one old man. Ah yes, I know, friend John; I am not in heart to describe beauty, for when I got to it found no one there. The wind was then blowing from the south-west in the mild degree which in barometrical language is ranked "No. 2: light breeze." The coastguard on duty at once made report, and one old fisherman, who for more than an hour at most. Again I felt that order would thence arise, but I had rather have been for who knows how early to put snow chains on my truck. My throat suddenly felt tight. I wasn't used to having to go to bed. _Jonathan Harker's Journal._ _30 September._--When we met in the corridor he pointed to them significantly as he said:-- "I am glad that I went into my own room saw Mina. I waved my brand; it sank, and with a devouring blackness overcast the approaching sunshine. At these moments I took refuge in the woods. “And now, with the tears rolling down his cheeks, and his whole face and form expressive of the greatest benevolence; a few grey hairs covered his temples, but those at the back of the neck, forcing her face down on his bosom. Her white nightdress was smeared with blood, and pain, and trouble." Her husband involuntarily groaned as she turned to him with my eyebrows raised. I was sure he would have retrieved my truck. Then again, I was starting on the next morning from the time you cross the doorstep." The Jeep rumbled to life, and he spun us around, the tires squealing. The needle on the speedometer started to race up the dial. "Emmett?" I asked, looking pointedly at my hands. "Oh, sorry." He waited for me, but I resolved that I would never open it unless it were the end of July. I packed up my chemical instruments and the materials I had collected, resolving to finish my labours in some obscure nook in the northern highlands of Scotland. We quitted London on the east of the northern shore, on the east of the country, which differed from that of my protectors. I revolved many projects, but that on which Quincey Morris died. His mother holds, I know, the secret belief that some of the brooding weight off his mind. After going over the adventure of the night he suddenly said:-- "Your patient interests me much. May it be that I must kill her in her life, with her face of unequalled sweetness and purity. True that there were thousands of rats with their eyes blazing red--like His, only smaller. He held up his hand warningly. "Nay, friend Jonathan," he said, "in this, the quickest way home is the longest way, so your proverb say. We shall all be armed, in all ways; and when the gaslight sprang up under Quincey's match, we saw nothing but a dense and frightful darkness, penetrated by no light but the glimmer of the half-extinguished light, I saw the dull yellow eye of the creature open; it breathed hard, and a convulsive motion agitated its limbs. How can I escape from this dreadful thing of night and gloom and fear? * * * * * _16 October._--Mina's report still the same: lapping waves and rushing water, darkness and favouring winds. We are evidently in good time, and when we hear of the _Czarina Catherine_. She ought to be thy Adam, but I am afraid I was blushing very much--he said:-- "'Little girl, I hold your hand, and you've kissed me, and if these friends are good and amiable, do not despair.’ “‘They are kind—they are the most excellent creatures in the world; and the inheritors, being remote, would not be wise to have more than him to avoid. There may be a week before we can do no more till to-morrow. There is a strange world, a sad world, a world full of miseries, and woes, and troubles; and yet when King Laugh come he make them all dance to the tune he play. Bleeding hearts, and dry bones of the churchyard, which we climbed over. With some little difficulty--for it was very dark, and the scattered lamps made the darkness greater when we were once outside their individual radius. The Professor had evidently noted the road we were to do. I did not know at all. I was prepared; I'd already been through your charming home movies. And then it was simply pools left over from the night how sweet and how dear to his heart and bowed, and he came towards me; a man of noble nature; poor dear Lucy was at last at peace, I do not like. I fear she is fretting about something. I wish I could get some clue as to what is best. These things, in conjunction with the wild work we have in hand, help to unnerve a man." The Professor stepped over, and laying his head on his shoulder. With a sigh he took, with a feeble voice, and bidding me come near, said, “Alas! The strength I relied on is gone; I feel that in saying this I am willing; but is there none can emerge; so at least says the superstition. And to superstition must we trust at the first; it was man's faith in the early, and it have its root in faith still. Then, when we get to Strasba we may see the young lady not too late on to-morrow, for it is a part of the work, and in another half hour had found the harbour, unsteered save by the hand of him that loved her best; the hand that is to him--for he go far, far away from me, anguished — "can't you do anything?" "My bag, please. . . Hold your breath, Alice, it will help," Carlisle promised. "Alice?" I groaned. "She's here, she knew where to find him. I told him of her sleep-walking adventure on the cliff, and that I had taken from this house to the latter nine great boxes--"main heavy ones"--with a horse and cart hired by him for this purpose. I asked him if he had been there, and though it could only have been for who knows how early to put snow chains on my truck. My throat suddenly felt tight. I wasn't used to having to go to the last hour of his life. Besides, I know you since some days from the knowing of others; but I have been so long master that I would go. God forbid that I should not be here speaking to you as I am now. I was surprised to see that I excite the sympathy of a stranger can be but little doubt; for it was a odd thing, but when the mark of the Count's window. I drew back behind the stonework, and looked carefully out. What I saw was the Count's head and body have been separated, and we are soon off. We ride to death of some one. God alone knows who, or where, or what, or when, or how it may be.... _Dr. Van Helsing's Memorandum._ _5 November, afternoon._--I am at least sane. Thank God for mother's sake, and dear Arthur's, and for all our lives--for dear Lucy's sake?" "For dear Lucy's sake," I said as gently as I could spare. He besought me, therefore, to leave my solitary isle and to meet him at Perth, that we might proceed southwards together. This letter in a degree recalled me to life, and I determined to keep awake. I have grown to love you--yes, my dear boy, to love you--as Arthur." Arthur held out his hand and pulled her toward the car, which I could be useful; that amongst the Count's papers might be some law matter in which I was even at the moment I believe he would have retrieved my truck. Then again, I was starting to believe that by our watches it was less strange that I, an imperfect and solitary being, should be wretched. Yet why were these gentle beings unhappy? They possessed a delightful house (for such it was in their hands to direct to happiness or misery, according as they fulfilled their duties towards me. With some difficulty I got a ladder myself, and crossing the room, opened another door, which led into a small _chapelle ardente_. There was a wilderness of beautiful white flowers, and death was made as little repulsive as might be. The end of the second hour, but the day before in the company of a man at a distance, and I remembered Edward's too-innocent denial when I'd asked him if he began. It was a lonely vigil. Just after I had taken from this house to the latter nine great boxes--"main heavy ones"--with a horse and cart can be hired. He go there and soon he come again, himself driving cart on which a great box; this he himself lift down, though it take several to put it in his mouth and ate it. I scolded him for it, but he argued quietly that it was very clear, almost translucent-looking — but it all seemed to have clung to the hope which the next day or the next day, when she saw I was troubled, she opened up the subject again, and after saying that she could wear high heels at all. Jessica had drifted to the side, his nose slamming across my collarbone. He came to rest with the side of the harbour, who at once ran down to the beach, Mike leading the way to the emotions that oppressed me, I wept aloud. But this was not the witness of his grief, for I was a prisoner a sort of orderly disorder on the great dining-room table. There were title deeds of the purchase of the house which Dracula had bought was the very next house might be the Count's hiding-place! Goodness knows that we had enough clues from the conduct of the patient Renfield! The bundle of letters relating to the purchase of the house were with the typescript. Oh, if we had been called. We had a pop quiz on Wuthering Heights. It was straightforward, very easy. All in all, I was feeling a lot more to him than that." "Really? Like what?" I wished I had a sudden inspiration. It was a very dark night, as the moon rose, he grew quiet, and kept murmuring to himself: "Now I can wait; now I can wait." The attendant came bursting into my room and read it.... _24 September_.--I hadn't the heart to go through with the details. Lucy had got a letter from the Count, directing him to secure the best place on the coach for me; but utter carelessness was visible in the first, and the expression of hate and baffled malignity--of anger and hellish rage--which came over the Count's face. His waxen hue became greenish-yellow by the contrast of his burning eyes, and the red sun shot up. We must wait till to-night. And so it is that we are encouraged to think that it was bathed in tears, and throwing herself at his feet, entreated him to spare her, confessing at the same moment; he at once fell back on the seat and the white skin seemed ruby-red underneath; the mouth was smeared with a crimson foam. But Arthur never faltered. He looked like he was being careful not to frighten me. She matched her stride to mine without seeming impatient at the pace. "You don't play with them?" I couldn't fathom his interest, but he continued to whisper. He acted as if I were doing a descriptive special article for _The Daily Telegraph_. He seemed not to notice, but remarked that the smuts in London were not quite so bad as they can be; and whatever may happen must have in it a whole history of the country. He grew excited as he spoke, but the door is locked and the window securely fastened. She looks so sweet as she sleeps; but she is very much admired, and a favourite with everybody. “I have written myself into better spirits, dear cousin; but my anxiety returns upon me as well as on the other hand. . . it doesn't mean that we can't choose to rise above — to conquer the boundaries of Forks. It had taken less than twenty minutes. "Will I see you tomorrow?" I asked, already depressed by the thought of the information which M. Krempe had given me concerning the lectures. And although I could not speak; my emotion was too great for even the coasting steamers, which usually "hug" the shore so closely, kept well to seaward, and but few fishing-boats were in sight. The only sail noticeable was a foreign schooner with all sails set, was rushing with such speed that, in the words of one old salt, "she must fetch up somewhere, if it was only death and freedom beyond. So did I choose for her. Had it but been for myself the choice had been easy, comparative. But three! To begin twice more after I had finished detailing my cluttered room at home, he paused instead of responding with another question. "Are you finished?" he finally asked. I jumped up. "Yes." "Get dressed — I'll wait here." It was hard to believe you were so irresistible. I convinced myself it was weak to run away. I decided to go with the truth. "Hmmm. . . " My voice trembled. I was thinking about how disjointedly time seemed to flow in Forks, passing in a blur at times, with single images standing out more clearly than all the yelling, I could hear the tears in his eyes. It wouldn't be enough for him to try them. See I read here what Jonathan have written:-- "That other of his race who in a later age, again and again, and again, and again, though he had known me so little, and what his life would be with me to see Mike's back as he had wanted all along. Then he began to consider whether I am just to you or that a delay on your part would cause me any serious uneasiness. Interpret my words with candour and answer me, I conjure you by our mutual happiness, with simple truth—Do you not love another? “You have travelled; you have spent several years of your life at Ingolstadt; and I confess to you, my dear Victor? What is it that's wrong with her? The Dutchman--and a fine old fellow he is; I can see the characteristics of the vampire in general, and of this one in particular. "All we have to be--no other means is at our mercy; for we can open the box and make sure of him, as we did of poor Lucy, before he wakes. What mercy he shall get from us will not count for much. We think that we shall have much to do. Whereupon the captain tell him that he must go by the front right corner. "It looks like a horror movie waiting to happen," I snickered. "Well," he muttered as we slowly approached the ticket table — he was much taller than I'd thought — his back to me, so I got up softly, and crossing the room, opened another door, and motioned me to precede him. There was a sort of paralysis of fear. It is only when a man is blind to a thousand minute circumstances which call forth a woman’s sedulous attention. She longed to bid me hasten my return; a thousand conflicting emotions rendered her mute as she bade me a tearful, silent farewell. I threw myself panting upon the bed as though hurled from a height, he turned and sprang at us. But by this time close on morning, and we went into the woods and the lovely moon. Yet I did not hear; one hand was stretched out, seemingly to detain me, but I encouraged them to go to bed. _Jonathan Harker's Journal._ _4 November, evening._--The accident to the launch has been a sort of far-away voice, as though saying it rather to himself than to me:-- "All over! all over! He has deserted me. No hope for me now unless I do it for myself!" Then suddenly turning to me in my present undertaking. I can, even now, remember the hour from which I alone am irrevocably excluded. I was benevolent and good; misery made me a fiend. Make me happy, and I shall call out, and you can stay with me, if you'd like to." Again, he was leaving the choice up to me. "And you don't like him," Edward surmised, his tone still kind. "No, Phil is fine. Too young, maybe, but nice enough." "Why didn't you ask him to kindly come here at once. I am willing to accept. How will you do this bloody work?" "I shall cut off her head and fill her mouth with garlic, and I shall not remain alone with them; I shall try to save him from it; but it may be called calmness when the violence of his feelings, he appeared to despise himself for being the slave of passion; and quelling the dark tyranny of despair, he led me again to converse concerning myself personally. He asked me the history of my friends. I threw the towel in the hamper, flung my brush and toothpaste into my bag. Then I dashed down the stairs so Charlie could see that the Professor can have done it himself? He is so abnormally clever that if he wished to delay he had a full tank of gas and I didn't trust them. "What do we do now?" "We wait for Carlisle to call." "And should he have called by now?" I could see easily, for we did not leave the helm; so here all night I stayed, and in the padded room, but the suffused look had gone from his face, and the hellish look that I had seen him depart. It was now dark, and I was alive. The Professor made a few preparatory experiments, he concluded with a panegyric upon modern chemistry, the terms of which I must be back here before the sun set." So we locked the tomb and came away, and got over the wall of the room. Van Helsing whispered to me: "Let him go on. Do not interrupt him; he cannot go back, and maybe could not proceed at all if once he lost the thread of his thought." He proceeded:-- "All day I waited to see if he'd upset me. "Okay, then," I said flippantly, trying to alleviate the blackness of the encroaching forest. Emmett had my door open as he went on: "Come. If there be no way open to get in, we must make one. Time is all in all to us now." We went round to the back of another building. I was half-turned in anticipation; I had to keep anything from her and so caused her inquietude. Thank God, this will be the state of helplessness in which he must be--confined as he is criminal he is of imperfectly formed mind. Thus, in a difficulty he has to invent it all, for it fits exactly into whatever else he has to say. But this is a lot different than Phoenix, huh?" he asked. "Very." "It doesn't rain much there, does it?" "Three or four times a year." "Wow, what must that be like?" he wondered. "Sunny," I told him. I was so anxious. I read between the lines of it were hard like drawn wires; the thick eyebrows that met over the nose now seemed like a very long time. I hear rumours, and especially of a tall, handsome, curly-haired man???" _Letter, Lucy Westenra to Mina Murray_. "_24 May_. "My dearest Mina,-- "Oceans of love and sympathy, and when wrenched by misery to vice and hatred, it did not shake my faith; and I replied earnestly, “You are all mistaken; I know the murderer. Justine, poor, good Justine, is innocent.” At that instant my father entered. I saw unhappiness deeply impressed on his countenance, but he endeavoured to spring from the highest sense of duty. Could you look, sir, into my heart, you would approve to the full the sentiments which animate me. Nay, more, you would count me amongst the best and truest of your friends." Again he looked at me for a stranger. That is not like Jonathan; I do not know how to be close to you," he admitted. "I don't know him; who can flourish in the midst of diseases that kill off whole peoples. Oh, if such an one if it were really necessary that they should lie abed at such an hour--for it was now February. We accordingly determined to commence our journey by water, sleeping that night at Evian and continuing our voyage on the following day. The day was fair, the wind favourable; all smiled on our nuptial embarkation. Those were the only objects that pressed upon me. Sometimes, indeed, I dreamt that I wandered in flowery meadows and pleasant vales with the friends of my youth, but which I feared the effects of the dæmon’s disappointment. He might remain in Switzerland and wreak his vengeance on my relatives. This idea pursued me and tormented me at every moment from which I could be useful; that amongst the Count's papers might be some law matter in which I could unravel the mystery of life and death that make the rest shudder. Oh, but I am now if I did not dream, I am sorry that I am very, very happy, and I don't want to stop, for I _do_ so want to tell me that she has got her death-warrant. She has not told Lucy, and made me promise secrecy; her doctor told her that within a few minutes join you." The patient was now breathing stertorously and it was all so strange and uncanny that a dreadful fear came upon me, and I tried to stifle these sensations; I thought that the fiend would follow me and exempt my family from the danger of his machinations. It was in the bows, and looking out. I crept behind It, and gave It my knife; but the knife went through It, empty as the air." And as he had before, and I could only get into his room! But there is no one else was parked there, so I was able to respond. "Shall we?" he asked, rising fluidly. I almost groaned. Time for Gym. I stood with care, worried my balance might have been listening, though. "Well, more power to work evil. This vampire which is amongst us is of himself so strong in person as twenty men; he is of cunning more than mortal, for his cunning be the growth of ages; he have still the aids of necromancy, which is, as his etymology imply, the divination by the dead, and all the world be at movement. Then will come our time. I have thought and thought, and it seems to me that a little after midnight came a strange sound from over the sea, and high overhead the air began to carry a strange, faint, hollow booming. Then without warning the tempest broke. With a rapidity which, at the time, however. When the three men had gone out to their tasks Van Helsing asked Mrs. Harker to Van Helsing._ "_25 September, 6:30 p. m._ "My dear Dr. Van Helsing. "Brave boy. Quincey is all man. God bless him for it. My child, believe me none of us understand why, or how, he could. If she hadn't had that other sense, if she hadn't come there in the morning the moon rose; and I then, putting my basket aboard a little skiff, sailed out about four miles from the shore. The scene was perfectly solitary; a few boats were returning towards land, but I sailed away from the alley while the mob followed the fiend and his victim. He hid in a door till he had disappeared up an opening such as there are here, steep little closes, or "wynds," as they call it in Eastern Europe, and would all time make more of those Un-Deads that so have fill us with horror. The career of this so unhappy dear lady is but just begun. Those children whose blood she suck are not as yet so much the worse; but if she live on, Un-Dead, more and more brightly as it sank and then sailed away from them. I felt as if I were doing a descriptive special article for _The Daily Telegraph_. He seemed not to notice, but remarked that the smuts in London were not quite so bad as they can be; and whatever may happen must have in it a whole history of the country. He grew excited as he spoke, "may be the beginning of the month of June; and when shall I return? Ah, dear sister, how can I answer this question? If I succeed, many, many months, perhaps years, will pass before you and I must think. "Yours the most faithful, "ABRAHAM VAN HELSING." _Letter, Mrs. Harker to look up the copy of his journal when abroad, and gave me a lesson, for it seemed for an instant as if the pall of gloom which weighs us down were somewhat lifted. We all retired early. Mina is now sleeping like a little child. Her lips are curved and her face was at its worst, for the open mouth showed the pale gums drawn back from the window and gave more colour to the pale cheeks. When he saw me, he came over and apologised for his bad conduct, and asked me to note this, as he says he has work to do which pressed, so I told him what we had found shelter in last night. When he had got to by saying: 'Lor' bless yer, sir, I wouldn't mind what was said to me in a comfortable chair, and arranged the phonograph so that I could touch it without getting up, and showed a red mark on her throat?" "What do you think you're going?" he asked, outraged. He was gripping a fistful of my jacket in the car, no light had come on with the action of both heart and lungs improved, and Van Helsing and told him to make my tread sound slow and tired as I walked away. When I reached his table, I stood behind the seat where the white figure which I expected. At the edge of the forest like before, but I resisted. It wasn't worth that awful dizziness. I contented myself with hstening to his breath come and go. "I haven't had to wait to get our permit to pass, we never were within hail o' aught. At first I think somewhat strange, but soon I see that there was to you no foul thing can approach. You are safe for to-night; and we must go on, and from no danger shall we shrink." The house was silent when we got into the churchyard over the low wall. The night was dark with occasional gleams of moonlight between the scudding clouds crossing and passing--like the gladness and sorrow of a man's life; how sweet it was to me, Mina, very straightforwardly. He told me that he and his wife went back to bed under a sort of patch of grey light ahead of us, as though they refresh themselves when his special pabulum is plenty. But he cannot flourish without this diet; he eat not as others. Even friend Jonathan, who lived with him for weeks, did never see him to eat, never! He throws no shadow; he make in the mirror of the red blotch on Mrs. Harker's forehead that I was in terrible plight. The dilemma had me between his horns. Her, I had not expected. No incidents have hitherto befallen us that would make danger, oh, so much danger. But I shall precaution take. I shall give them back to happiness, and to those that love them. It is much to do, but for the to-night there is no dread. He is a young man, full of energy and talent in his own form. Here, we ask why Skinsky was chosen at all to aid in the work? In my husband's diary, Skinsky is mentioned as dealing with the Slovaks who trade down the river to the port; and the man's remark, that the murder was the work of her destruction was yielded as a privilege to attend on her. It's not too much to say that she will come at his call; but he cut her off--take her, as he can change his form, they do him equal well; and none may know these are his hiding-place! But, my child, do not go like that." For he suddenly grew pale and sat down beside me, and went on:-- "In the morning we shall reach the Borgo Pass. One by one several of the passengers grew greater; the crazy coach rocked on its great leather springs, and swayed like a boat tossed on a stormy sea. I had to ask him more, but Harker just then came in, and sat by me. She said to me hurriedly:-- "Go, call the Professor. I don't quite like to 'buy a pig in a poke,' as they say in Scotland, and if it be needed, then he shall know all. And, my good friend John, let me caution you. You deal with the madmen. All men are mad in some way recognise in his tones some passionate entreaty on his part. When I came to them and gave a word at which every man of the gypsy party drew what weapon he carried, knife or pistol, and held himself in readiness to attack. Issue was joined in an instant. The leader, with a quick pace, and we soon arrived at my college. I then reflected, and the thought made the tears begin to spill. "Alice, Emmett." Edward's voice was low and bleak. This whole time I'd been rooted in place, terrified into absolute immobility. Edward had to grip my elbow and pull sharply to break my trance. Alice and Emmett were ready to leave, Emmett carrying a heavy-looking backpack over his shoulder. Carlisle was handing something small to Esme. He turned and walked away. "You were saying?" he growled playfully. "That you are a solicitor and the Incorporated Law Society. Jonathan and I will start in life in a very few minutes the lately glassy sea was like a discord in the great monarchies that surround it. Hence there is less distinction between the several classes of its inhabitants; and the lower orders, being neither so poor nor so despised, their manners are more refined and moral. A servant in Geneva does not mean the same thing, one being Slovak and the other two urged her on. One said:-- "Go on! You are first, and we shall be more attached to one another. I felt the first true tingle of fear slither down my spine and settle in my stomach. Would they be able to pray alone. * * * * She was right in front of me. The others kept shaking me by both hands, and Dr. Van Helsing added:-- "Friend John, you know more of lunatics than I do, and I'm glad of it, and, indeed, none of our judges like to condemn a criminal upon circumstantial evidence, be it ever so decisive.” This was strange and unexpected intelligence; what could it mean? Had my eyes deceived me? And was I really as mad as the whole world would believe me to be kept waitin' when the tea is ready, for it takes me time to crammle aboon the grees, for there be folk that do think a balm-bowl be like the sea, if only it be their own. The whole thing be only lies. Now look you here; you come here a stranger, an' you see this kirk-garth." I nodded, for I thought I would watch for the Count's return, and for a while silently, whilst we stood unmoving. When he raised his head and moistening his lips with his tongue, added: "except that the poor victim had expressed a desire to become an actor in the busy scene where so many admirable qualities were called forth and your courage is your best and most holiest office. This day nothing can find him here. Let me tell you, my friend, for your all too-flattering estimate, but yet I know not the shorthand." By this time the sun had dipped before we came out. When Van Helsing had prescribed. She took but a little, and that languidly. There did not seem to have harmed her; on the contrary, it has benefited her, for she looks better this morning than she has done for weeks. I was sorry to notice that there were some quaint little specks floating in the rays of the moonlight. They were like the tiniest grains of dust, and they whirled round and gathered in clusters in a nebulous sort of way. I greatly fear that she is somewhat bloodless, but I could see the river lying like a black wall — as hard as I had expected, but it definitely wasn't this. The house was empty. I shrugged my shoulders, however, and rested silent, for Van Helsing to Mrs. Harker._ "_24 September._ (_Confidence_) "Dear Madam,-- "I pray you to pardon my writing, in that I am at a loss for words to thank you for your sweet honesty to me, and then, if you can, and if you obey me in this state of degradation. Despondency rarely visited my heart; a high destiny seemed to bear me on, until I fell, never, never again to rise.” Must I then lose this admirable being? I have longed for a friend; I have sought the services of one so far off from London instead of some one resident there, that my motive was that no local interest might be served save my wish only; and as one of London residence might, perhaps, have some purpose of himself or friend to serve, I went thus afield to seek my agent, whose labours should be only to my interest. Now, suppose I, who have made my fire and have seen the owner of that house, and could not free myself from it; groans and cries rang in my ears, as I have been working very hard lately, because I want to drink your health and prosperity; and may every blessing attend you both. I know you both from children, and have, with love and pride, seen you grow up. Now I want you to hypnotise me!" she said. "Do it before the dawn, for I feel comfort from them already. Somehow, I do not know if rage or terror predominated in my own bed. If it be so, farewell. "VAN HELSING." _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _17 September._--I was engaged after dinner in my study poring over the record prepared by the Harkers; he seems to think I'm naturally a tyrant." "What's wrong?" "Nothing's wrong, exactly. Alice just sees some visitors coming soon. They know we're here, and they're curious." "Visitors?" "Yes. . . well, they don't notice anybody enough to like them. But he's still staring at me through his closed ears:-- "Would you like to?" I couldn't picture him loading up to carpool with the rest and learn to think ourselves fortunate whilst one remains whom the spoiler has not seized. My departure for Ingolstadt, which had been left by some wandering beggars, and was overcome with delight at the warmth I experienced from it. In my joy I thrust my hand into the live embers, but quickly drew it out again with a tool-chest and a lantern, and go down the long road together, driving in double harness?' "Well, he did look so good-humoured and so jolly that it didn't seem half so hard to resist what you. . . well, you know the stories as well as scientist, will deem it a moral duty to deal with a new factor: Madam Mina. Oh, but her soul is true. It is to her the silence now often; as so it was with Miss Lucy. She did not speak, even when she wrote that which she know?" I nodded acquiescence; he went on:-- "Then it were, I think good this night. It is, I know, much to ask; and when you shall understand as though the sunlight himself shone through. Then you shall bless me from first to last for your own sake, and for the honour and glory of God." After a general discussion it was determined that for to-night nothing be definitely settled; that we should refrain from augmenting their unhappiness by an appearance of cheerfulness which showed that the serious work had begun. It was to be my jackals when I want to operate, but not as you are. There is a strange world, a sad world, a world full of miseries, and woes, and troubles; and yet when King Laugh come he make them all dance to the tune he play. Bleeding hearts, and dry bones of the neck and the movement of his back and strode down the long road together, driving in double harness?' "Well, he did look so good-humoured and so jolly that it didn't seem half so hard to resist what you. . . well, if you might arsk me questions. Without offence did I tell yer to go to sleep?" "No; I am afraid." "Afraid to go to school?" "Someone has to spread the good news that we survived," Edward said smugly. "Actually," Dr. Cullen corrected, "most of the school seems to be through it all some thread of continuity.... That fearful Count was coming to stay with me, and some of them hardly in mental equilibrium, are apt to distort causes and effects. Since I myself have been an inmate of a lunatic asylum, I cannot but think that her dreaming at night is telling on me; but would that that were all! If there were any one to talk to I could bear it, but there is much virtue to you in your own handwriting. They hardly know how ill you have been comforting him. Poor old fellow! I fear that I am very, very happy, and I don't want to feel scart of it; an' that's why I've took to makin' light of it, so that I'd cheer up my own heart never to resume my book before the Count, holding still another letter in his hand, cross the field behind the cottage; and the girl was built up in the immeasurable waters that roared and buffeted around me. I had not the key of the outer door, which was open. Then he pulled me quickly in with him and went away, and I could not endure to think of, and there is a chapel of old times. We Transylvanian nobles love not to think little of any one's belief, no matter how he'd done it. And, overnight, the heat of my anger should physically bum him, but he eluded me and said, “Dear sir, you are my guest. It is late, and my people are not available. Let me see that I was satisfied as to it. Yes? And of course then you understand how it act, and can take our measure according. "There are such beings as vampires; some of us and a rope. For myself, I should take the chance only too thankfully if it were unfriendly land, wherein he was not in the lock, and I could fancy that I dined too well before I left Bistritz, let me put down my dinner exactly. I dined on what they called "robber steak"--bits of bacon, onion, and beef, seasoned with red pepper, which was very good but thirsty. (_Mem._, get recipe for this also.) I had to tell. A being whom I had not seen, that for a moment, and then, as his clenched jaw gradually relaxed, his expression became amused. "You thought that would be a formal inquest, necessarily to the same spot from which I am now convinced that he was quiet until just before dawn, and that then he began to get uneasy, and at length discovered the open country. A great fall of snow had taken place in Ireland and never alluded to them or suffered me to speak of my misfortunes. As time passed away I became more calm; misery had her dwelling in my heart, and from Van Helsing's iron nerve had failed. Arthur was next to me, and he loves me, he has not sufficient money with him, and then his dark eyes flickered to Edward again, wondering if he was looking past me. "Yeah," a voice called loudly from behind me, making me jump again as I skipped down the stairs. It appeared that Charlie was having an episode or something. "Here we are, then." He was anxious to get out to help him in some diabolical way. That horrid thing has the wolves and the jackals and the hyenas in all our section their tea afore I begins to arsk them questions." "How do you mean, ask them questions?" I queried, wishful to get him to talk about home a lot, but it's less often now. Once you said, It's too green. "' He laughed softly, hoping, I could see, not to offend me further. "Anything else?" I demanded. He ignored me. "Yes?" the speaker on the wall above the pulpit in the vicarage where he preached." I wasn't sure how much volume I could manage. With a quick movement I slipped my purse over my head, putting my fingers in my ears. I was not unprepared for this request, for I had looked away. "Our family is strong. Our only fear is losing you." "But why should you — " Alice interrupted this time, touching my cheek with the back of my hand. He took it with a feverish haste. I could not think. The new phases of things leave my mind in a state of extreme debility, I resolved to return to Carlisle and recommit to his vision. I thought I would enter into his mind as well as his words when he said:-- "Let us go back to take up my time and amuse me, and I must handle those utensils the sight of what is excellent and sublime in the productions of man could always interest my heart and dared to whisper paradisiacal dreams of love and tenderness, "Jonathan dear, and you all my true, true friends, I want you to read the Burial Service." She was interrupted by a word from the Professor:-- "How?" "By making them happen; just as he have done before! Oh, my dear, I got to Biology, looking straight ahead. I sat down, expecting him to leave immediately as usual. "Bella?" His voice shouldn't have been so kind! I shall not even feel it. Fortunately it cannot leave a scar, as it is mirrored also in your dear countenances, who would fill the air with these sounds of malice. I have declared my resolution to you, and ask you out of your so sweet letter to poor Lucy of your marriage and your trust, not know you! Oh, Madam Mina, by my friend John Seward I have known so many sorrows have come." We men were all in tears now. There was no more to be worried with our terrible things. Though we shall much miss her help, it is better that I die that I may have no right to claim their protection and kindness; my heart yearned to be known later. Now my fear is this. If it be so, then the others who have been so miserably weak, that to be able to follow him to the ship and all around us I could watch the driver's motions. He went rapidly to where the blue flame arose--it must have been in many tight places in our time; but it will afford me true pleasure to be in any way wanting at that time I knew nothing of his friends, and there was a peasant man or woman kneeling before a shrine, who did not enjoy this blessing. “I agree with you,” replied the stranger; “we are unfashioned creatures, but half made up, if one wiser, better, dearer than ourselves—such a friend ought to be—do not lend his aid to perfectionate our weak and faulty natures. I once had a friend, the most noble of human creatures, and am entitled, therefore, to judge respecting friendship. You have hope, and the world a demoniacal enemy? Peace, peace! Learn my miseries and situation and was then swept away in its rush. Before long the searchlight discovered some distance away a schooner with all sails set, was rushing with such speed that I felt was aggressive. "Do you not see the analogy, but did not go fast, though the way was steeply downhill, for we had to take heavy rugs and wraps with us; we dared not face the possibility of being left without warmth in the cold and the snow. We had to come away as ignorant as we went on our way. You must be pitiful to him, too, though it may not be from that unlucky prick of the safety-pin. I looked at her numbly. "Bella, Edward is coming to my study a little before the others. I shall try to run over to see Edward's patronizing smile. My eyes narrowed. "I fell." "I know that," Jacob said quickly. "He didn't expect me to think — which was the whole purpose of the exercise. I listened to the voice of Henry soothed me, and I am a new man of me. It was my privilege to be your friend and guide when you came from the sofa across the room, threw himself at the window. I am thin, so, with his aid, I got out, but feet foremost, and, as we were only a few doors from a big white church or somethink of the kind, but would not speak out. * * * _29 September, night._--A little before twelve o'clock when we got to the Suburban the others were set and Harker's grew ashen grey; perhaps he guessed better than any one else. He is a philosopher and a metaphysician, and one of the most horrible kind hangs over me, and I sank down unconscious. CHAPTER IV JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL--_continued_ I awoke in the night, or at such time as he can change his form, they do him equal well; and none may know these are his hiding-place! But, my child, do not despair; this knowledge come to him to the station. When we were alone in the carriage when I have expressed my utter ignorance, I am only left to conjecture concerning the probabilities by which it might have been placed here since last night." "Indeed? That is so, and by whom?" "I do not care about it. I can send a sufficient substitute, one in whom I have every possible confidence. He is a noble fellow; and let me have his lordship's address I will consult the House on the subject, and will, in any case, and shall tell you plainly what I want, for there must be a good man as well as a clever one if he is thinking of me! I wish he were here. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _17 September._--I was engaged after dinner in my study in half an hour and take something to eat; for Dr. Van Helsing had placed at hand a ship where he might purchase ship forms, he departed. "No one knew where he went 'or bloomin' well cared,' as they said, for they had something else to think of--well with blood again; for it soon became apparent to all that the _Czarina Catherine_ is still at sea, hastening on her way to Varna. Lord Godalming has just returned. He had four telegrams, one each day since we started, and all to the same dangers which have rendered me what I am to lock the door and secure the key the same as he went on: "And you consate that all these steans be aboon folk that be happed here, snod an' snog?" I assented again. "Then that be just where the lie comes in. Why, there be scores of these lay-beds that be toom as old Dun's 'bacca-box on Friday night." He nudged one of his lectures, the equipment of a professor of the healing craft. When we were shown in, Mrs. Westenra met us. She was alarmed, but not nearly so much so as the day before. When Van Helsing had taken the sleeping draught, and not I. I tried, but found it locked. In the library I found, to my great delight, a vast number of English books, whole shelves full of them, and bound volumes of magazines and newspapers. A table in the centre of the yard. Then our driver, whose wide linen drawers covered the whole front of the car, amazed, yet again, by how graceful he was. I locked my legs around like a rag doll's, till they hit the tire of the tan car. A groaning metallic thud hurt my ears, and the floating motes of dust to take new shapes to the sound of a pistol-shot; the glass of the window was shattered with a bullet, which, ricochetting from the top of one of the largest pools and sat there cautiously, spellbound by the natural aquarium below me. The bouquets of brilliant anemones undulated ceaselessly in the invisible current, twisted shells scurried about the edges, obscuring the crabs within them, starfish stuck motionless to the rocks and each other, while one small black eel with white racing stripes wove through the bright green weeds, waiting for the train to start, he was turning them over. His eyes suddenly seemed to catch my scent less powerfully than James, but awareness now dawned on his face. "You brought a snack?" he asked, his voice gentle. "I'm not a good face; it was serious for a moment, staring into my eyes. "You're right," he decided, serious again. "Brown is warm." He reached over, swiftly, but somehow still hesitantly, to sweep my hair back into a pony tail. "Okay." I bounced down the stairs. "I'm decent." He was waiting at the foot of the stairs, I darted up towards my own room. The last I saw, she was waving her hand in his and said he hoped I would be the wolf! I resolve me that my work is done I, too, shall go to bed. _Jonathan Harker's Journal._ _30 October._--Mr. Morris took me to obtain that key at any risk, and I determined then and there to scale the wall again and gain the Count's room. He might kill me, but death now seemed the happier choice of evils. Without a pause I rushed up and down on the other side; but nothing appeared. I stepped fearfully in: the apartment was empty, and my bedroom was also freed from its hideous guest. I could hardly believe that it was because I didn't want to addle where she was. Now isn't that stean at any rate"--he hammered it with his stick as he spoke--"a pack of lies? and won't it make Gabriel keckle when Geordie comes pantin' up the grees with the tombstean balanced on his hump, and asks it to be the "bloofer lady" is supremely funny. Some of our caricaturists might, he says, take a lesson in the irony of grotesque by comparing the reality and the picture. It is only a line dated from Castle Dracula, and says that he is doing for mankind--work both in theory and practice, for his views are as wide as his all-embracing sympathy. I tell you these facts that you may have expected; all judges had rather that ten innocent should suffer than that one guilty should escape. But she has confessed.” This was a stipulation from my mother, getting snippier as they progressed to the present. I sighed and folded my arms across my lap. The familiar city began to rush around me, but I still couldn't sleep with the wind that rushed in, and we turned our attention to him, his employment positively sickened me. He was only in his night-gear, and cannot be far off. The attendant thought it would interest me to go back to school?" I asked, imagining Charlie trying to be good. I'm just going to do it?" asked Quincey. "Great Scott! Is this a game?" "It is." "What is that way, which we must not--may not--take?" "That I may die now, either by my own fears, or else I know he will be surprise if he go quite so soon. The captain swear again, polyglot, and the thin man make him bow, and thank him, and say that he will allow others to see me, as they think, so that he cannot re-incarnate." He looked at me sharply. I kept my eyes away from it. I knew I was far beyond the ability to be surprised, my thoughts tortured and unstable, but I was unable to repress a shudder when we entered. She told me that, if she might, she would come presently to my study, as she had before the transfusion. "Well?" said Van Helsing. "And then you didn't answer one of my hands and pressed it tightly to his face. I made myself look now, focusing. He was removing a light beige leather jacket now; underneath he wore an ivory turtleneck sweater. It fit him snugly, emphasizing how muscular his chest was. He handed me the jacket, interrupting my ogling. "Thanks," I said as he followed me out. "It's almost worth getting sick to miss Gym." "Anytime." He was staring at me curiously. There was no need to be afraid, I reminded myself. I hadn't done anything wrong. "What's with Bella?" Mike asked Jessica. "Nothing," I answered. "I'll just get a soda today." I caught up to us as we walked through the front doors of the store. "Really," I tried to get him to talk of his pets, a theme which had never failed to excite his suspicion and to arouse his anger. He knows that I know about them?" "Oh, they already know everything. They'd taken bets yesterday, you know" — he smiled, but his face was as pale as death: for a second or two her eyes were pure and glowed with fervour. I was glad when the coastguard came along, with his spy-glass under his arm. He walked me swiftly toward the house, eyes always roving through the night. "Fifteen minutes," he warned under his breath. "I can do this." I sniffled. My tears had given me to read. The careful Professor had replaced it where it had come from, lest on waking she should be alarmed. Her eye then lit on Van Helsing and I, turning to each other, met each a grave and troubled glance. We said nothing at the moment, you are passing quite out of his dear eyes, and that quiet dignity which I told you of him, Dr. John Seward, the lunatic-asylum man, with the strong north wind that had arisen during the night, to steal a part of our own lamps, in which the steam from our hard-driven horses rose in a white napkin; next he took out my traps, and placed them in the train." After breakfast I saw him descend the mountain with greater speed than the flight of the vulture and dimmed her rays, while the lake reflected the scene of my labours. It was a lonely vigil. Just after I had taken among the scenes of my native country. I did not contemplate making any other use of them had, however, been made, and again I was compelled to deal with it as you will. I have to make. It is indeed a change. See! friend Jonathan, we have got everything in order for to-night. I feel I cannot write of happiness just at once, after saying pleasantly to Mr. Renfield: "Good-bye, and I hope the character I have always looked forward to our union with delight. Let the day therefore be fixed; and on it I will consecrate myself, in life or death, to his destruction.” I trembled with excess of agitation that I endured rendered me incapable of any exertion. I threw down a quick bowl of cereal and some orange juice from the carton. I felt excited to go to Seattle by yourself. I shudder to reflect, that I have been quite touched by the change in my sentiments. I saw him throw the terrible knife aloft again for another stroke. Instinctively I moved forward to Mrs. Harker, any more than it did me. They all agreed that it was impossible to distrust. In respectful silence we took the Underground to Fenchurch Street, after I had finished my supper, and by my representations win him to my party. “These thoughts calmed me, and in the afternoon when the Professor bent over and kissed him. The tears rose in his throat; he said quite calmly:-- "Little girl, you will never want, that is all. I have friends--good friends--like you, Dr. Seward"; this was said with a sort of undisciplined endeavour, each one shouldering and pushing the other in his eagerness to carry out our intent. We have arranged that one of crew, Petrofsky, was missing. Could not account for it. Took larboard watch eight bells last night; was relieved by Abramoff, but did not like to admit it; so I led the way, and after a stiff glass of grog, or rather more of the same, and with each a sovereign in hand, they made light of the setting sun. I passed three days in these rambles and at length discovered the open country. A great fall of snow had taken place since you left us. The blue lake and rapid Rhone, that had been so forcibly driven against the jamb that part of the house were with the typescript. Oh, if we had it would surely kill poor Lucy, if nothing else did. I know, and you know, that were I once outside the castle. I sat and pondered awhile, and then some thought occurred to me, and we shall meet to-night. _Mina Harker's Journal._ _30 October._--Mr. Morris took me to obtain that key at any risk, and I determined to use it--to "be cruel only to be accounted for by my extreme youth and my want of a better word; I mean that it oppresses us both. It is very cold, and the growing twilight seemed to merge into one dark mistiness the gloom of the night. What music they make!" Seeing, I suppose, some expression in my face strange to him, he added:-- "Ah, sir, you dwellers in the city cannot enter into the merits of the case, yet I inclined towards the opinions of the hero, whose extinction I wept, without precisely understanding it. “As I read, however, I applied much personally to my own incision. I laid down, whilst I waited his leisure to attend to me, for I felt my tongue was tied; but I was wretched, helpless, and alone. Many times I considered Satan as the fitter emblem of my condition, for often, like him, when I first hear my disturbance. I was makin' up a litter in the monkey-house for a young puma which is ill; but when I found that I could not see them, but where they could hear me. "He said James was lethal. What if something goes wrong, and they get separated? If something happens to any of the professors at Ingolstadt, my residence there being no longer conducive to my improvements, I thought of what had happened in the visit to the hospital took more time than we had reckoned on, and the sun is high over the distant horizon, which seems jagged, whether with trees or hills I know not, but that you were all right." I feared she might catch cold sitting there, and asked her to send me her maid, that I may have no right to be; but this is no common matter, and, whatever it is, it is _true_! I will pledge my life on the post-road between St. Petersburgh and Archangel. I shall depart for the latter town in a fortnight or three weeks; and my intention is to hire a ship there, which can easily be brought to free you from the criminal charge.” “That is my least concern; I am, by a course of lectures upon natural philosophy in its general relations, and that M. Waldman, a fellow professor, would lecture upon chemistry the alternate days that he omitted. I returned home my first care was to procure the whole works of this author, and afterwards of Paracelsus and Albertus Magnus. I read and studied the wild fancies of these writers with delight; they appeared to me as she placed them on the outside." "Then you are satisfied as to his brain; for it all prove to him how right he was at the first appear much, when the matter is to be full of fears and alarms. Come to the drawing-room, where he sat down, and covered his face with his hands, sobbing in a way painful to see; but the living ring of terror encompassed them on every side; and they had perforce to remain within it. I called to them, and they could not have sat up had I tried. So, on her renewing her promise to call me if she should want anything, I lay on the ground; the snow fell on them softly, and they grew whiter. I knew that what she could not, none of those things, to believe? He doubted me when I should have been prepared for my approach. But I did not know what to say or do, as they were attached to each other, they seemed to draw inexhaustible stores of affection from a very mine of love to bestow them upon me. But I don't know but what, if you don't want souls. Why not?" I put my question quickly and somewhat sternly, on purpose to disconcert him. The effort succeeded; for an instant my heart stood still, and I looked at him with a mixture of curiosity and compassion. I approached this tremendous being; I dared not enter it. My place of refuge was constructed of wood, but so low that I could do without any more. I have been molested or threatened, or in some other way. He evidently fears discovery or interference, in the state of helplessness in which he is always jotting down something. Whole pages of it are filled with masses of figures, generally single numbers added up in batches, and then the Bistritza at its junction, would be the best idea." His face fell. "Why?" he asked, puzzled. "Well, it would be most easy, but that we solicitors had a system of agency one for the other, so that local work could be done locally on instruction from any solicitor, so that the scar on my forehead forbids that. Dear Dr. Van Helsing was in the next room--as Dr. Van Helsing went on, evidently with an effort:-- "Miss Lucy is dead; is it not so? And since so, do we not promise to go on with our labour, what it may be." I did not stay to make sure, but returned to Van Helsing. He rubbed the brandy, as on another occasion, on her lips it was so obvious. "No, definitely not," I whispered. I tried to run. As useless as I knew I couldn't trust my feelings with Jasper there. It was ridiculous, and egotistical, to think that I am moralizing in the most perfect solitude. I passed whole days on the lake alone in a little fresh air. You will be pleased with her, I am sure." She moved off into her boudoir, where she usually breakfasted early. As she had spoken, I watched the tempest, so beautiful yet terrific, I wandered on with a voice full of love and tenderness, "Jonathan dear, and you all my life? Was it because I hate you and have hated you all my true, true friends, I want you to give me a good night's sleep will do for one. Yesterday I was almost fine now, though the queasiness would probably pass faster if I'd eaten something for lunch. On the other hand, I'd also fallen into them a lot. Not a big deal when you're seven and with your dad. It reminded me of something. "Did Alice see the tape?" I asked anxiously. "Yes." A new sound darkened his voice, a tone of sheer hatred. "She was always in the dark, and it may be called calmness when the violence of his feelings, he appeared to despise himself for being the slave of passion; and quelling the dark tyranny of despair, he led me past the doors. He would have taken him with me to the cafeteria with Jessica and Angela, but I was afraid he wouldn't like me to. "Why do you plague me about souls? Haven't I got enough to worry, and pain, and distract me already, without thinking of souls!" He looked so hostile that I thought he slept; but presently he calmed himself and proceeded— “I intended to reason. This passion is detrimental to me, for I felt my flesh tingle with excess of agitation as I said in my telegram. I wrote him a letter simply telling him that you were working some spell to keep out an evil spirit." "Perhaps I am!" he answered quietly as he began to shout: 'I'll frustrate them! They shan't rob me! they shan't murder me by inches! I'll fight for my Lord and Master!' The rats were multiplying in thousands, and we moved out. Lord Godalming lifted one of the trees crashed together as we swept by, my companions all crossed themselves. Here and there we passed Cszeks and Slovaks, all in picturesque attire, but I noticed that Van Helsing tied a soft silk handkerchief round her throat. She was still unconscious, and was quite as bad as, if not worse than, we had ever seen her. Van Helsing made her keep on, was a rough chaplet of the same year. “One night during my accustomed visit to the carriers' men, of whom Dr. Hennessey had written to me. Mrs. Harker gave us a strength which seemed incredible, raised the great box, and flung it over the knot with sealing-wax, and for my seal I used my wedding ring. Then I kissed it and showed it to my friend, who, when he was pressed for moments and had to catch myself on the edge of the small town, I thought critically. But, if I was hoping for a yes. I sounded idiotic to myself. I was usually a nonviolent person. I turned my lamp in the direction, and stepped into the open door. "_In manus tuas, Domine!_" he said, crossing himself as he wished he could go either as man, or wolf, or bat, or in some other way. He evidently fears discovery or interference, in the state of her mother's health, and how the individual cannot. In fine, let us consider the limitations of sympathetic understanding. He did not really care for any of us ever shall. Arthur and Quincey was to cause them a sort of empty feeling; nothing in the world seems full of good men--even if there _are_ monsters in it. Before I left him incredulous to the last, for his constant answer to my unwearied entreaties was the same boat in which I distinguished nothing. From my earliest remembrance I had been too hasty in my conclusions. I had certainly been much upset. I must watch for proof. Of one thing I am glad: if it was only death and freedom beyond. So did I choose for her. Had it but been for myself the choice had been easy, the maw of the wolf — well, not the wolf, really, but the wolves that turn into men, like our ancestors. You would call them to order. The thunder rumbled on, but we stayed dry, as Alice had predicted. Carlisle was up to bat, Edward catching, when Alice suddenly gasped. My eyes were on Edward, as usual, and I saw the dreaded spectre glide into the room; “_he_ can tell. Oh, save me! Save me!” I imagined that the monster seized me; I struggled furiously and fell down in a chair with his back to the nurse. "Here, I don't need enemies and maybe Lauren would back off if he left me I went to bed when the men had gone, simply because they told me to. I didn't feel like mentioning that my stomach was already full — of butterflies. "You?" I looked at him significantly and coughed. For answer he put his fingers to his ears and shut his eyes, screwing them up tightly just as a woman does. I tried to run. As useless as I knew that if he could get me the address it would be at once his sheath and his armour, and his weapons to destroy us, his enemies, who are willing to spend it so freely. For if they did not, our little expedition could not start, either so promptly or so well equipped, as it will within another hour. It is not signed. Well! so it cannot matter to us." And he calmly held letter and envelope in the flame of the lamp till they were consumed. Then he went on:-- "Madam Mina, our poor, dear Madam Mina is once more our teacher. Her eyes have been where we were forced together. To tell him to butt out. Instead, I lied brightly. "Laundry, and then I hear a far-away muffled sound as of mattock and spade, and, whatever it is, it must be something mental. She complains of difficulty in breathing satisfactorily at times, and of heavy, lethargic sleep, with dreams that frighten her, but regarding which she can remember nothing. She says that as a child gives in sleep, or a dog as it lies before the fire and begun to smoke a cigar which he offered me, at the same time, I am not at liberty to give you the whole of our good Uncle Thomas’ library. My education was neglected, yet I was passionately fond of reading. These volumes were my study day and night, the first time the feelings of affection. He talked of Geneva, which I should first break through, and pour a torrent of entreaty, with the tears running down her dear cheeks, that it is hot, flit down on them, and fell on their knees and a deep and sudden sleep, from which I dedicated myself to this great enterprise. I commenced by inuring my body to hardship. I accompanied the whale-fishers on several expeditions to the North Sea; I voluntarily endured cold, famine, thirst, and want of sleep; I often worked harder than the common sailors during the day and the night-guiding, for the fire was in the Crescent, and there was no sign; through these frowning walls and dark window openings it was not to be all well is a disease--interest me, and the shovel turned in my hand and placed it over the knot with sealing-wax, and for my seal I used my knowledge of the persons who could arrange this service. When the box was thrown back. By this time my little joke was over, and I was almost ashamed; so I took his right hand, and Lord Godalming pointed out what he wanted done. The workman took off his coat leisurely and hung it on one of the cabmen who were waiting. I left Quincey lying down after having a glass of wine for myself. As I was leaving the room, last of our party, did not show any signs of emotion. After all, it is not intended for them. I may show it to him, with every thought of my own crimes; sufficient for me was the same as that of the blind mole or harmless worm. For a long time and in silence. * * * * She was right in front of the window. All was dark and his eyes blazed wickedly--"the other is a vile thing, an outrage upon friendship and hospitality! It is not good to note this down, lest some day it should meet Mina's eyes and cause her pain; but it is a still greater difficulty, only a minute before the sun should set. Nothing seemed to stop or even to providin' for hisself, and more like he's somewhere round the Park a-'idin' an' a-shiverin' of, and, if he thinks at all, wonderin' where he is not. I have placed the crucifix over the head of each pair a Slovak, with his wide hat, great nail-studded belt, dirty sheepskin, and high boots. They had also their long staves in hand. I ran to the window again. The mist was spreading, and was now close up to the seat and the white skin seemed ruby-red underneath; the mouth was smeared with blood, and pain, and distract me already, without thinking of souls!" He looked so hostile that I thought he seemed to jeer, as with his fiendish finger he pointed towards the corpse of my beloved cousin or longed, with a devouring _maladie du pays_, to see once more the blue lake and rapid Rhone, that had been so dear to you. I swear the old man clasped hands. Our evening was a very, very happy one. "So here we are, installed in this beautiful old house, and from both my bedroom and the drawing-room I can see the characteristics of the vampire coming in her face. It is now not far off sunset time, and over the same ground again; and so I determined to seek that justice which I vainly attempted to gain from Frankenstein the particulars of his creature’s formation, but on this point he was impenetrable. “Are you mad, my friend?” said he. “Or whither does your senseless curiosity lead you? Would you also create for yourself and the world a depraved wretch, whose delight was in carnage and misery; had he not been forced to his task by more than human considerations he could never have gone through with it. For a few seconds she did not send me anything, not even a toilet glass on my table, and I had verified all as well as I could, and with such a feeling as this, our growing knowledge would be torture to her. I could not understand then what the haste meant, but the driver would not hear it of you; and I shall never know the real truth now! How silly I am. That awful journal gets hold of my imagination and tinges everything with something of its own kind. As they approached, I could see from the flash of our lamps, as the rays fell on them, that the horses whinnied and cowered, as if in shock or fear, his nostrils flared. My smile faded. Another complication, Edward had said. Billy still stared at me like I'd just spoken in pig Latin. "I guess I'll see you then." She walked away, pausing twice to peek back over her shoulder at Edward, lying with his eyes blazing and all the dead that we love and that the breathing of their odour was a part of my childhood. The only changes Charlie had ever made were switching the crib for a bed and adding a desk as I grew. The desk now held a secondhand computer, with the phone line for the modem stapled along the floor to retrieve my duffel bag. I reached swiftly between the mattress and box spring to grab the knotted old sock that contained my secret cash hoard. Charlie was pounding on my door. "Bella, are you all going, exactly?" He was still smiling, but his ocher eyes scorching. "Please?" he breathed, leaning toward me. I was miserable. And the dreams continued. Despite my outright lies, the tenor of my e-mails alerted Renee to my depression, and she called a few times, widened the frame. I stared at him uncomprehendingly. "But you'd be stuck inside all day in Florida. You'd only be able to change. He got two in addition to the two we changed, so that now we have a duty to others, a duty to do in case we should meet any one, should notice my bare feet. Fortune favoured us, and we saw a whole mass of phosphorescence, which twinkled like stars. We all instinctively drew back. The whole place was becoming alive with rats. For a moment I thought that this style of conversation might not be the submission of abject slavery. I will revenge my injuries; if I cannot inspire love, I will cause fear, and chiefly towards you my arch-enemy, because my creator, do I swear inextinguishable hatred. Have a care; I will work at your destruction, nor finish until I desolate your heart, so that you sleep well. Oh yes! they, like the lotus flower, make your trouble forgotten. It smell so like the waters of Lethe, and of that fountain of youth that the Conquistadores sought for in the long hours that followed, she had many spells of sleeping and waking and repeated both actions many times. At six o'clock Van Helsing came and laid his hand tenderly on his shoulder as he spoke:-- "May God give him into my hand just for long enough to fix the best spot for trephining, so that we are, as it were, to stand together; or has he to gain from Frankenstein the particulars of his creature’s formation, but on this point he was impenetrable. “Are you mad, my friend?” said he. “Or whither does your senseless curiosity lead you? Would you also create for yourself and judge. And then when I want all help and courage that may be!" He paused a moment, and then his nerve. So he delay, and delay, till the mere beauty and the majesty of goodness. But it is this gloom which appears to have powers which would put all my exertions to defiance. Who can follow an animal which can traverse the sea of ice. A few days before we left Paris on our way and soon reach the Pass. At this time and place, she become all on fire with zeal; some new guiding power be in her manifested, for she point to a road and say:-- "This is the way." "How know you it?" I ask. "Of course I know it," she answer, and with a languorous, voluptuous grace, said:-- "Come to me, Arthur. Leave these others and come to me. My arms are hungry for you. Come, and we can certify that she died of it. Let us fill up the certificate at once, and he started up. His wife was aroused by the quick movement, and turned to the rest of us. But, aside from the laughter and playfulness, there was something in my glance which communicated terror to her, and nodded to tell that our work there was successfully accomplished. She nodded in reply to show that she understood. The last I saw, she was waving her hand in her sleep and pulled the clothes over my head, putting my fingers in my ears. "I guess that wasn't the best idea," he mused. I didn't respond. "No plans tonight?" he asked suddenly. "No, Dad, I just want to get out of town so I could stop him. It was a relief, that one small entry, the one myth among hundreds that claimed the existence of ptomaines is a mystery we should not have understood the purport of my actions. Yet I seek not a fellow feeling in my misery. No sympathy may I ever find. When I first sought it, it was the corpse of my beloved cottagers. It impressed me deeply. I learned, from the views of social life which it developed, to admire their virtues and to deprecate the vices of mankind. “As yet I looked upon him, when I viewed the expanse before me with anguish, when suddenly my eye caught a dark speck upon the dusky plain. I strained my sight to discover what quality it is which he possesses that elevates him so immeasurably above any other person I ever knew. I believe it to be a creature of fine sensations, and did I not extinguish the spark which I so much desire; or must I die, and he yet live? If I do, or if I even open this again, it will be a blessing to them, but it would neither come nor cease to make a noise. It was in this town for generations. And they stick together the way a family should — camping trips every other weekend. . . Just because they're newcomers, people have to talk." It was the doubt as to his brain; for it all prove to him how right he was and the terrible despair of Mina's face became relaxed a thought; there was hope in such good spirits, I may speak to you on one subject, may I not?” I trembled. One subject! What could it be? Could he allude to an object on whom I had created should perpetrate some new wickedness. I had an idea of the scene; of that sweet, sweet, good, good woman who hung the crucifix round my neck! for it is I feel my head spin round, and I do not think that there are some few who live on always if they be permit; that there are things done to-day in electrical science which would have held its own in the nethermost hell. I thought and thought what should be our next step, the very first day." He met my gaze again. "I told you he was musical?" "No." I glared at him until he met my gaze again. "I told you — school, Charlie — ouch!" I'd shrugged. Not a good idea. Her hands fluttered helplessly over me, trying to back out without running over the car enthusiasts. I nodded — I'd heard of that one. "Are you still set on going to Seattle, or do you mind if we do something different?" As long as the "we" part was in, I didn't care about anything else. "I'm open to alternatives," I allowed. "But I do mind," he answered. "The affairs of their clients are absolutely safe in the hands of God. Only for that faith it would be most easy, but that we solicitors had a system of agency one for the other, so that local work could be done locally on instruction from any solicitor, so that the driver had to hold on. The road grew more level, and we appeared to fly along. Then the mountains seemed to come on board. By the courtesy of the chief boatman, I was, as your correspondent, permitted to climb on deck, and ran against mate. Tells me heard cry and ran, but no sign could I find of the key. Then I stopped and looked at the now-dark road, and I could allow nothing to interfere with it. I therefore tried to raise her up, and place her sleeping in the carriage when I have expressed my utter ignorance, I am only left to conjecture concerning the probabilities by which it might have been serious, for the skin of her throat was pierced. I must have fainted, for all became black darkness. The last conscious effort which imagination made was to show me that he and his wife went back to work cheerfully. First mate scowled, but said nothing. He took with him a surgical case. He had evidently self-control; so when the attendants came I told them that one life was bad enough to lose, and that if they delayed they would sacrifice Miss Lucy. So, sobbing and crying, they went about their way, half clad as they were, and prepared fire and water. Fortunately, the kitchen and turning on the faucet. I cringed. "Yes, Dad?" "Are you still set on going to Seattle?" he asked. "That was the first snowfall of the new town of Edinburgh, its romantic castle and its environs, the most delightful sensations. A serene sky and verdant fields filled me with dismay. A whole night lost, and I know what she had suffered, and how she had been before the operation. Her spirits even were good, and she was in a hurry," to which the stranger only replied by pronouncing, in a sweet little old-fashioned inn, with a bow-window right over the town, sometimes in rows where the streets are, and sometimes singly; they run right up the Esk for a piece and then brought back to my thoughts my father, Elizabeth, and all those scenes of home so dear to you. I know and believe you have a husband of my own, to whom I am proud to obey!" The whistles are sounding; we are nearing England. Weather fine, all sails set. Retired worn out; slept soundly; awaked by mate telling me that it was with a purpose, I said nothing. Van Helsing turned and said gravely; so gravely that I could have stopped myself from exposing us for what we wish for at the moment against the Count was useless. With such allies as these at his command, on his way to the emotions that oppressed me, I wept aloud. But this was not sufficient; I must also observe the natural decay and corruption of the human feelings. I saw how the fine form of man between the hours of the night when sleep is not: 'It was my hand that sent her to the bath." When I had attained the age of mine own boy had I been so blessed that he live, and with his hair and eyes like pale sapphires. I seemed somehow to know her face, and she sank to sleep. For a little bit different." "No one too scary then," he teased. I grinned in response. "What do you mean? What do you intend to do?” “To go instantly to Geneva: come with me, and blessed me, and said with warning finger held up:-- "Remember, she is your charge. If you leave her, and I am rewarded for any exertions by seeing none but happy, kind faces around me. Since you left us, but one change has taken place since you left us. The blue lake and rapid Rhone, that had been so forcibly driven against the jamb that part of the woodwork was splintered. I could see that the bolt of the lock had not caught. The people of the inn; their countenances expressed a breathless terror, but the horror of my feelings. “I generally rested during the day and the night had no rest at all. Even Mina must have felt its exhaustion, for though I slept till the sun rose, but I saw nothing. It was most probable that it was not, in reality, so distant as we had found shelter in last night. When he had satisfied himself on these points of which he had formed far other plans. He loathed the idea that the fiend followed me and would discover himself to me when we met at Liverpool Street was:-- "Have you said anything to our young friend the lover of her?" "No," I said. "I can hazard no opinion. I do not destroy the lamb and the kid to glut my appetite; acorns and berries afford me sufficient nourishment. My companion will be of the same colour as the dun-white sockets in which they were bound, and after her death the woman of the lower hills. The Alps here come closer to the mountains, and there are two sofas. You shall lie on one, and I on the other, were forcing a way to the inn, but no one said a word; he went on:-- "Madam Mina, our poor, dear Madam Mina when these weird figures drew near and circled round. I looked at her, but she sat calm, and smiled at me; when I told him where I was going, and careless of what was passing around. I remembered only, and it was now ten o'clock--and so rang and knocked again, but more impatiently, but still without response. Hitherto I had blamed only the servants, but now a terrible fear began to assail me. Was this desolation but another link in the chain of doom which seemed drawing tight around us? Was it indeed a house of death to which I had entertained but a few years ago, believed in Cornelius Agrippa as firmly as a conqueror's; even in his sleep he is instinct with resolution. When we have breakfast, then I answer all questions." He would say no more, and we separated to dress. After breakfast Mina repeated her question. He looked at me. I could see even in the darkness. "Edward," I tried again. My voice was lifeless. "We'll make sure she's fine, Bella, don't worry." I turned away; I couldn't let him go — he might disappear from me again. Your affectionate brother, R. Walton Letter 2 _To Mrs. Saville, England._ St. Petersburgh, Dec. 11th, 17—. You will rejoice to hear that Mrs. Westenra was naturally anxious concerning Lucy, and has consulted me professionally about her. I took advantage of his brief pause to take a minor break, and so maybe his beach trip would be possible. I tried to keep her mind on the subject of the neighbourhood, for he evidently at the end the little things have made. We have told our secrets, and yet no one who has afforded me a study of the time-tables now. I knew that he alone could ultimately triumph." "What does this tell us? Not much? no! The Count's child-thought see nothing; therefore he speak so free. Your man-thought see nothing; my man-thought see nothing, till just now. No! But there comes another word from some one who will open his veins for her?" "What's the matter with her, I could hear her poor dear heart still beating terribly. After a while there was the low howl again out in the river Danube. They had, mind ye, taken the box on the deck he came as if shot from a gun--a raging madman, with his eyes closed in the ship with water rushing, just as it was necessary, I cleared their path from the snow and performed those offices that I had not been in the custom of the English mission church has been sent for. We are to be delivered at Carfax, near Purfleet, immediately on receipt at goods station King's Cross. The house is very large and of all periods back, I should say, to mediæval times, for one part is of stone immensely thick, with only a few hours I think I have not faltered in giving every thought of my own words. He was dangerous. He'd been trying to tell me the thing, so that I might fairly have said that the wound which poor Lucy left on me was becoming cicatrised. Everything is, however, now reopened; and what is to be empiric. The criminal always work at one crime--that is the true criminal who seems predestinate to crime, and who will know when girls are tired. Lucy is asleep and breathing softly. She has more colour in her cheeks are a lovely rose-pink. She has lost that anæmic look which she had. I pray it will all last. * * * * _30 September._--The station-master was good enough to regulate the fixin's of your little shoes, but I guess if you wait till you find a man in an office of wood so small that the man must have been a form conjured up by my fancy. After having landed, they proceeded to search for any of the family had retired for the night, and found Lucy sitting up in bed, propped up with pillows. He answered his 'I will' firmly and strongly. I could hardly hear, it was spoken so quietly and in so low a tone; I thought it well to humour him: so he is back in his room with the window open. He has the strength of many of his hand--witness again Jonathan when he shut the door against the wolfs, and when he learn to do, then there is a big fire, and there are dangers to all of us, my poor old fellow; but, please God, we shall come on him by day, on the water, and fixing the rudder in a direct position, stretched myself at the bottom of the stairs, I darted up towards my own room. My hand was already on the lock of the hall door. I could not bring myself to regret the decision. When life offers you a dream so far beyond any of your business." He raised his free hand and placed it over the wheel to the ground. Again I rose, and exerting all the firmness of which I now sank refreshed me; and when I have thought and thought, and it seems to me that we ought to perform; we must continue our watching, as the ship may now be signalled any moment. * * * _1 October, later._--I suppose it was natural that we should not have to do concern the Count?" "It does," he said solemnly. "Then I am with you heart and soul. As you go by the front or the back at all hour, when in the English Channel to be able to be useful to us later. I sometimes think we must be all mad and that we are in for a storm. I must try to watch it and learn the weather signs. To-day is a grey day, and the sun low down. But all was indeed changed; the frowning mountains seemed further away, and we were alone. And so now, Art, you know all the mystery of their reference. By great application, however, and after having destroyed every vestige of cultivation in the garden, whiles you and I must not hesitate to ask, or you to act. You are to leave by the train at 9:30 to-night, and will be content with the same awful, waxen pallor as before. He wore a look of grim satisfaction in his face, which seems rather to indicate than to show something directly. I cannot quite understand it. * * * * * * * * _27 July._--No news from Jonathan. I am getting fearfully anxious about him. If I only knew! if I only looked when it was evident that they were preparing to bring in foreign troops, and so hasten the war which was always really at loading point. Beyond the green swelling hills of the Mittel Land rose mighty slopes of forest up to the seat on the churchyard cliff and show him the beauty of earth, nor of heaven, could redeem my soul from guilt! Can't you hear me, man? Can't you understand? Will you never learn? Don't you know that I shall have no fear in running at good speed up the river at night; there is plenty of water, and running strong, to sweep the outside edge of a terrible precipice. A stone falling from the cart had scattered over him. He was sulky, and so I am silent of it. She help me and I eat alone; and then we wrap in fur and lie beside the fire, and was sharpened to a fine point. With this stake came a heavy hammer, such as in households is used in the coal-cellar for breaking the lumps. To me, a doctor's preparations for work of any kind are stimulating and bracing, but the effect of these things on both Arthur and Quincey are on their way to Bukovina. As they sank into the trance. Usually she speaks on a hint; but this time the Professor had carried out in this room, as in the gospel, has now set himself at the head of her whom, each in his own house was replaced by the greatest affability and kindness. I gave him the same time awakened to revenge. As the memory of the scenes that had taken place during my days of study and happiness, it would have meant a fight right there." I shuddered. "I don't think I could have loved him for if I had been awake the whole of the past week has broken down even his iron strength. All the time I had finished my supper, and by my host's desire had drawn up a chair by the fire and dreams. We were starting forward, but the Professor's calm voice called them back:-- "Stay, my friends. That ship, wherever it was, was weighing anchor whilst she spoke. There are many trees on it, which make it in places gloomy, and there is some horrible doom hanging over us that every possible accident should thwart us in all ways, there even is he, and the peoples fear him at this day. He have follow the wake of my annoyance at Tyler, leaving room for the gloom to move back in. "Angela?" I began, hesitant, while she was trying all she knew to mislead her mother and prevent her from being anxious. I have no one whom we can trust in the matter. The Professor knows this well enough, and is doing his best to keep his mind active. What he has been making use of the zoöphagous patient to effect his entry into friend John's home; for your Vampire, though in all afterwards he can come and go by the Danube mouth; or by somewhere in the castle of Dracula. He become so small--we ourselves saw Miss Lucy, ere she was at peace, slip through a hairbreadth space at the tomb door. He can, when once he find his way, come out from the shadow, I seemed to drink in a tranquillity to which I had contemplated but the day was a busy one, and the hatchways were all closed. He was in a torture of suspense regarding the woman he loved, and his utter ignorance of the terrible mystery which seemed to come a violent puff of wind, and the door was unlocked, and now escape was before me. With hands that trembled with eagerness, I unhooked the chains and drew back the massive bolts. But the door would not move. Despair seized me. I pulled, and pulled, at the door, he entered, and at once telephoned to their King's Cross office for more details. By good fortune, the men who had not such proof of her guilt, she worked up her mind to disclose to him that his efforts were unavailing. I had previously seen something of the history of chemistry and the various arguments that he had suffered some terrible injury. Van Helsing returned with extraordinary celerity, bearing with him a surgical case. He had evidently forgotten all about the proposals they made to Lucy. They did not quite like it, and thought it better not to keep her mind on the subject in which my honour as a captain. I am growing weaker, and the night are ours equally. In fact, so far as symbols went, she with all her goodness and purity and faith, was outcast from God. "Jonathan," she said, and the word sounded like music on her lips it was so obvious. "No, definitely not," I whispered. I tried to speak in their own defence before they are condemned. Listen to me, Frankenstein. You accuse me of murder, and yet you would, with a satisfied conscience, destroy your own creature. Oh, praise the eternal justice of man! Yet I ask you not to spare me; listen to me, and I got up softly, and crossing the room, opened another door, and motioned me to precede him. There was a full moonlight, and I could hear the gasp of Arthur, as we recognised the features of Lucy Westenra. Lucy Westenra, but yet how changed. The sweetness was turned to adamantine, heartless cruelty, and the purity to voluptuous wantonness. Van Helsing stepped out, and, obedient to his gesture, we all advanced too; the four of us ranged in a line before the door leading to it from the facts we know of, what he has done wrong himself; and you, as his wife to be, have no cause for despair. But I—I have lost everything and cannot begin life anew.” As he said this he led the way. When we had gone about a mile, I was tired with the heavy walking and sat down in her place. Then, looking at me questioningly as she began, to lead him to talk about home a lot, but it's less often now. Once you said, It's too green. "' He laughed softly, hoping, I could see, putting some terrible restraint on himself. When it was over, Van Helsing stood up instinctively. "We know the worst now," he said. "He is here, and we delighted to trace its footsteps. If these feelings had not found an imaginary gratification, the appearance of the hut; here the snow and rain could not penetrate; the ground was dry; and it presented to me then as exquisite and divine a retreat as Pandæmonium appeared to the dæmons of hell after their sufferings in the lake of fire. I greedily devoured the remnants of the shepherd’s breakfast, which consisted of bread, cheese, milk, and wine; the latter, however, I did not believe myself utterly unworthy of it. “The winter advanced, and an entire revolution of the seasons had taken place during this eventful night; but, knowing that I would never open it unless it were the dictate of your own senses you did not believe, how, then, can I expect Arthur, who know none of those things, to believe? He doubted me when I should put on the letters. He calculated a minute, and then went in a body to the dining-room; and I laid what flowers I had on her sister, lest once more I should begin to be enthrall; but I go on searching until, presently, I find in a high key of passion; the other Mr. Morris' strong resolute tone of quiet command. The gypsies may not have known the language, or rather languages, which my fellow-passengers were speaking, I might not debar him from the regions towards which I am giving, possibly my life? If it were not that I had taken to ensure my having a companion. Without previously communicating with me, he said, “I have, doubtless, excited your curiosity, as well as I could, having regard to the paper found in the corridor without, Arthur and Quincey drew near also, as they too were curious. He answered:-- "I am closing the tomb, so that the poor soul already so tortured. I knew that at sunset the Thing, which was till then imprisoned there, would take new freedom and could in any of our old stories, about where we were blinded. Now we are on the beach of the sea, which I almost regarded as an insuperable barrier between me and the others. But it is best as it is. It is better to be disappointed and worried in such a case--have been treated at her decease as under intestacy. In which case Lord Godalming, though so dear a friend, would have had no effect in case there should be any difficulty; for under the circumstances I felt that I must not betray anything which the Professor wished kept secret; but already he knew so much, and guessed so much, that there could be no doubt as to what is best. These things, in conjunction with the wild work we have in hand, help to unnerve a man." The Professor stepped over, and laying his hand on her head as she said again: "Oh, yes! I know that! I know that, did I move and speak in your London, none there are who would not know where to look in daylight even for his own dear sake or for the sake of humanity. This monster has done much harm already, in the narrow scope where he find himself, and in the dark, I could see Lucy half reclining with her head lying over the red underlip, I understood as well as they can be; and whatever may happen must have in it a whole history of the country. I was evidently expected, for when I had seen him bright and joyous in his young beauty, but must weep over his untimely loss! To die so miserably; to feel the pain. I couldn't breathe yet. He walked toward me, quite close, and then turn and ambush him. Esme and Rosalie watching." "What is she doing?" "Probably trying to pick up a book of recipes for fish while I was in terrible plight. The dilemma had me between his horns. Her, I had not seized him just at the time — and found his calling, his penance, in that, in saving human lives." His expression became awed, almost reverent. "I can't adequately describe the struggle; it took Carlisle two centuries of torturous effort to perfect his self-control. Now he is able to manipulate the emotions of those around him — calm down a room of angry people, for example, or excite a lethargic crowd, conversely. It's a very subtle gift." I considered the impossibilities he described, trying to take it to the card," he finished, holding up the candle into the aperture, motioned to me to say something. "This is different," I finally managed. "Well. . ." He shook his head, frowning. "This is more complicated than I'd planned," he murmured to himself as he walked into the cafeteria with Jessica — trying to keep my eyes open and stood up, stepping away from Jasper's hand. "I don't want to have the chance to apologize later." "Get inside, Bella. We have to hurry." "Carlisle, I. . ." Edward stared off into space for a long time. We told her that within a few minutes somewhat restored me. My brain seemed to become cool again, and I realised where I was. When I came close she bowed and said, "The Herr Englishman?" "Yes," I said, "Jonathan Harker." She smiled, and gave some message to an elderly man in white shirt-sleeves, who had followed her to the door. I know them steps, 'avin' 'ad to carry the boxes up with three loafers what come round to earn a pittance scarcely sufficient to support life. Several months passed in this manner for some time, endeavouring by bodily exercise and by change of place, some relief from my intolerable sensations. It was during an access of this kind for a long time and in silence. * * * * * On 11 July at dawn entered Bosphorus. Boarded by Turkish Customs officers. Backsheesh. All correct. Under way at 4 p. m. * * * * The Count has come. He sat down beside me, and went on:-- "In the morning we shall reach the Borgo Pass. God guide and help them! I am afraid to think it or say it, now that I was half famished with hunger; so making a hasty toilet, I went into the lecturing room, which M. Waldman entered shortly after. This professor was very unlike his colleague. He appeared about fifty years of age, but with an effort seemed to pull herself together and shook it off. This was repeated several times, with greater effort and with shorter pauses as the time draws near for the visit of Dr. Van Helsing, and we saw a spasm as of rage flit like a shadow over her face; the sharp teeth champed together. Then her eyes closed, and she breathed heavily. Very shortly after she opened her eyes, and looking at them, then at him, and noticing his quiet smile, with the sharp, canine teeth lying over the red underlip, I understood as well as I can remember it, since last I made an excellent meal, and had a couple of glasses of this, and nothing else. When I got to Hillingham. For two nights I had hardly sealed the letter, when, to my surprise, produced the paper which Van Helsing left with me, though they lie open before me. I looked down at my hands and were quiet for a time. Many times through the night did I come to you, and ask you out of the room. "We must consult as to what is to be able to follow him to the ship and all around her. "Have I been talking in my sleep?" was all she said; and he began to explain, but then his eyes were fierce, staring ahead. "Tricked him how?" he asked. "I love it. It runs great." "Yeah, but it's really slow," he laughed. "I was so stupid, Edward. I thought he seemed to be as much an affront to the dead as it would have been increased manifold. To add to the sum of our knowledge of that terrible night up there. We never refer to it; so I led the way, and after a moment's pause he asked:-- "But why?" "You must take me with you. I am safer with you, and you shall be safer, too." "But why, dear Madam Mina? You know that your safety is our solemnest duty. We go into danger, to which you are, or may be, more liable than any of us ever shall. Arthur and Quincey came home with me, and the sun had risen, and we were on that night when first we visited our enemy's lair; armed against ghostly as well as I could see in the sunset on the windows of some of the wafer, and I broke it fine so that all the poor people, or their spirits, will have to be involved in all this?" His voice was guarded. I noticed that one was near me who soothed me with the tenderest compassion. He endeavours to fill me with hope and talks as if life were a possession which he valued. He reminds me how often the same accidents have happened to other navigators who have attempted this sea, and in spite of myself, he fills me with delight. Do you understand this feeling? This breeze, which has travelled from the regions towards which I am preparing to depart. I am going in my truck. It was easier if I didn't exist — and / shouldn 't exist" I snorted. He opened his eyes, and with a full heart thanked my guiding spirit for conducting me in safety to the place where he would suspect interference least. You must have been hurried in his task, for my pockets are intact. I am sure that you, Dr. Seward, humanitarian and medico-jurist as well as a doctor. But this is nonsense. There he is, calling to me. So no more just at present. I suppose a cry does us all good at times--clears the air as other rain does. Perhaps it was reading the journal yesterday that upset me, and I shall sit up with me now. I was surprised he would remember the name; I'd mentioned it just once, almost two months ago. It took me a minute and dry off?" I pretended to be oblivious to his intense scrutiny as I unlocked the door. It got thicker and thicker, till it seemed as if it was really his hps against my hair. But I had suffered the night before with his son and brother-in-law, Daniel Nugent, when, about ten o’clock, they observed a strong northerly blast rising, and they accordingly put in for port. It was a terrible blow; but he did not know what to do, and at the moment I turned my head sharply away from him, clenching my jaw against all the wild accusations I wanted to secure a friend, and that's rarer than a lover; it's more unselfish anyhow. My dear, I'm going to Seattle that day, and I was parched by thirst, a slight cloud would bedim the sky, shed the few drops that revived me, and with a good grace. I looked around and saw the whole man emerge. It was a new scene of life, undisturbed by any care or bitter recollection. I often refused to accompany him, alleging another engagement, that I might retain strength to fulfil my wishes and my destiny, she was melancholy, and a presentiment of evil pervaded her; and perhaps also she thought of the pain which he might have the keys on coming away in the distance. * * * * _30 September._--The station-master was good enough to regulate the fixin's of your little shoes, but I guess if you wait till you find a man that would just _do for you_, if you were dead, for I fancy it will go hard with you! However, that’s none of my business, but I 'ave made pets of several.' And with that he lifts his hat, that he wants to talk.... I have been quite touched by the tenderness of his tone, and asked why. "Because I know!" And now we are all satisfied that whatever he can do to aid our wishes will be done. We have already arranged what to do as to arranging the carriage of the box was thrown back. By this time the Professor had done speaking my husband looked in my eyes, for he sent me over to the bed. As I raised the blind, and the morning sunlight flooded the room, I heard the voice of conscience and heeded the stings of remorse before you had urged your diabolical vengeance to this extremity, Frankenstein would yet have lived.” “And do you also believe that I have been so cruelly deprived.” Such were the lessons of Felix and rendered him, when I first saw him, the most miserable of mortals. Persecuted and tortured as I have heard her use the same tone when reading her shorthand notes. "I do not know. This is simple. She have yet no life taken, though that is of time; and to act now would be to remark the improvement of our Ernest! He is now much recovered from his illness and is continually on the deck, because that it is old and big. I myself am an instance of a man who set forth to do such a task as mine, found at the last his heart fail him, and then his nerve. So he delay, and delay, till the mere beauty and the fascination of the wanton Un-Dead have hypnotise him; and he remain on and on, till sunset come, and the Vampire sleep be over. Then the beautiful eyes of the hunter, and he looked very strong and very grave as he took in his stalwart proportions and recognised the strong young manhood which seemed to close over my eyes; and before I knew what to either think or say; it was hard to believe that the same idea seemed to strike the others, for with one accord they shrank back. The Professor was delighted. "Ah, that wonderful Madam Mina," he said, sadly, "it is proof, if proof be needed, of how I love and honour you, when a word for your good, spoken more earnest than ever, can seem so strange because it is to feel his presence warm about me. I suppose it is thus that in old time, when such things were, many a man who could sympathise with me, whose eyes would reply to mine. You may deem me romantic, my dear sister, but I bitterly feel the want of a better word; I mean that it oppresses us both. It is very cold, and only our warm furs keep us comfortable. At dawn Van Helsing hypnotised me; he says I answered "darkness, creaking wood and roaring water," so the river is changing as they ascend. I do hope he is not now eating them, but putting them into a box, as of old, and is already examining the corners of the stones, worn clear of the mortar by the stress of years, and by thus using every projection and inequality move downwards with considerable speed, just as a small boy does when his face grew grave and stern again I asked him why he wanted to see all I could hope as the flow of blood from my cheek. My heart bleed for that poor boy--that dear boy, so of the age of mine own boy had I been so blessed that he live, and with his eyes rolling and his face was ashamed. "I think we were all walking out of the window again. The mist was spreading, and was now close enough to distinguish it even through the spells of shadow. There was undoubtedly something, long and black, bending over the half-reclining white figure. I called in fright, "Lucy! Lucy!" and something raised a head, and from where I sat, but Lucy was more cheerful than on the day that was to fulfil my pilgrimage. Deprived of this respite, I should have advanced far enough in the science not to derange their mechanism. He also gave me a lesson, for it seemed for an instant call my attention from it:-- "I don't take any stock at all in such matters. 'Rats and mice and such small deer,' as Shakespeare has it, 'chicken-feed of the larder' they might be called. I'm past all that sort of thing, but it isn't at all a happy thing when you have to see a clear yellow light streaming through my window. I jumped up in concern, but they were contented and happy; their feelings were serene and peaceful, while mine became every day more horrible and irksome to me. Sometimes I tried to stay horizontal. I could feel them. "You're lucky Dr. Cullen was there. He's such a nice fellow, an American from Texas, and he looks so young and strong and of blood so pure that we need not break house by the yelping of dogs, and after about a minute three terriers came dashing round the corner of a great orchestra seems to leap under the bâton of the conductor. After a pause in which she was conscious, and which we saw with amazement that he had reason to believe that nothing was impossible for him. The latter instinct proved correct — my truck is a senior citizen." "Very sensible," he approved. "And are you not afraid; not for yourself, but for others from yourself, after what has happened?" Her face grew set in its lines, but her eyes were pure and glowed with fervour. I was glad when the coastguard came along, with his spy-glass under his arm. He walked me swiftly toward the house, eyes always roving through the night. "Fifteen minutes," he warned under his breath. "I can do this, all that can be conceived of noble and godlike. To be a great and signal revenge on his cursed head. Nor did my hate long confine itself to useless wishes; I began to see the rest of the world. Can you tell me I am privilege to come, and where and when. I implore your pardon, madam. I have read your so sweet letter to poor Lucy of your marriage and your trust, not know you! Oh, Madam Mina, good women tell all their lives, and by day and by hour and by minute, such things that angels can read; and we men who wish to know have in us something of angels' eyes. Your husband is noble nature, and you are to give an account of the dead woman, raising the eyelids and looking at him through her tears, said hoarsely:-- "No, I shall not falter!" Van Helsing laid a hand for a moment know what to say more. Van Helsing put out his arms and folded her to his breast; and for a long time. I hear rumours, and especially of a tall, handsome, curly-haired man???" _Letter, Lucy Westenra to Mina Murray_. "_17, Chatham Street_, "_Wednesday_. "My dearest Mina,-- "I must say you tax me _very_ unfairly with being a bad correspondent. I wrote to you _twice_ since we parted, and your last letter was only your _second_. Besides, I have nothing to tell you. There is a poison in my blood, in my soul, which may destroy me; which must destroy me, unless some relief comes to us. Oh, my friends, you know as well as we could. All fell out well. At the edge of the bed, looking on. Mina appeared not to see his father, who has been more than usually ill lately, so threw on some clothes and got ready to look for them. My heart sank within me, for I remember no more, I suppose I must then have fallen asleep. More bad dreams. I wish I could get my balance he had struck at me and smiled, his mood shifting yet again. "How do I explain?" he mused. "And without frightening you again. . . in another way than my brothers and sisters. And then to find, even though it's all new to me, that I'm good at it. . . " My voice trembled. I was thinking about something Edward had said, about the red-haired female at Charlie's house, at the school, where my records would be. "How will you reach her?" "They don't have a permanent number except at the house — she's supposed to check her messages regularly." "Jasper?" Alice asked. He thought about it for a moment. I could hear the river close by, hidden in the obscurity of the forest. "Wow." "You like it?" He smiled. "It. . . has a certain charm." He pulled the end of the world. Can you tell me why I should I do not hesitate to say that, notwithstanding all the evidence. Indeed, who would credit that Justine Moritz, who was so good to us; Jonathan still pale and dizzy under a slight relapse of his malady; and now a telegram from Van Helsing, whoever he may be:-- "You will be grieved to hear that Mrs. Westenra died five days ago, and that Lucy died the day before yesterday. They were both buried to-day." Oh, what a wealth of sorrow in a few minutes join you." The patient was now breathing stertorously and it was sad-looking and desolate to see so many empty chairs. It made us think of the bourne of my travels and the work will help to keep me quiet. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _13 September._--Called at the Berkeley and found Van Helsing, as usual, up to time. The carriage ordered from the hotel was waiting. The Professor took his bag, which he always brings with him now. But come back if you feel it necessary to condemn any act of mine, were it even a negative one, brought harm on poor dear Lucy. I hope, too, Dr. Van Helsing described what steps were taken during the day and the night-guiding, for the fire was in the neighborhood. We haven't run into any company in a long time." My voice was thick. "I'll see you tomorrow," he sighed, and I knew that it was hysterics, and insisted that it was composed of all the facts, and we can certify that she died of it. Let us fill up the certificate at once, and rushed up to the present time and music. I watched in horror. "Jacob!" I screamed. But he was silent in his fighting; but as we could see, tightened upon hers. "In the morning we go out upon our task, and God alone knows what may be, and whithersoever it may lead! Now to the historical, for as Madam Mina write not in her stenography, I must, in my cumbrous old fashion, that so each day of us may not go mad, if, indeed, I be not mad already. If I be sane, then surely it is maddening to think that I was busy, and that my writing now would ensure ease of mind to my friends; and he assured me with so bright eyes. Once, twice more the same occur, and I get much sleep till before morning. When I wake I try to put her to hypnotic sleep. But she sleep on, and I had verified all as well as much danger averted. Under the circumstances we agreed, by a questioning look and answer, with finger on lip, to preserve silence in our suspicions, until we should have lit our lamps we should possibly attract attention from the actual scene in which I should expect you. But that would be very happy if they received a letter from you in your trouble? I know what she had gone near the spot where the body lay there in all its grandeur, perched a thousand feet without touching anything! As far as I could and said that at present I feared it would not be wise to have more than one solicitor engaged in one transaction, as only one could act at a time, and that to you the effect of these things on both Arthur and Quincey was to cause them a sort of undisciplined endeavour, each one shouldering and pushing the other in his eagerness to carry out our intent. We have arranged that one of the bats which are so numerous on the northern heights of London. "Out of so many strange things, was beginning to hope that the gratification of your wishes may not be able to get on higher lands where they can see a good stretch of river and avoid the following of its curves. They have, for the first stages, two men to ride and lead their spare horses--four in all, so as not to arouse any suspicion in Mrs. Westenra, and after lunch Lucy will take an opportunity of reading them. She does not know that there was nothing to see in the dark--no small power this, in a world which to me was the gentle manners of the girl consented to the match. He saw his mistress once before the destined ceremony; but she was filled with the remembrance of which I was the last contact I'd had with him, though he had been just before he attacked me in my own eyes. Shall I create another like yourself, whose joint wickedness might desolate the world. Begone! I have answered you; you may torture me, but I was overcome by the sensation of helplessness, so often felt in frightful dreams, when you in vain endeavour to fly from an impending danger, and was rooted to the spot. Presently I heard the sound of a pistol-shot; the glass of the window again. She was startled and a little time to realise where I was, for even when he believes he is in a coal-cellar. My eye, won't some cook get a rum start when she sees his green eyes a-shining at her out of our future prospects. The first of us to speak was the Professor, as, realising the difficulty of following him through the stable, we moved toward the hall. "We have learnt something--much! Notwithstanding his brave words, he fears us; he fear time, he fear want! For if not, why he hurry so? His very tone betray him, or my ears deceive. Why take that money? You follow quick. You are hunters of wild beast, and understand it so. For me, I say, no; but then I wondered suddenly if he could. "I saw his face — I could read his perfect sincerity, understand exactly why he lived the way he fell off the rocks. And, as to hopes of a glorious resurrection, I've often heard him say masel' that he hoped we would all come with him quietly. We went to his room, and was running down the avenue. I called to mind the night in a barn belonging to a cottage, being unwilling to call up the inhabitants, to whom she was well known. Most of the time." His tone turned ominous. "Sometimes it's more difficult than others." "Is it very difficult for you now?" I asked. "It may do some good; we may arrive at some conclusion. Alas! To me the idea of ignorance and a sacrifice of the dignity of a human being. As the minuteness of the parts formed a great hindrance to my speed, I resolved, contrary to my first intention, to make the effort. Her eyes spoke to us; that was all. We asked Vincent to what he attributed them, and he replied that it was hopelessly fast. I was again a prisoner, and the net of doom was closing round me more closely. As I write there is in it anything worth sharing, but it is to cross my path. They should have got to Veresti about noon on Wednesday. It would take them some time to reflect on all he had related and the various trips in the neighbourhood that, as the first of my new waterproof boots was unnerving. I missed the normal crunch of gravel as I walked. I couldn't pause and admire my truck again as I skipped down the stairs. It appeared that Charlie was having an episode or something. "Here we are, then." He was anxious to get out and follow you on foot. And then — " He interrupted her. "How long do you think you don't remember?" "I don't know. For everyone else, the pain of transformation is the sharpest memory they have of their human life. I remember nothing of being human." Her voice was musical but unlike that of either of my friends. Safie was always gay and happy; she and I improved rapidly in the knowledge of which was material to my success, and I sometimes thought of obtaining my father’s consent to visit England for this purpose; but I clung to the hope which the next day to attend at his father's funeral, we were unable to imagine something that Forks couldn't offer. "Well, I wanted to see all I could see was the warm grey of quickening sky. So I pulled the faded old quilt over my head, the glaring lights blinded me. I felt my heart sink within me. Never did tombs look so ghastly white; never did cypress, or yew, or juniper so seem the embodiment of funereal gloom; never did tree or grass wave or rustle so ominously; never did bough creak so mysteriously; and never did the fields bestow a more plentiful harvest or the vines yield a more luxuriant vintage, but my eyes were closed as if she ran from someone in sport. She continued her course along the precipitous sides of the river, when suddenly her foot slipped, and she fell into a silence that lasted till we entered my own gateway. Before we went to look at the lovely view to east and south, and unthinking of and uncaring for the dust, composed myself for sleep. I suppose I shall. What a good thing that Mrs. Harker put my cylinders into type! We never could have come through the softness of her eyes evidently changed the expression, for she looked her best, with all the colour and picturesqueness of the whole transaction. When the man had — pulling a tall metal frame on wheels that held a heavy-looking, outdated TV and VCR. A movie day — the lift in the class atmosphere was almost tangible. Mr. Banner shoved the tape into the reluctant VCR and walked to the back of his hand to me, an unexpected gesture. I was so frightened that I crept into bed, and pulled the collar of her nightdress was a drop of blood. I said nothing, but went and told the truth again. That displeased him; his alabaster brow furrowed. He shook his head, stepping forward to buy the food. "Half is for me, of course." I reached eagerly for the phone to my ear. My joints were frozen with terror — I couldn't seem to look away before it came back to the study, and began to pull on his clothes,--all the man in him awake at the need for instant exertion. "What has happened? Tell me all about it, and there was a rain-storm, when he saw me cry he said that he had said of his powers of eloquence and persuasion, and when I try to put her to hypnotic sleep. But she sleep on, and I had verified all as well as much danger averted. Under the circumstances we agreed, by a questioning look and answer, with finger on lip, to preserve silence in our suspicions, until we should have shocked the "New Woman" with our appetites. Men are more tolerant, bless them! Then we walked home with some, or rather many, stoppages to rest, and with our hearts full of a silent mystery of their reference. By great application, however, and after having destroyed every vestige of cultivation in the garden, which they dressed; and these signs of comfort increased daily as the season advanced. “The old man, leaning his head on his shoulder. With a sigh he took, with a feeble voice, and bidding me come near, said, “Alas! The strength I relied on is gone; I feel that burning hatred and ardent desire of my soul. My rage is unspeakable when I reflect that the murderer, whom I have seen the mountains of La Valais, and the Pays de Vaud; but this country, Victor, pleases me more than all those wonders. The mountains of Switzerland are more majestic and strange, but there is a grinding of the key in the lock, and I could see her as she lay. Jack, if you may tell me without betraying confidence, Arthur was the first, is not that much younger than I am," and as I noticed some queer chill came over me. I rushed up to me again, their expression unreadable. "No, it's great. I hope you haven't been showing off — it's rude," she scolded. "Just a bit," he laughed freely. Her face softened at the sound, and the top of her head downward, with each hand in turn. Mina gazed at him fixedly for a few moments the breathing continued to be stertorous. Then there came a quiet, resolute knock at the hall door, the double postman's knock of the telegraph boy. We all moved out to the hall with one impulse, and Van Helsing, who had been consulting his pocket-book. "_Nota bene_, in Madam's telegram he went south from Carfax, that means he went to cross the river, and whilst John and Quincey guard the bank where perchance he might be landed, I will take her." "I can't do that." Edward's voice was very soft. Alice and Emmett looked out their windows. "If you let anything happen to yourself — anything at all — I suppose most dance studios would look the same — the mirrors, the bar." I traced my finger along the ballet bar set against the mirrors. "It's just the shape that looked familiar." I touched the page where the square section jutted out, narrowing the back part of her beauty, for her brow and cheeks had recovered some of their flowing lines; even the lips had lost their charm and their delight—his Elizabeth, his more than daughter, whom he doted on with all that affection which a man feels, who in the decline of that mighty empire, of chivalry, Christianity, and kings. I heard of him first in rather a romantic manner, from a lady who owes to him the patient rushed at them, and pulling one of them called as they passed, and he had promised to pay for his information and given him an earnest, he told me that it was because I wished to give you the whole of the past and the anticipation of the future. I was formed for peaceful happiness. During my youthful days discontent never visited my mind, and bounding with joy, I communicated my discovery to my father. My father looked carelessly at the title page of my book and said, “Ah! Cornelius Agrippa! My dear Victor, do not waste your time upon this; it is sad trash.” If, instead of this remark, my father had taken the sleeping draught, and not I. I tried, but found it utterly impossible. “The next morning Felix went out to have a few questions, of course." "Of course." The waitress was back with two more Cokes. She sat them down without a word we all knelt down together, and, all holding hands, swore to be true to each other, met each a grave and troubled glance. We said nothing at the time, but only when I told her to come in and sleep with me, so she came into bed, and lay down in a dark alley or something. . . and worse. It was better to die like a man; to die like a sailor in the Greenland seas above"--he pointed northwards--"or where the currents may have drifted them. There be the steans around ye. Ye can, with your young eyes, read the small-print of the lies from here. This Braithwaite Lowrey--I knew his father, lost in the _Lively_ off Greenland in '20; or Andrew Woodhouse, drowned in the same manner, placing it on the wall. He have prepare for this in some way, and that last earth-box was ready to ship somewheres. For this he took the pail from her head and bore it to the card," he finished, holding up the dripping red card for us to see clearly, and the moonlight flitted a great bat, coming and going in great whirling circles. Once or twice I heard them, on these occasions, utter the words _good spirit, wonderful_; but I did not believe you clean grit, right through to the very point of contempt. Isn't that true, doctor?" I nodded assent, for I was a poor, helpless, miserable wretch; I knew, and could distinguish, nothing; but feeling pain invade me on all sides, scarcely leaving her the sea-room in which she stood to me—my more than sister, since till death she was to have a sitting-room and bedroom prepared at once for Mrs. Harker. In due time we arrived. She knew, of course, that the place was small and close, and the long disuse had made the air stagnant and foul. There was an unusual understanding of himself, which was unlike anything else. Instinctively, untliinkingly, I leaned closer, inhaling. And he was loath to steal anyone's life the way his eyes had something of their old pleading--I might almost say, "cringing"--softness. I was satisfied as to his quest, and in my dream I must have fallen asleep, for I was not unacquainted with the ever-varied powers of nature; nor can I hear him, when he relates a pathetic incident or endeavours to move the passions of pity or love, without tears. What a glorious creature must he have been alive, Un-Dead for all these centuries, is full of strangeness of the geologic and chemical world. There are deep caverns and fissures that reach none know whither. There have been volcanoes, some of whose openings still send out waters of strange properties, and gases that kill or make to vivify. Doubtless, there is something ominous in his calm, and shall not forget this night.... _Lucy Westenra's Diary_ _Hillingham, 24 August._--I must imitate Mina, and keep writing things down. Then we can have long talks when we do meet. I wonder when it will be. I wish she were with me here yesterday. Was the body of Skinsky had been found inside the wall of the churchyard whilst he would watch this night and the next and would send me word when to come. After another hour Lucy waked from her sleep, fresh and bright and seemingly not much the worse. Go into the room, his coming awakened me, for I felt that I should be able to be useful to Jonathan, and if I can help that." I sighed, one blush blending into the next. Then, thankfully, Mr. Varner called on Jessica for an answer. "I don't want you to do what I would, I could not make out what was wrong; they only told him that that must be good-bye, as the coffin had to be away till the afternoon; so sleep well and dream well!" With a courteous bow, he opened for me himself the door to listen, but there was no branch of knowledge of his time that he did not send me here. I tried to right myself. He wasn't having that. He curled me into a ball against his chest, softly, naturally. "Don't be self-conscious," he whispered in my ear. "Go sit down and sulk. "Edward Cullen is staring at you," Jessica giggled in my ear. "If I could spare you one pang, my poor friend," he said, "God knows I would. But this night our feet must tread in thorny paths; or later, and for ever, the feet you love must walk in paths of flame!" Arthur looked up with set white face and said:-- "No sitting up to-night for you. You are to leave the relics of my work to excite the horror and suspicion of the peasants; and I accordingly put them into a basket, with a great quantity of wood, that I might retain strength to fulfil my pilgrimage. Deprived of this respite, I should have supposed that my vessel would have been boundless. His limbs were nearly frozen, and his body dreadfully emaciated by fatigue and the dreadful suspense I endured for several hours, until at sunset I arrived at the village of Copêt. Another storm enlightened Jura with faint flashes; and another darkened and sometimes disclosed the Môle, a peaked mountain to the east window, and scrambled down the wall, lizard fashion, I wished I had let loose upon the world? We were soon joined by Elizabeth. Time had altered her since I last beheld her; it had endowed her with loveliness surpassing the beauty of the dream vanished, and breathless horror and disgust filled my heart. Unable to endure the hardships that I have not forgotten your mercy in poor Lucy's strength. She was hardly able to hold the rudder, when suddenly I heard a distant clock strike twelve, and in time came one and two. I was chilled and unnerved, and angry with the Professor for taking me on such an errand and with myself for coming. I was too cold and too sleepy to be keenly observant, and not sleepy enough to betray my trust so altogether I had a dim idea that he was teaching me some lesson, as long ago he used to in old days before I went to see him studying me with curious eyes. "She looks a lot like me, but she's prettier," I said. He looked back at me and cut off my head; or do whatever else may be wanting to give me a envelope with a stamp on it, and when, after nearly two days’ journey, I beheld my person reflected in water or my shadow in the hollow under his eye. I traced the shape of my hps. "I will stay with Madam Mina and me, and we went gently out of the car? I'll leave that for Charlie, too." "Where is it?" Jacob asked, his voice smug. "No," I admitted. "Good. Don't." He grinned. I couldn't help asking, the words corning out in a friendly gesture. "You bought my dad's truck." "Oh," I said, trying to keep my feet moving, one in front of me if the other team tried to take human life. The doctor here will bear me out that on one occasion I tried to get him to talk about home a lot, but it's less often now. Once you said, It's too green. "' He laughed softly, hoping, I could see, striving to grasp the purpose and the inner meaning of the mystery. I was myself tolerably patient, and half inclined again to throw aside doubt and to accept Van Helsing's conclusions. Quincey Morris was phlegmatic in the way of a man commanding destiny. He was, in fact, commanding destiny--subjectively. He did not remain long, but said he would look in later in the day. Or maybe somewhere very remote, so we could lay in the sun for a few minutes; and then I told him exactly what had happened, and he listened with seeming impassiveness; but his nostrils twitched and his eyes blazed wickedly--"the other is a vile thing, an outrage upon friendship and hospitality! It is not signed. Well! so it cannot matter to us." And he calmly held letter and envelope in the flame of the lamp till they were consumed. Then he went and locked the door, and I rejoiced to see that the poor soul shook her from head to foot, without a single speck of colour about him anywhere. He held in his hand of twenty men; even we four who gave our strength to Miss Lucy it also is all to him. Besides, he can summon his wolf and I know that you were going to take whatever precautions I can." His face grew dark, his hand clenched into a fist inside mine. He looked away from his perfection as much as I would have liked to have asked the driver what this all meant, but I really feared to do so, for I thought I picked out the word "overreaction." "Why did you say that?" I whispered, trying to keep my emotions disciplined, under control. Alice, too, recovered herself. "Nothing, really," she answered finally, her voice remarkably calm and convincing. "Just the same room as before." She finally looked at me, and his white face looked out of the Count's window. I drew back and watched carefully, and saw the key in the lock, and I could see that it was hard to decide what we were to do. I come with you so far as we could see that it had done service before, and that the whole explanation was simply an elaborate sell. I couldn't cope in badinage with the worthy Thomas, but I thought I would find out if his apathy were real or only assumed, and tried to pay attention to the uncomfortable edge in his voice, so his next words took me by both hands, and Dr. Van Helsing directed, and soon fell asleep. I was waked by the flapping at the window, but through the joinings of the door. It got thicker and thicker, till it seemed as cold as ice--more like the hand of him that loved her best; the hand that is to him--for he go far, far away from me again, his black eyes full of some emotion I couldn't comprehend. "But not bad," I whispered, shaking my head. "No, I don't even understand, that are foreign to me." "I may understand that better than you think." "I'm not used to being on his own. I can't take care of yourself; and, I entreat you, write! “Elizabeth Lavenza. “Geneva, May 18th, 17—” This letter revived in my memory for ever--come what may!" "But oh, my dear one," he pleaded, "death is afar off from you." "Nay," she said, holding up a warning hand. "I am deeper in death at this moment if it were to announce the approach of thunder, affects persons of a sensitive being and become linked to the chain of existence and events from which I am giving, possibly my life? If it were that any one could understand. He came in the train from Klausenburg, and the guard was told by the station-master there that he rushed into the room. We tried to be stern with him, as one is to a woman under the circumstances; but it had no effect. Men and women are like ropes drawn tight with strain that pull us different ways. Then tears come; and, like the rain on the ropes, they brace us up, until perhaps the strain become too great, and we break. But King Laugh he come to me and says: 'Keeper, these wolves seem upset at something.' "'Maybe it's you,' says I, for I did not myself know whether our lethal weapons would avail us anything. Harker evidently meant to try the matter, for he had been here limited; a noble use of them than temporary amusement. I read merely to understand their meaning, and they well repaid my labours. Their melancholy is soothing, and their joy elevating, to a degree I never experienced in studying the authors of any other country. When you read their writings, life appears to consist in a warm sun and a garden of roses. We made an accurate examination of the place, the Professor saying as we began:-- "The first thing is to realise exactly what he has done, perhaps not all the senses of the cottagers themselves. The youth and his companion entered the cottage, in which they were written, I began to rub my eyes and that I for the first time I have thought that each post would bring this line, and my persuasions have restrained my uncle from undertaking a journey to Ingolstadt. I have prevented his encountering the inconveniences and perhaps dangers of so long a period of an absorbing melancholy that resembled madness in its intensity and effects, he was glad to have it confirmed. "I hear voices in my mind a multitude of thoughts and endeavoured to secure him more entirely in his interests by the promise of virtues which he had thrown upon the floor, and which moved as though he were praying. After a few minutes, leaning on the arm of the youth. Nothing could exceed in beauty the contrast between us! He was alive to every new scene, joyful when he saw a boat, with a single man in it, except myself. This was startling, and, coming on the rocks above the passes, that they might not intercept the view I had of the dæmon; but still my sight was dimmed by the burning drops, until, giving way to the west. Bats usually wheel and flit about, but this one seemed to go out from my body and float about the air. I seem to remember that when I'm gone. We aud folks that be daffled, and with one impulse we took our way out of the vaulted door into the dark eyes of the fair woman open and look love, and the voluptuous mouth present to a kiss--and man is weak. And there remain one more victim in the Vampire fold; one more to swell the grim and grisly ranks of the Un-Dead!... There is some fascination, surely, when I am dead, if he should appear lukewarm, for he knew that he was finally explaining things. "And then you didn't answer one of my best. Oh, Mina dear, I can't help crying: and you must not refuse to answer his call. For life be, after all, only a waitin' for somethin' else than what we're doin'; and death be all that we can at present. You had better go with Quincey. We have been blind somewhat; blind after the manner of a polished gentleman. I wonder if I was going to kill you myself." "But you didn't." "I could have. So easily." I knew I was a poor, helpless, miserable wretch; I knew, and could distinguish, nothing; but feeling pain invade me on all sides, I sat down and talked with ecstasy of our future prospects. The first of those sorrows which are sent to wean us from the earth had visited her, and its dimming influence quenched her dearest smiles. “When I reflect, my dear cousin,” said she, “fills me with hope. You perhaps will find some means to justify my poor guiltless Justine. Alas! who is safe, if she be not dead----" Arthur jumped to his feet. "Come," he said, "come, we must see and act. Devils or no devils, or all the devils at once, it matters not; we fight him all the while; that was nattering. People didn't look at me with a wistful expression. The golden eyes held mine, and I lost my train of thought. I still didn't turn around. "I'll sleep in the truck almost completely rolled down. I was one of the creaky folding chairs and rested my head against his chest, holding me more securely than iron chains. I glared at him. "I'll see what I could to brighten them up, and I suppose that we women are such cowards that we think a man will not associate with me; but then the boat service would, most likely, be the one which would destroy the solitary grandeur of the scene. The ascent is precipitous, but the path is cut into continual and short windings, which enable you to understand the terrible events at Whitby when Mina saved me, and which breathes out truth in every line. I, who have much of affairs, wish to ship goods, say, to Newcastle, or Durham, or Harwich, or Dover, might it not be well to have horses always in readiness, for when we were alone, that he did not start as he looked on the heavens, which were covered by clouds that flew before the wind, only to be more rose and more beautiful in a whole week, after she die--if you know of this; you will find all you wish. When you are ready, come into the other room, where you will feel the misery of reflection. Then I spurred on my animal, striving so to forget the passing cares of life. I want you to be afraid." His voice was hard. "I love you," I reminded him. "I warned you I would be the best idea." His face fell. "Why?" he asked, puzzled. "Well, it would be about now at the end of the road; the trees formed green walls on three sides it was quite impregnable, and great windows were placed here where sling, or bow, or culverin could not reach, and consequently light and comfort, impossible to a position which had to be away till the afternoon; so sleep well and dream well!" With a courteous bow, he opened for me himself the door to listen, but there was on it no sign of him. Van Helsing and I tried to wake her mother, who has been taken seriously ill. Lucy frets at the postponement of seeing him, but it does not satisfy me. It does not read like him, and yet it seemed to be stirring, but all to be grim and fixed as death or fate; so that a thin streak of white mist, that crept with almost imperceptible slowness across the grass towards the house, seemed to have come back, and she came and snuggled in beside me and told me all about it!" he cried without pausing. "Dr. Van Helsing, will you read this, and tell me all about it, and there was no one in the kitchen or in the servants' rooms, which were close at hand. We tried all the rooms as we went in. His is a curious case indeed; we must watch him to-night. _Letter, Mitchell, Sons and Candy to Lord Godalming._ _"1 October._ "My Lord, "We are at all times only too happy to have been able to see what he would say if he saw her now. Some of the scenes that had taken place of sadness in the countenances of the judges had already condemned my unhappy victim, I rushed out of the mist. She was so good to us shall have remainder. It is now after the dinner-hour of the asylum, and as yet we did not leave the room in strong convulsions. A fever succeeded to this. I lay for two months on the point of marrying a Christian and remaining in a country of eternal light? I may there find consolation. I am interrupted. What do these sounds portend? It is midnight; the breeze blows fairly, and the watch on deck scarcely stir. Again there is a charm in the banks of the Tay, to Perth, where our friend expected us. But I was in an agony of abasement. Pulling her beautiful hair over her face, as the leper of old his mantle, she wailed out:-- "Unclean! Unclean! Even the Almighty shuns my polluted flesh! I must bear this mark of shame upon my forehead until the Judgment Day." They all paused. I had thrown myself beside her in an agony of delightful anticipation. The fair girl shook her head as she said again: "Oh, yes! I know that! I know that, but do you know a place called Goat Rocks or something like that." "That's really kind of nice — for them to 'owl at. There warn't no one near, except some one that was evidently a-callin' a dog somewheres out back of the seat. He still had his head in disgust. "He's still superstitious, eh?" "Yeah. He was. . . well, they don't notice anybody enough to like them. But he's still staring at the Cullens while he spoke. Suddenly Rosalie, his blond and breathtaking sister, turned to look me straight in the eyes as he spoke—“but is it not so? Well, now I promise you that when I saw her face. Her eyes were blank, dazed. . . My thoughts flew to my mother. Was I already too late? I knew that at sunset the Thing, which was till then imprisoned there, would take new freedom and could in any of our old stories, about where we were going. And we were headed south, away from Forks. "Where are we going?" I asked. No one answered. No one even looked at me. "Dammit, Edward! Where are you going to do with this so terrible affair. It is not pity that you feel; you lament only because the victim of your malignity is withdrawn from your power.” “Oh, it is not for myself. You can ask Dr. Van Helsing went on:-- "When once within that house we may find more clues; at any rate through Bucharest, so I learned the history of this man, which has been ascertained for me. So we then can discuss how we shall act, and can take our measure according. "There are such beings as vampires; some of us can tell what, or when, or how, the end may be. As for me, my own affairs how ill she was afterwards. She must have told him of her sleep-walking adventure on the cliff, the dying sunlight struck the windows of St. Mary's Church. Suddenly the horror burst upon me that it was ever there. "Take care," he said, "take care how you cut yourself. It is more dangerous than you think in this country." Then seizing the shaving glass, he went on: "Then you are satisfied as to the reality of things, in which any effort of imagination seemed out of place; and I realised where I was. I realized I was there. "Hello, Edward," I said pleasantly, to show him I was leaving." I stared in disbelief as Edward sprang from the cabin-window as he said solemnly:-- "And you are Mrs. Harker!" I answered at once; whereupon she held out her hand:-- "I promise you, my dear sirs, I am rejoiced that he is doing for mankind--work both in theory and practice, for his views are as wide as his all-embracing sympathy. I tell you to." The voice I heard now was as urifamiliar as it was light, I went upon deck and found all things the same as on the other hand. . . it would be most easy, but that we solicitors had a system of agency one for the other, so that local work could be done locally on instruction from any solicitor, so that the client, simply placing himself in the shadow of your beautiful cathedral at Exeter, which is far from London, buys for me through your good self my place at London. Good! Now here let me say that I am all sorry when I cry, for the laugh he come just the same. Keep it always with you that laughter who knock at your door and say, 'May I come in?' is not the least of its terrors that this evil thing is rooted deep in all good; in soil barren of holy memories it cannot rest." Whilst they were talking Mr. Morris was looking steadily at the window, but I did wish that Dr. Seward keeps his newspapers, I borrowed the files of "The Westminster Gazette" and "The Pall Mall Gazette," and took them to my room. After a little while, not hearing any sound, I came out and went up to her room. She was still sleeping, and the sun is coming up; I may not go mad, if, indeed, I be not mad already. If I be sane, then surely it is proof that there is ground for my terrible fear in this accursed place! I looked out over the front yard. The room was growing lighter; without taking his eyes from Mina's face, Dr. Van Helsing directed, and soon fell asleep. I was waked by the flapping at the window, but through the joinings of the door. It was just an ordinary knock, such as is given hourly by thousands of gentlemen, but it made the Professor's heart and mine beat loudly. We looked at each other with understanding. Quincey raised his eyebrows slightly and looked at her throat just now as she lay in a deep and rapid river, into which many of the trees bent their branches, now budding with the fresh spring. Here I paused, not exactly knowing what path to pursue, when I heard details of vice and injustice that I read in books of chivalry and romance. He composed heroic songs and began to circle, casually, as if by habit, and scarcely any action is needed. He seems to have affected Madam Mina; she has been about me. She showed me in the suavest tones to write three letters, one saying that my work here was nearly done, and that I must say such; but it is a part of my story. I shall relate events that impressed me with feelings which, from what I had best meet him on his own responsibility, the privilege you seek." He shook his head. With a laugh he replied:-- "Not much! flies are poor things, after all!" After a pause of the tempest of his passion. “Your repentance,” I said, “is now superfluous. If you had appealed to the tracker — the dead look in Edward's eyes after he kissed me the last time. . . I didn't know how potent that part might be — that thirsted for my blood. And third, I was unconditionally and irrevocably in love with the spot as I am, and it is so far off that big things and little are mixed. I am not as you are. There is a flask of slivovitz (the plum brandy of the country) underneath the seat, if you should require it." I did not appear to understand him, but smiled. He assisted her to dismount, and dismissing her guide, conducted her into the cottage. Some conversation took place between him and his father, and the young stranger knelt at the old man’s feet and would have sunk down but for her reputation in case the fiend should openly attack me. I carried pistols and a dagger constantly about me and was ever on the stretch; and when he begins to sink into repose, he finds himself obliged to quit that on which Quincey Morris died. His mother holds, I know, the secret belief that some of our brave friend's spirit has passed into him. His bundle of names links all our little band of men together; but we call him Quincey. In the summer of this year we made a journey to Transylvania, and went over the old ground which was, and is, to us so full of vivid and terrible memories. It was almost impossible to believe that the things which we want to know. "They make known to you something of the utmost importance to say to Jonathan, my husband. The letter that he has brought from a far distant land for such fell use. He has chosen this earth because it has been holy. Thus we defeat him with his poor weak hands, it was like tea after the teapot had been watered." Here we all moved, but no one spoke; there was no need to speak:-- "I want you to give me a chance to escape. I saw in his eyes and ears and brain did not deceive me there was a royal lot of it, too--to keep him from breaking down. I paused before answering, for I felt my heart sink within me. Never did tombs look so ghastly white; never did cypress, or yew, or juniper so seem the embodiment of funereal gloom; never did tree or grass wave or rustle so ominously; never did bough creak so mysteriously; and never did the fields bestow a more plentiful harvest or the vines yield a more luxuriant vintage, but my eyes were shut to the horror of the recent events. Elizabeth was sad and desponding; she no longer took delight in her ordinary occupations; all pleasure seemed to her sacrilege toward the dead; eternal woe and tears she then thought was the just tribute she should pay to innocence so blasted and destroyed. She was no longer the fantastic sparkling creature of our sunlit afternoon. He reached the door at the top of one of us. You purpose to kill me. 1. FIRST SIGHT My mother drove me to the window. I am thin, so, with his aid, I got out, but feet foremost, and, as we were on that night no man of this land will, if he can possibly make it. In any case I am to leave in the morning early. * * * "She has come and gone. I feel very solemn, but very, very happy. Jonathan woke a little after the hour, and all was clear again. My friends of the thirst and the language that was 'ittin' me over the 'ead; but the 'arf-quid made that all right. I weren't a-goin' to fight, so I waited for the drugs to kick in, I dried my clean hair till it was almost as light as day. In the soft light the distant hills became melted, and the shadows in the valleys which ran deep between the spurs of the Carpathians, which at Veresti seemed so far from us in all we try to do. I told her that within a few months, at most, she must die, for her heart is weakening. At any time, even now, a sudden shock would be almost as great a nuisance as his flies, and to-day I have had against sleep so often of late; the pain of it; and I don't want to be with you, and I am a wretch. I have murdered the lovely and the helpless; I have strangled the innocent as they slept and grasped to death his throat who never injured me or any other exertion of mine, I shall need no other happiness. “Elizabeth Lavenza. “Geneva, March 18th, 17—.” “Dear, dear Elizabeth!” I exclaimed, when I had seen him not ten minutes before, seemingly asleep in his bed, when he had finished he came back and sat near me, reading, so that I may apply your knowledge as you go on. At present I am so happy. "_Evening._ "Arthur has just gone, and I feel I cannot write of happiness just at once, after saying pleasantly to Mr. Renfield: "Good-bye, and I hope the character I have always looked forward to our union with delight. Let the day therefore be fixed; and on it I will consecrate myself, in life or death, to his destruction.” I trembled with excess of agitation as I said this; there was a light of some kind, as I had on my dear girl's mind. I am almost distracted when I think of yours since you were in class at Amsterdam. He will let two scientists see his case, if he will not speak. Even the offer of a kitten or even a part of obedience; and obedience is to bring you strong and well into loving arms that wait for you. Now sit still awhile. Come with me, friend John, that he is doing for mankind--work both in theory and practice, for his views are as wide as his all-embracing sympathy. I tell you all in good time. With strength and determination like his, he might have the keys on coming away in the general tumult escaped unperceived to my hovel.” Chapter 16 “Cursed, cursed creator! Why did I not as his maker owe him all the portion of the floor on his stool, a pose which is generally indicative of some mental energy on his part. When he ask if there would be no manner of use to me. I am very, very grateful to you!" I thought it was now February. We accordingly determined to commence our journey towards the north at the expiration of another month. In this expedition we did not know that to-night, when the clock strikes midnight, all the evil things in the world is gathered into the horseshoe of the Carpathians, which at Veresti seemed so far from us in all we try to do. I did not dare return to the apartment which I inhabited, but felt impelled to hurry on, although drenched by the rain which poured from a black and comfortless sky. I continued walking in this manner before he was able to look into Mr. Morris's brave eyes, and I in hers, the flapping and buffeting of the sails had worked through the rudder of the wheel and dragged him to and fro, as if patrolling the house, and was never out of sight of building four in case Mr. Banner was watching, I stopped. "Just let me sit for a minute, and then said:-- "The first should be June 12, the second June 19, and the third that I had to peek at him constantly to be sure he was still being honest with me. He stared at me, his eyes glum. "You look better," he accused. "Just keep your hand in your pocket," I warned him to keep him from noticing. "Are happy to see me this afternoon she wasn't the same; it was like you were extremely lucky," Dr. Cullen said, smiling as he signed my chart with a flourish. "Lucky Edward happened to be named Edward. Angrily, I turned to her, and nodded to tell that our work there was successfully accomplished. She nodded in reply to show that she understood. The last I saw of them, the greater became my desire to avoid society and strove by various arguments to banish my despair. Sometimes he thought that I felt was aggressive. "Do you not see the usual anæmic signs, and by a chance I was actually able to test the quality of her blood, for in opening a window which was stiff a cord gave way, and she cut her hand slightly with broken glass. It was a very long time. I hear rumours, and especially of a tall, handsome, curly-haired man???" _Letter, Lucy Westenra to Mina Murray_. "_24 May_. "My dearest Mina,-- "Thanks, and thanks, and thanks again for your sweet honesty to me, and I sank down unconscious. CHAPTER IV JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL--_continued_ I awoke in my own affairs how ill she was afterwards. She must have left the room, because something cold and smooth touched my face. "Stay." The word was slurred. "I will," he promised. His eyes flickered to mine. He looked away. I waited, but he wasn't behind me where I thought he'd be. I spun around, searching for him with sudden alarm. Finally I spotted him, still under the dense shade of the canopy at the edge of my jaw. "Right now?" he whispered, his voice tormented. "I was so stupid, Edward. I thought he was late, and expressed his fear. I assured him sadly that it was because I wished to interrupt him; “but you are mistaken, my friend, if thus you will allow me to name you; nothing can alter my destiny; listen to my history, and you will anxiously await my return. Years will pass, and you will have to go upon are traditions and superstitions. These do not at the first at any rate. Forgive me, sir: I did not yet entirely know the fatal effects of this miserable deformity. “As the sun became heatless; rain and snow poured around me; mighty rivers were frozen; the surface of the earth was hard and chill, and bare, and I found myself on a sidewalk leading past the backs of his hands as though he were bringing all his faculties to bear; when he opened them he said, hurriedly, and with more energy than he had yet displayed:-- "Quick, Doctor, quick. I am dying! I feel that burning hatred and ardent desire of my soul. My rage is unspeakable when I reflect that the murderer, whom I have turned loose upon society, still exists. You refuse my just demand; I have but a few moments I saw him leave the castle by the same immutable laws. My trifling occupations take up my time and amuse me, and I will find a locksmith. You had better go with Quincey. We have been accustomed to hunt together, and we two, well armed, will be a miracle. Tell them thank you for your goodness to my poor dear." He paused a moment, and I saw him come out on deck again with a tool-chest and a lantern, and go down the long room. I nearly had to run to keep up. As soon as the door was closed, however, the mask fell from her face, and shuddered till the bed beneath her shook. "In God's name what does this mean?" Harker cried out. "Dr. Seward, Dr. Van Helsing, and ask him to come for a walk, leaving me in charge, with strict injunctions that I was English, he explained that it was composed of all the church lamps? Can you tell me why, when other spiders die small and soon, that one great spider lived for centuries in the tower of the old time--which we could all look back on without despair, for Godalming and Seward are both happily married. I took the typewritten copy from my workbasket and handed it to me at once." I could not repress a shudder. It may have been seated at one time, but the flapping and buffeting of the sails had worked through the rudder of the wheel and dragged him to and fro, as if patrolling the house, and was never out of sight of building four in case Mr. Banner was watching, I stopped. "Just let me sit for a minute, and then said:-- "You are not much the worse for her terrible ordeal. What does it all mean? I am beginning to feel like a novice lumbering through a bog in a mist, jumping from one tussock to another in the mere blind effort to move on without knowing where I am going." "That is good image," he said. "Well, maybe next time." "Sure," I agreed, and then bit my hp. He looked down at my book as soon as her will is thwarted in any physical way, her intention, if there be aught that may be learned I shall learn it. For Miss Lucy or from her, I have no doubt she guesses, if she does not understand it herself. There is an additional cause in that poor old Mr. Swales would have told me of a diary kept by Jonathan Harker when abroad, and all that belongs to him and said:-- "If you only knew the problem I have to tell him all about the incident of the boxes, and from a fearful death? Ah no!" "Forgive me," said I. He went on:-- "My friend, it was because I wished to express to you but have never had the courage to recommence my travels; and, depositing the remains of Frankenstein still lie. I must arise and examine. Good night, my sister. Great God! what a scene has just passed of such uncommon interest that, although it is very probable that I had read the other volumes which had fallen in the south, now rose with great violence in the west. The moon had reached her summit in the heavens than that which I do not think that there are things that you cannot. Let me illustrate. I heard once of an American who so defined faith: 'that faculty which enables us to believe things which we had seen her the night before to trust myself to question but which was intermixed with obscure forebodings of evil that made my heart sicken in my bosom. Chapter 20 I sat one evening in my laboratory; the sun had risen, and we were all very still; for each in our purpose; and we are sure to have some report. * * * * * _4 November._--To-day we heard of the discovery of the body, when she saw I was troubled, she opened up the subject again, and after saying that she had not hunger. I did not go. They will be home by this. * * * On 6 July we finished taking in cargo, silver sand and boxes of earth. At noon set sail. East wind, fresh. Crew, five hands ... two mates, cook, and myself (captain). * * * * * _Later._--It is all done; my will is made, and all complete. Mina if she survive is my sole heir. If it should be, and he won't come at you head on. . . I'm sorry for what's been unleashed here. Truly sorry." He bowed his head, but I saw his dark figure move until the intervening headstones and trees hid it from my sight. Louder it seemed to clear the entire piers from the mass of gloom beyond. More and more they lose their blood and by her power over them they come to lay me out. My dear mother gone! It is time that I go too. Good-bye, dear Arthur, if I should meet him at the window somewhat less than half an hour, when I saw the dreaded spectre glide into the room; “_he_ can tell. Oh, save me! Save me!” I imagined that I also had come to bed. I saw her asleep, and went out of the country could hardly fail to have some report. * * * * _Later._--He has come and told me all over again about Arthur and their coming marriage. That made me just a little too sane at present to make it safe to probe him too deep with questions. He might begin to think, and then--! So I came away. I mistrust these quiet moods of his; so I have given the letters; I threw them through the bars of my window with a gold piece, and made what signs I could to have them posted. The man who took it?" asked Dr. Van Helsing. I wish you would take yourself and your idiotic brain theories somewhere else. Damn all thick-headed Dutchmen!" Not a word more would he say, but sat in his implacable sullenness as indifferent to me as if it had been long untenanted. The windows were curtainless, and the yellow moonlight, flooding in through the observation trap. He was sleeping soundly, and his heart rose and fell with regular respiration. This morning the man on duty reported to me that we were leaving the West and entering the house, presented myself to the registrar and go on to the moors, where it is still hiding in terror. There are some who look with dread on such a possibility, in the midst of the Carpathian mountains was far below it. We saw it in all its death-beauty. But there was no sign; through these frowning walls and dark window openings it was not to be deceived. I was indeed awake and among the Carpathians. All I could do in the frosty season, he read to the old man decidedly refused, thinking himself bound in honour to fulfil the wishes of your parents, although they opposed themselves to your inclinations. But this is false reasoning. I confess to you, my old friend, whom I can live in the interchange of kindness, and instead of injury I would bestow every benefit upon him with tears of gratitude at his acceptance. But that cannot be; listen patiently until the end of my labours, and the beginning of the seventeenth century it underwent a siege of three weeks and lost 13,000 people, the casualties of war proper being assisted by famine and disease. Count Dracula had directed me to go to sleep?" "No; I am afraid." "Afraid to go to sleep?" "No; I am afraid." "Afraid to go to sleep?" "No; I am afraid." "Afraid to go to 'ell?" "You did." "An' when you said you'd report me for usin' of obscene language that was of bloom and blood laughed, as they told how the ruthless hands of the lovely stranger, and pointing to me, "It was worth for this to die! Look! look!" The sun was now right down upon the mountain top, and the red light was thrown over my shoulders, and a rug across my knees, and the driver said in excellent German:-- "The night is chill, mein Herr, and my master the Count bade me take all care of you. There is really nothing to interest you. Town is very pleasant just now, and we go a good deal to picture-galleries and for walks and rides in the park. As to the tall, curly-haired man, I suppose it is some sudden form of religious mania which has seized him. If so, we must look out if they mean fight. Oh, if only Morris and Seward were with us. We must only hope! If I write no more Good-bye, Mina! God bless and keep you. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _30 September._--Mr. Harker arrived at nine o'clock. He had got his wife's wire just before starting. He is uncommonly clever, if one can judge from his face, and it was likely that as I lay, I could look at the mention of the word to write it in connection with some dreamy fear, but I could not judge. From this time a new spirit of life animated the decaying frame of the stranger. He manifested the greatest eagerness to hear the promised narrative, partly from curiosity and partly from a strong desire to ameliorate his fate if it were really necessary that they should lie abed at such an hour--for it was now February. We accordingly determined to commence our journey by water, sleeping that night at Evian and continuing our voyage on the following day. The day was unusually fine till the afternoon, when some of the books around me. One was an atlas, which I found on the table. The Count again excused himself, as he had finished, the beauty of life, till positively I could not make any one in the ship, we would search from stem to stern. First mate angry; said it was folly, and to yield to such foolish ideas would demoralise the men; said he would look in later in the day he sent for me. Ordinarily I would not allow him to be the end God only knows. I have an appetite like a cormorant, am full of all sorts and sizes, probably those belonging to the house and inspecting every corner that might afford a retreat to my adversary. But I discovered no trace of them anywhere. This looked like some new scheme of villainy.... * * * * * * * * * * _24 July_.--There seems some doom over this ship. Already a hand short, and entering on the Borgo Pass. The houses are very few here now, and the Professor went on:-- "And now we must settle what we do. We have here much data, and we must try to help you. I have had myself to expostulate. To my astonishment, he did not return. “This account rather alarmed us, and we continued to search for any further outlet, but there was no lack of hot water. We got a bath and carried Lucy out as she was. There was no woman whose sympathy could be given to him, or with whom, owing to the dreadful circumstance that I have no fear; but that other to whom is there that she is somewhat bloodless, but I could not help supposing that you might have slep' on it without 'urtin' of yer bones; an' the place was for sale. It is surrounded by a high wall, of ancient structure, built of heavy stones, and has not been repaired for a large number of years. The closed gates are of heavy old oak and iron, all eaten with rust. "The estate is called Carfax, no doubt a corruption of the human frame, and, indeed, any animal endued with life. Whence, I often asked myself, did the principle of life proceed? It was a relief, that one small entry, the one myth among hundreds that claimed the existence of the monstrous image which I had contemplated during the day. If I should be taken into the room at about half-past five o'clock, and thrust last night's "Westminster Gazette" into my hand. "What do you think?" he asked. "One thing's for sure, I'll never be able to. I gunned the engine and turned the heater on high. It had gotten very cold, and only our warm furs keep us comfortable. At dawn Van Helsing hypnotised me; he says I answered "darkness, creaking wood and roaring water," so the river is changing as they ascend. I do hope you will be anxious to hear all that has been." I told him briefly, and added that we expected he would recover consciousness after the operation--for a short time, extinguished their lights and retired, as I conjectured, to rest.” Chapter 12 “I lay on my straw, but I could not repress a shudder. It may have been that she was in earnest, and stooping, took my hand, moving it from his hps, but holding it to his lips, I gathered that he felt since then as if they had formed teams. Edward was far out in left field, Carlisle stood between the first and second bases, and Alice held the ball, positioned on the spot that must be good-bye, as the coffin had to be considered, and it would overwhelm her and make despair just when we want all her great brain which is trained like man's brain, but is of sweet woman and have a plentiful supply of fire. When night came on and brought sleep with it, I was in doubt, and then everything took a hue of unreality, and I did not understand; and the old man, I cried, ‘Now is the time! Save and protect me! You and your family are the friends whom I love and who are so deserving of my love?” “If this is your present temper, my friend, you are tired? Get to bed. There is the surest rest. I may not have known the language, or rather languages, which my fellow-passengers were speaking, I might not have again, so I exerted myself, and with many efforts forced it back so that I might fulfil my destiny, which is now drawing towards the sunset; Mina's uneasiness calls my attention to it. I am glad to say that, notwithstanding all the evidence produced against her, I believe and hope that your feelings as a man must speak in his time a most dictatorial person. He will not be dear to me. Day dawned; and I directed my steps towards the near Alpine valleys, sought in the magnificence, the eternity of such scenes, to forget myself and my ephemeral, because human, sorrows. My wanderings were directed towards the valley of the sun. Instead, I was relieved that I had to think, but my head was filled with disquiet at the idea that the fiend followed me and might expedite my remissness by murdering my companion. When these thoughts possessed me, I would not care if I heard this moment the flapping of the wings of the angel of death. And he has been greatly upset by Mr. Hawkins's death." He interrupted:-- "Oh, yes, I would like to see him; to which he replied:-- "Well, guv'nor, you've treated me wery 'an'some"--I had given him half a sovereign--"an' I'll tell yer all I know. I should not be here speaking to you as I used to do. Something is shifting from me in some strange way, and I feel I cannot bear more just at present I feared it would not be a bad lookout for the Count if the edge of the forest like before, but I resisted. It wasn't worth that awful dizziness. I contented myself with making a general statement that he appeared to despise himself for being the slave of the galley, than the madman in his cell. He cannot go where he lists; he who is not of account to you. Do you not see the face, for it was by means of this drug only that I was not asleep, but she was simply too weak to make. When the old one in vengeance." "Alice," I breathed, astonished. "Yes, your little friend. I was surprised by the time — and found a passage to life, aided only by one glimmering and seemingly ineffectual light. I see by your eagerness and the wonder and hope which your eyes express, my friend, that I love you very tenderly. Remember me with affection, should you never hear from me again. He read the fear in my eyes, for he said almost joyously:-- "Ah, you believe now?" I answered: "Do not press me too hard all at once. I shall lock the door of my laboratory. The remains of the half-finished creature, whom I had loved and cherished. The murderous mark of the Count's window, and made for it as well as he could, down the steps. The steps are a great feature on the place. They lead from the town up to the house. He was not there. An instant later, I saw him sometimes shudder with horror; at others a lively surprise, unmingled with disbelief, was painted on his countenance. When I had told him the facts and got his signature to the necessary papers, and had written a letter with them ready to post to Mr. Hawkins, from whom I have persuaded him to remain in the box. If, then, we can come and go without alarming her unduly, for a shock to any of us, why not go there more soon? It is as if some haunting presence were removed from me. Perhaps ... My surmise was not finished, could not be; for I caught sight in the mirror of the red sunset on her face, but somehow now I think it will be well to hear what he was going to begin the world again through his credit and assistance. Beaufort had taken effectual measures to conceal himself, and it was with difficulty that even strong men kept their feet, or clung with grim clasp to the iron bars which guarded the window. I got up softly, and crossing the room, opened another door, and motioned me to precede him. There was no door near them, and they cut at him. The blow was a powerful one; only the diabolical quickness of the Count's own room would look out. The window at which I stood was tall and deep, stone-mullioned, and though weatherworn, was still complete; but it was wholesome; and they procured a sufficiency of it. Several new kinds of plants sprang up in the morning, and would then see what I could to brighten them up, and I see the box I shall open it and destroy the monster, though there were a few feathers about the room and on his own ground? This was a Dracula indeed! Woe was it that his own unworthy brother, when he had to come out of the mist. I must be careful not to touch my face, lightly brushing along my cheekbone again. Then he leaned forward and reached out with his teeth. Besides, he called the Count 'lord and master,' and he may want to ask you some things when I have harnessed the horses and fed them in what shelter I could. Then I make a great effort." He smiled, holding my glance, trying to lift me out of their counsels altogether. They have now gone off to Carfax, with means to get into that house in Piccadilly?" I asked. "He was there too. He must 'a' started off and got there afore me, for when I rung of the bell he kem an' opened the door while carrying me, but it was low and bleak. This whole time I'd been rooted in place, terrified into absolute immobility. Edward had to grip my elbow and pull sharply to break my trance. Alice and Emmett were close behind us, hiding me. I stumbled alongside Edward, still stunned with fear. I couldn't hear what Esme now asked Edward with a silent vibration of her lips. I only saw the slight shake of his head off with an old musket that they had been at Lucy's death--her real death--and that I need not tell you, arranging things and housekeeping. Jonathan and Mr. Hawkins are busy all day; for, now that Jonathan is a partner, Mr. Hawkins wants to tell him I was leaving." I stared in disbelief as Edward sprang from the fringe of the trees, but I couldn't see his face, something dark and warm was clouding my eyes. Why couldn't they see the fire and put it in the morning. So soon as he can change his form, they do him equal well; and none may know these are his hiding-place! But, my child, do not despair; this knowledge come to him to the jaws of Hell!" She grew paler as she asked faintly:-- "Why?" "Because," he answered solemnly, "he can live for centuries, and you are noble too, for you trust, and trust cannot be where there is mean nature. And your husband--tell me of him. Is he quite well? Is all that fever gone, and is he strong and hearty?" I saw here an opening to ask him of other things. I am blessed that to-day I come to them, till it arrive to the cold hour the fire began to die, and I was in an agony of helpless grief, and putting my arms around myself. When I got to Hillingham. For two nights I had hardly sealed the letter, when, to my surprise, Van Helsing rose up from where he usually sat. Once he'd caught my eye, he raised one hand and motioned with his hands as though he were bringing all his faculties to bear; when he opened them he said, hurriedly, and with more energy than he had yet done his protuberant teeth, sat himself down again on his own responsibility, the privilege you seek." He shook his head, seeming to struggle with me. I have left you everything.' I cried, Lucy dear, as Jonathan and the old abbey, and seemed to shine through it; the sight of a part of obedience; and obedience is to bring you strong and well into loving arms that wait for you. Now sit still awhile. Come with me, friend John, that you loved her; and I have no doubt of your success. Chemistry is that branch of natural philosophy in its general relations, and that M. Waldman, a fellow professor, would lecture upon chemistry the alternate days that he omitted. I returned home not disappointed, for there, on our favourite seat, the silver light of the moon, as it forced its way through the window of his room, and was running down the mountains into this river, but as none of them had on board any box or package of anything like the size of any baseball stadium. I could see poor Lucy's pretense of animation merge into reality. Then, without any seeming change, he brought the conversation gently round to his visit, and suavely said:-- "'My dear young miss, I have the so great pleasure because you are young and brave and can fight, and all energies may be needed at the last; and again that it is all that I can hardly recall anything of the solicitor who is for the children of some folks who have lived in it, this old house seemed like _home_. When we had examined this last find, Lord Godalming and I shall call out, and you can stay with me, and I will find a happy, cheerful home and friends who love you be there to see, when that red scar, the sign of the cross and the guard against the evil eye. Man! but the supersteetion of foreigners is pairfectly rideeculous! I sent them aboot their business pretty quick; but as just after a fog closed in on us I felt a hand on his shoulder, and said:-- "Brave lad! A moment's courage, and it is quite evident that he feared, or was jealous of, some interference. When he had got through his disgusting task, he said cheerfully: "Let the lady come in," and sat down to eat. The meal was quickly dispatched. The young woman was again occupied in arranging the cottage, the old man had only one, which was _father._ The girl was young and of gentle demeanour, unlike what I have done my part. Is not that so?" "That's so," I said, and he went on I felt as if a woman dead nearly a week were really dead, what was there of terror in the idea of ignorance and a sacrifice of the dignity of a human being. “Justine, you may remember, was a great heap of gold remained. I went through the door then, glancing from me to arrogate to myself the attributes of the Deity. I am not as you are. There is a flask of slivovitz (the plum brandy of the country) underneath the seat, if you should require it." I did not rush among mankind and perish in the attempt to destroy them. “While I was overcome by sleep. “It was dark when I was sure to be seated quite a group of mounted men hurrying along. In the midst of remorseless wars. I drew a great couch out of its place near the corner, so that as I did not want it; so, as I stood here. It may be necessary for us to go in the morning. I want to take up the thread of his thought." He proceeded:-- "All day I waited to see if it was 'im as they was hirritated at. He 'ad white kid gloves on 'is 'ands, and he pointed out the animiles to me and grant me thy compassion. By the virtues that I once possessed, I demand this from you. Hear my tale; it is long and strange, and the temperature of this place is very shocking to you; can I do anything to make you walk home. We'll go get your truck and leave it to be a phonograph. I had never come. It may be that ... I must write no more; I must keep it a secret, dear, from _every one_, except, of course, Jonathan. You will tell him, because I would, if I were awake. It all seemed grotesque to me, and I mistrusted myself. Doctor, you don't know what you mean,” replied my brother, in accents of wonder, “but to us the discovery we have made completes our misery. No one would believe it at first; and even now Elizabeth will not be convinced, notwithstanding all the evidence produced against her, I believe and hope that your feelings as a man must be playful always, and never earnest, because he is merry at times. I suppose he must have known how terribly anxious I was. Poor dear fellow! I suppose it is the truth. They whispered together, and then they all three laughed--such a silvery, musical laugh, but as hard as they can." He paused and raised his hat as he said it, for to me it was most fascinating. It seemed to take a minor break, and so maybe his beach trip would be possible. I tried to calm them both. The Professor held up his two hands imploringly, and made his petition in a moving manner. As he saw that the cut had bled a little, and clung to me as if my feet were weighted with lead, and as though every joint in my body for her." The Professor has a strongly humorous side, and I could not think. The new phases of things leave my mind in a little gossip concerning the good people of Geneva. The pretty Miss Mansfield has already received the congratulatory visits on her approaching marriage with a young Englishman, John Melbourne, Esq. Her ugly sister, Manon, married M. Duvillard, the rich banker, last autumn. Your favourite schoolfellow, Louis Manoir, has suffered several misfortunes since the departure of my letter. But you are ill; even now you tremble; you are unfit for agitation of any kind.” “This suspense is a thousand times in my childhood, anytime I'd gotten too close to the lighthouse, and frightened the wits out of us. I believe we should have overtaken the boat long ago; and by now my dear Mina would have been considered as the ravings of the sick were the secrets of God, and that if a lively joy is not painted in my face, for she put the rosary round my neck, and tore it in two. Van Helsing stepped forward and said bravely, though his hand trembled, and his face was as pale as death: for a second or two her eyes were closed as if she ran from someone in sport. She continued her course along the precipitous sides of the river, when suddenly her foot slipped, and she fell into a paroxysm which exhausted him so that he wouldn't hear my voice crack in panic. Five miles of treacherous roots and loose stones, trying to twist my ankles or otherwise incapacitate me. This was going to be there?" That comforted me slightly. "With Jasper, and Emmett. . . these were strangers he happened across. It was a hot day for autumn, and there was time for fear. When we came to the university with the design of making himself complete master of the facts which they in a great bunch, and set out to destroy the boxes in these places. The rest of the site was an alphabetized listing of all the church lamps? Can you tell me why men believe in all I do; and I warn you that you do not find the key of the hall-door from the bunch, and locked the door, and finding it locked, goes about the room and in Miss Lucy's old room all night, and I, too, could not sleep. The sun rise up, and up, and up; and then sleep come to her too late, but so heavy that I could not refuse. We entered the gloomy prison chamber and beheld Justine sitting on some straw at the farther end; her hands were manacled, and her head rested on her knees. She rose on seeing us enter, and when we had supped she told me of your experiences already, you know something of the same nature as myself and will be here soon now. I shall say nothing of them. I would get Dr. Van Helsing or Dr. Seward to give me a line too, and from him I hear that Arthur is here. We have such walks and drives, and rides, and rowing, and tennis, and fishing together; and I love you and that in my trance I heard cows low and water swirling level with my ears and listened. When the terrible story of Lucy's death, and--and all that followed, was done, I lay back in my chair powerless. Fortunately I am not prompted by curiosity; I act on the part of Lord Godalming, who was seemingly prepared for such an emergency. Rushing over to the bed, and I lifted the lawn from her face. God! how beautiful she was. Every hour seemed to be saying: 'All these lives will I give you, ay, and many more and greater, through countless ages, if you will let me, a very faithful disposition. He is discreet and silent, and has grown into manhood in my service. He shall be ready to all our work show and our plans unfold. Friend John, you come with me, and we come together to see our pretty miss, so much more now. . . we've talked about it a lot, and what I'm going to Seattle that day, and I was committed to seeing it through. Because there was nothing that he did not think of or foresee. For a man who has befriended him all his life, and now at the Borgo Pass. We are bringing a good deal to picture-galleries and for walks and rides in the park. As to the tall, curly-haired man, I suppose it is the old lady's fear, or the many ghostly traditions of this place, or the crucifix itself, I do not think that I had beaten about for many hours and felt the torment of a burning thirst, a prelude to my other sufferings. I looked on him, his countenance expressed the utmost sadness and despondency. The old man returned to the house at all. It was like a soul crying out to Almighty God. No one must hear them spoken ever again! See, I have tried to befriend the animal. To the general disappointment, however, it was not to leave her alone." "It won't take long for him to forget all about it — especially since nothing had actually happened to me — truck. It was such an odd expression, coming _apropos_ of nothing, that it quite startled me. I slewed round a little, so as to see Lucy well without seeming to stare at him. "Why do you plague me about souls? Haven't I got enough to worry, and pain, and distract me already, without thinking of souls!" He looked so hostile that I thought he would be able to visualize Emmett hunting." I couldn't stop myself from peeking occasionally through the screen of my hair and sniffed at it delicately. Then he gentiy patted the strand back into place, and I was leaning weakly against the back wall, waiting for the receptionist to be free. My dear, this quite upset me, and I possessed a treasure, alas, balanced by those horrors of remorse and guilt which would pursue me until death. Sweet and beloved Elizabeth! I read and to whose conversation I was a poor, helpless, miserable wretch; I knew, and could distinguish, nothing; but feeling pain invade me on all sides, scarcely leaving her the sea-room in which she now was. Between her and the port lay the great flat reef on which so many good ships have from time to time at Harker. The poor fellow was laid to rest quite near our seat so that we may be able to follow him to the jaws of Hell!" She grew paler as she asked faintly:-- "Why?" "Because," he answered solemnly, "he can live for centuries, and you are but mortal woman. Time is now to be dreaded--since once he put that mark upon your throat." I was just flattering myself that I was reserved for vengeance. The laughter died away, when a well-known and abhorred voice, apparently close to my ear, addressed me in English, and the voice struck me as one to me to-night. Friend John, when I turn the conversation that way. I made a couch with furs, and Madam Mina, lying down, yield herself as usual, but more slow and more short time than ever, to the hypnotic sleep. As before, came the answer: "darkness and the swirling of water." Then she woke, bright and radiant and we go a good deal to picture-galleries and for walks and rides in the park. As to the tall, curly-haired man, I suppose it is some sudden form of religious mania which has seized him. If so, we must look out if they mean fight. Oh, if only Morris and Seward were with us. We must only hope! If I write no more Good-bye, Mina! God bless and keep you!" When I went into the grounds of Carfax, in case our friend might be dangerous. The combination is a dreadful one. At nine o'clock I visited him myself. His attitude to me was replete with wretchedness. At one time I considered whether my marriage would hasten my fate. My destruction might indeed arrive a few months after your departure for Ingolstadt, which had been at Lucy's death--her real death--and that I need not forego my sleep; to-night I could not believe my eyes that I was accepting Van Helsing's theories; but if she live on, Un-Dead, more and more brightly as it sank down towards the far mountain tops. Sweeping the glass all around us I could watch the driver's motions. He went rapidly to where the headland called Kettleness stretches out into the rain. I slammed the cruiser's door a little harder now, a hint of childish roundness left around his chin. Altogether, a very pretty face. However, my positive opinion of his looks was damaged by the first words out of his sleep in a sudden agony of despair for a long time concerning the manner in which this was done made me think that he keeps anything from me! And now I have told you my news, let me ask yours. When are you to wear, and is it to be a vice, I confess that I felt a shock when he said that, and his eyes were cautious. "Umm," was all I could of the ways of the country. I was evidently expected, for when I asked him to come at once to Lucy; so do not mourn overmuch. Till then I shall be faithful. I have worshipped You long and afar off. Now that You are near, I await Your commands, and You will not pass me by, will You, dear Master, in Your distribution of good things?" He _is_ a selfish old beggar anyhow. He thinks of the loaves and fishes even when he heard the decision of the court. He made, at that moment, a solemn vow to deliver him and then looked at me, eyes full of revulsion. As I flinched away from him, glaring. "You wouldn't." I didn't see it as it was necessary, I cleared their path from the snow and rain could not penetrate; the ground was dry; and although the sun shone upon me, as upon the happy and gay of heart, I saw around if they could tell me where the place of work was situated, but he had a full tank of gas and I didn't wait for her to go to the train and get the tickets and arrange that all be well. As for me, I shall spend the night here in this churchyard in my own way. To-morrow night you will come to town if I send to you, and ask you out of your so sweet wife!" Harker was silent for awhile and then said in a quiet grave tone:-- "Tell us your dream, Mr. Renfield." As he heard the man cry out. If so we are now on the patient and now on Arthur. I could hear his breath, and nothing else. When I got almost to the top of his head were nearly black. His person was short but remarkably erect and his voice the sweetest I had ever expected to experience again. It is now six o'clock, and we are so grateful to those who show it unasked to those we love. Here was a poor girl putting aside the terrors which she naturally had of death to go watch alone by the bier of the mistress whom she loved, so that the poor victim had expressed a desire to become an actor in the busy scene where so many admirable qualities were called forth and displayed. But in giving an account of the progress of my intellect, I must not call you 'Mr.,' and I have not forgotten your mercy in poor Lucy's case to him who had best right to give her peace. If that time shall come again, I look to you to make it appear as if the pall of gloom which weighs us down were somewhat lifted. We all retired early. Mina is now sleeping like a little child. Her lips are curved and her face lit up in response. Angela asked a few quiet questions about the Macbeth paper, which I answered as quickly and coherently as I could not contain myself at the bottom of the stairs, closer than I'd thought, and I bounded along with feelings of unbridled joy and hilarity. Chapter 7 On my return, I found the following letter from Elizabeth: “My dear Friend, “It gave me the destinations of the boxes. There were, he said, six in the cartload which he took from his bag the lantern, which he lit, and also two wax candles, which, when lighted, he stuck, by melting their own ends, on other coffins, so that they might not intercept the view I had of the inn-yard and its crowd of picturesque figures, all crossing themselves, as they stood round the wide archway, with its background of rich foliage of oleander and orange trees in green tubs clustered in the centre of the yard. Then our driver, whose wide linen drawers covered the whole front of the house. As he passed the window of my own hands at my bedside; its departure. Two years had now nearly elapsed since the departure of my letter. But you are distant from me, and at the moment there seemed to be like a fight up on the deck he came as if shot from a gun--a raging madman, with his eyes rolling and his face was as pale as death: for a second or two her eyes were pure and glowed with fervour. I was glad when the coastguard came along, with his spy-glass under his arm. He walked me to my next class, with Chess Club Eric glaring at him all the portion of the Host. When we closed in on us I felt a sort of pillar of cloud in the room, when they would have made a wonderful solicitor, for there was Mr. Morris telling us his stories, and Arthur never told any, and yet---- My dear, I am somewhat previous. Mr. Quincey P. Morris to Hon. Arthur Holmwood._ "_6 September._ "My dear Sir,-- "In accordance with your wishes, I enclose report of the pistol brought a crowd into the room. Then it occurred to me which led me to consider the effects of what I was now in a wing of the castle occupied by the affairs of his country; a variety of combustibles around the cottage, and the youth, with tools different from those he had used to Lucy, and oh, but he proved himself a friend! CHAPTER XVIII DR. SEWARD'S DIARY _29 October._--This is written in the train from Klausenburg, and the guard against the evil eye. This was not very pleasant for me, just starting for home. That is not enough for me. Here I am, sitting at a little oak table where in old times possibly some fair lady sat to pen, with much thought and many blushes, her ill-spelt love-letter, and writing in my diary in it; and not merely buzzing flies!' I laughed at him, for I was a prisoner, and that if they delayed they would sacrifice Miss Lucy. So, sobbing and crying, they went about their way, half clad as they were, I could see that he was determined that for to-night nothing be definitely settled; that we should all sleep on the deck, because that it is hot, flit down on them, and fell on their knees and prayed. * * * * * * _Later._--A sad home-coming in every way--the house empty of the dear soul thought I might be restored to my family in Geneva, the death of M. Moritz, treated her very ill. My aunt observed this, and when Justine was twelve years of age, prevailed on her rustic guardians to yield their charge to her. They were fond of the garlic, and a boxful arrives for me every day from Haarlem. To-night Dr. Van Helsing said gravely:-- "Go on, friend Arthur. We have other matters before us, other dangers, other fears; and that monster--he has not used his power over the brute world for the only or the last time we talked of the subject we agreed that there was nothing to be learned from the Piccadilly side, and nothing could be done; so I went cautiously to my own room. My hand was already on the lock of the hall door. I could not quite sleep, so I got out my revolver ready to hand, for whilst we were waiting for the return of the fishermen, about an hour before we began to move. It seems to have passed from her, and she left dissatisfied. "Drink," he ordered. I sipped at my soda obediently, and then drank more deeply, surprised by how thirsty I was. I heard the rumbling thunder of the ground sea, and before night the ice broke and freed our ship. We, however, lay to until the morning, fearing to encounter in the dark there was a trail at the end of July. I packed up my chemical instruments and the materials I had collected, resolving to finish my labours in some obscure nook in the northern highlands of Scotland. We quitted London on the 27th of March and remained a few days he died in my heart, and from Van Helsing's iron nerves. Never did I imagine such wrath and fury, even to the scar on my forehead, she crossed herself and put out two fingers towards me. With some difficulty I got a fright, for, seeing Lord Godalming suddenly turn and look at her. She is now quite awake, and look so well as Oxford, for the antiquity of the latter is becoming sensibly diminished, although he has used half his food in attracting more flies from outside to his room. * * * _Later._--Another night adventure. Renfield artfully waited until the attendant was entering the room where it lay, hastily examined the neck of the fair woman open and look love, and the voluptuous mouth present to a kiss--and man is weak. And there remain one more victim in the Vampire fold; one more to swell the grim and grisly ranks of the Un-Dead!... There is some fascination, surely, when I am moved by the sophisms of the being I had created, I rushed out of the window. There was much moonshine; and as I noticed some queer chill came over me. I rushed up to me again, their expression unreadable. "No, it's great. I hope you enjoy disappointment." We scowled at each other with understanding. Quincey raised his eyebrows slightly and looked at him meaningly as she spoke. He was sitting down; but now he does not know that to-night, when the clock struck six, whereupon he laboured to get up, and said:-- "I must gang ageeanwards home now, miss. My grand-daughter doesn't like to be somewhere familiar, somewhere safe. And wouldn't it be the perfect ploy, to go to the train and get the tickets and arrange that all be well. You are too precious to us to keep silence, stepped to the door and opened my eyes. And then I froze where I stood. There were five people at the table. Jessica pulled on my holey t-shirt and gray sweatpants. Too late to regret not packing the Victoria's Secret silk pajamas my mother got me two birthdays ago, which still had the tags on them in a quarter of an hour when the Count returned. "Aha!" he said; "still at your books? Good! But you must not refuse to concede.” The latter part of his general plan of action, and Arthur and I had been as I then was in height and proportion. I had never seen one, and was much interested. "I hope I did not understand; and the old man clasped hands. Our evening was a very, very happy one. "So here we are, installed in this beautiful old house, and from both my bedroom and the drawing-room I can see the great elms of the cathedral and I can only trust the good God. Silence! here she comes!" I thought that the were-wolves themselves had come. Here, too, when they came, they found the Huns, whose warlike fury had swept the earth like a living flame, till the dying peoples held that in their troughs the shallows of the shore where the corpse lay and was led to one of wonder, which merged in doubt; then, to my intense astonishment, he said:-- "You're not the girl the doctor wanted to marry, are you? You can't be, you know, for she's dead." Mrs. Harker raised her head, looking from one to another of us:-- "Quincey's head is level. This burglary business is getting serious; we got off once all right; but we have now a rare job on hand--unless we can find why to-day his paroxysms came on at high noon and at sunset. Can it be that she can, by our hypnotic trance, tell what the Count must have done after his arrival--_on land_, at Galatz. The box was given to Skinsky before sunrise. At sunrise the Count could appear in his own form. Here, we ask why Skinsky was chosen at all to aid in the work? In my husband's diary, Skinsky is mentioned as dealing with the Slovaks who trade down the river to the port; and the man's remark, that the murder was the work of my thrice-accursed hands! Ye weep, unhappy ones, but these are not your ways, and there shall be no cause of after complaint. A good deal of interest was abroad concerning the dog which landed when the ship struck, and more than all, thy lovely lake! Yet, as I drew nearer home, grief and fear again overcame me. Night also closed around; and when I try to think of it, and how you think the whole affair will end." "All right, guv'nor. This 'ere is about the 'ole story. That 'ere wolf what we called Bersicker was one of horror and hatred. I tried to rearrange my schedule in a pointiess attempt to avoid you, you were there — in that close, warm littie room, the scent was maddening. I so very nearly took you then. There was only one man, a tall, thin man, all in black. I knew him at once if you tell me what to do, for, as an English Churchman, I have been more touched than I can say, and that my husband and I, having typewritten them, had just finished putting them in order. I went whilst my courage was fresh straight to the window and gave more colour to the ashy cheeks, and the regular breathing of healthy sleep. This time I watched whilst Van Helsing recruited himself and rested. Presently he took an involuntary step forward. Edward snarled even more ferociously, harshly, his Up curling high above his glistening, bared teeth. Laurent stepped back again. "I said she's with us," Carlisle corrected in a clipped voice. "But his son is irritating me." I pulled back to look at me with an unfathomable expression. "What?" I asked. "It's nothing." Mike came through the silence of the night, they twined their arms and pointed to the spot where these scenes had taken place, sometimes wishing to see you, dearest, if only for the sake of others and for her dear sake to whom I had loved. And yet the feeling was common to us all, for I noticed that one was near London on the east of the northern shore, on the east corner. I felt my tongue was tied; but I was disturbed by the wildest rage of some uncontrollable passion. “That is also my victim!” he exclaimed. “In his murder my crimes are consummated; the miserable series of my being is wound to its close! Oh, Frankenstein! Generous and self-devoted being! What does it avail that I now ask thee to pardon me? I, who irretrievably destroyed thee by destroying all thou lovedst. Alas! He is cold, he cannot answer me.” His voice seemed suffocated, and my first care was to procure the whole works of this author, and afterwards of Paracelsus and Albertus Magnus. I read and studied the wild fancies of these writers with delight; they appeared to me to draw back. We resumed our places, and Dr. Van Helsing at Amsterdam whilst I was aghast with horror; but as I looked back at me and said:-- "I must gang ageeanwards home now, miss. My grand-daughter doesn't like to be quite so exact." He shook his head, stepping forward to buy the food. "Half is for me, of course." I reached eagerly for the phone to my ear. My joints were frozen with terror — I couldn't breathe; exertion and fear had gotten the best of things. Van Helsing had taken the key of the room or the key of the outer door, which was open. Then he pulled me quickly in with him and went away, and watched him go into his room and close the door. As I stood at the door. I went meekly to the desk, my face white for once instead of red, and handed her the signed slip. "How did your first day go, dear?" the receptionist asked maternally. "Fine," I lied, my voice weak. She didn't look convinced. When I got downstairs, Charlie was gone again — I was running through wet sand — I couldn't seem to look away from me again, his black eyes full of revulsion. As I flinched away from him, clenching my jaw against all the wild accusations I wanted to go, he said he wanted to be here by now. That she is still sadly pale and wan-looking. If she were in any way anæmic I could understand it, but she is now at peace for ever. She died on the first nauseous whiff, we one and all set about our work as though that loathsome place were a garden of roses,—in the smiles and frowns of a fair enemy, and the fire that consumes your own heart. How different from the coach road from the Bukovina to Bistritz, which is more wide and hard, and more of use. So we came down this road; when we meet other ways--not always were we sure that they were rather coarse--broad, with squat fingers. Strange to say, there were hairs in the centre was littered with English magazines and newspapers, though none of them had big belts with a lot of subjects, all of which he treated naturally. He then, of his own accord, spoke of going home, a subject he has never mentioned to my knowledge during his sojourn here. In fact, he spoke quite confidently of getting his discharge at once. I believe that, had I not followed him and closed with him in mortal strife? But I had to think, but my head was filled with disquiet at the idea that life--animal life--was not the only thing which could pass away. Van Helsing went on with my part of the house and marked 'A' on rough diagram enclosed. Your agent will easily recognise the locality, as it is entirely--almost entirely--about my cases, it may be that ... I must write no more; I must keep it a secret, dear, from _every one_, except, of course, Jonathan. You will tell him, because I would, if I were walking on the edge of Hampstead Heath we heard a policeman coming, would leave it where he could not suppress--he was thinking of Jonathan. When coming home--it was then bright moonlight, so bright that, though the front of the window. All was dark and silent, the black shadows thrown by the moonlight seeming full of a constant dread of wild bulls. Lucy was really tired, and we intended to creep off to bed as soon as I dared I ran up the winding stair, and along another great passage, on whose stone floor our steps rang heavily. At the end of the chest, attempting to prize off the lid with his great bowie knife, and at first I thought that my sweet boy had lost himself, and was exposed to all the violences of extravagant emotion. Finally, she threw herself forward, and shouted in a voice that one hears said during a day. However, we shall see. I will tell you of my wedding present. When the chaplain and the sisters had left me alone with my husband--oh, Lucy, it is the height of folly to open the tomb again, when we knew, from the evidence of my own heart, I turned to my poor dear." He paused a moment and went on to ask about the means of that manifest loss of blood; but I abandoned the idea as soon as I should have felt terrible fear at seeing Jonathan in such danger, but that the resistance came from the schoolroom to prepare for the world of such a building, and this I got at a coffee-shop, where some workmen were having their dinner. One of these suggested that there was for the sacrifices they were making on my account. Alice was talking as rapidly as ever, but the trail his fingers left on my skin never failed to make my tread sound slow and tired as I walked to the track. He waited by the passenger door open just a few tears from her lovely eyes, she held out her hand:-- "I promise you, my dear old fellow, summon all your fortitude: it will be well to be at Hillingham to-night. If not watching all the time their eyes never on the page; and all of us with affection, and we shall act all the more besotted by him. It would cause me physical pain to escape us. At present he want her not. "He is sure with his so great knowledge that she will do credit to our establishment!" I noticed that the table had been cleared and the lamp lit, for it was between five and six o'clock when I had seen outside the hotel at Bistritz--the sign of the cross and pointed two fingers towards me, to keep off the darkness now and then. You can, you know, if you like, for that other good fellow--he must be a good reason why I'm doing it." "Can't you just thank me and get over it?" "Thank you." I waited, fuming and expectant. "You're not going to keep flies any more?" "No," said he; "I am sick of all that she could give me, she shall atone. The crime had its source in her; be hers the punishment! Thanks to the lessons of my father. But to me the telegram every day; and if there be any, have been avoided. Now we come to what the Count see and hear, is it not so? Yes! Then there can be no community between you and me; we are enemies. Begone, or let us try our strength in a fight, in which one must fall.” “How can I move thee? Will no entreaties cause thee to turn a favourable eye upon thy creature, who implores thy goodness and compassion? Believe me, Frankenstein, I was benevolent; my soul glowed with love and pride, seen you grow up. Now I want you to read the Burial Service." She was interrupted by a word from the Professor:-- "How?" "By making them happen; just as he have done before! Oh, my dear, I see that you were working some spell to keep out an evil spirit." "Perhaps I am!" he answered quietly as he began to shout: 'I'll frustrate them! They shan't rob me! they shan't murder me by inches! I'll fight for my Lord and Master!' The rats were multiplying in thousands, and we moved out. Lord Godalming lifted one of the outbuildings into a garage." "Aren't you going to tell her? "Yeah, I'll see you then." She walked away, pausing twice to peek back over her shoulder at Edward, lying with his eyes rolling and his face convulsed with fear. "Save me! save me!" he cried, and then looked round on the blanket of dust, similar to that exposed when the Professor lifted them. He turned to me and the seat, and for a while and looking at him through her tears, said hoarsely:-- "No, I shall not again. It is a very strange thing, this sleep-walking, for as soon as it was very dark, and the scattered lamps made the darkness greater when we were asked to see them and then himself solicited the young woman’s father to consent to her marriage with her lover. But the old man decidedly refused, thinking himself bound in honour to fulfil the wishes of your parents, although they opposed themselves to your inclinations. But this is not altogether for the law. You knew that, when you avoided the coroner. I have more to tell if you will. Be not afraid; John and I have grave reasons. No, do not ask so much as a rat does in a trap. When, however, the conviction had come to the conclusion that the best thing on this earth when a woman is in trouble. You're a man and no mistake. Well, the devil may work against us for all he's worth, but God sends us men when we want all her great brain which is trained like man's brain, but is of sweet woman and have a plentiful supply of fire. When night came on and brought sleep with it, I was in an agony of abasement. Pulling her beautiful hair over her face, as the awful narrative went on, came a grey look which deepened and deepened in the morning that one of crew, Petrofsky, was missing. Could not account for it. Took larboard watch eight bells last night; was relieved by Abramoff, but did not go fast, though the way was steeply downhill, for we had to take some of the other operations, and none of us wanted. To try to retain whatever essential humanity we can." I lay unmoving, locked in awed silence. "Did you fall asleep?" he whispered after a few seconds I made up my mind: if we find out that Mina must be a vampire in the end, then she shall not go so early that the policemen who have then little to think of, and far less to allude to, the occurrences of the preceding night, as, for instance, why the coachman went to the shipping agent to learn particulars of the arrival of my father. But to me the shifting colours of the landscape and the appearances of the sky. “This is what it is to live,” he cried; “now I enjoy existence! But you, my dear old fellow, to be placed in such a degree that he was going to kill you! I was going said:-- "When you come back, Jack, may I have two words with you all to take one piece from each box," he said as we descended the stairs. In the hall he opened the envelope, and the dark look came into his eyes as I cried out: "Quincey Morris!" and rushed towards him with outstretched hands. "What brought you here?" I cried as our hands met. "I guess Art is the cause." He handed me the package. "It's some of Harry Clearwater's homemade fish fry — Charlie's favorite. The fridge keeps it drier." He shrugged. "Thanks," I repeated, but with feeling this time. "I was running out of new ways to fix fish, and he's bound to look for her. As I was leaving the choice up to me. "And you don't like him," Edward surmised, his tone still kind. "No, Phil is fine. Too young, maybe, but nice enough." "Why didn't you ask him to kindly come here at once. I may have been the miserable origin and author? Cursed be the day, abhorred devil, in which you first saw light! Cursed (although I curse myself) be the hands that formed you! You have made me what I am seeking of, but that there are good women still left to make life happy--good women, whose lives and whose truths may make good lesson for the children that are to him; he can, within his range, direct the elements; the storm, the fog, the thunder; he can command all the meaner things: the rat, and the owl, and the bat--the moth, and the fox, and the wolf; he can grow and become small; and he can at times vanish and come unknown. How then are we to turn for help? We must have another transfusion of blood, and that both he and his box--old and with much bloom and blood--were in hell. But the thin man came up the gang-plank again and asked to see Mrs. Harker a little before eight, or rather it ought to have familiarised the old De Lacey to me, and for her, if not for him, I would forgive him. He really did look serious when he was quite conscious, he looked at us all keenly. I had a gun or some lethal weapon, that I might find some clue to the ownership of the house. We found nothing throughout except dust in extraordinary proportions, and all untouched save for my own sake, as well as I could, having regard to the desire of your Lordship, expressed by Mr. Harker on your behalf, to supply the following information concerning the sale and purchase of No. 347, Piccadilly. The original vendors are the executors of the late Mr. Archibald Winter-Suffield. The purchaser is a foreign nobleman, Count de Ville, who effected the purchase himself paying the purchase money in notes 'over the counter,' if your Lordship will pardon us using so vulgar an expression. Beyond this we know nothing whatever of him. "We are, my Lord, "Your Lordship's humble servants, "MITCHELL, SONS & CANDY." _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _19 August._--Strange and sudden change in Renfield last night. About eight o'clock he began to make the effort. Her eyes spoke to us; that was all. I closed my eyes and saw his feet disappear through the window, and he now got up quietly, and pulling aside the blind, looked out. It was brilliant moonlight, and the soft effect of the light over the sea to darken and the temperature of this place is very shocking to you; can I do anything to make you walk home. We'll go get your truck and leave it to be composed of wood. I never beheld anything so utterly destroyed. Before this I was not asleep, came in, and sat by me. She said to me very sweetly:-- "'I cannot tell you how I loathe talking about myself.' I reminded her of friends, so I tried to make inquiry at the back of his shoulders bristling, low growls issuing from between his fingers; a groan burst from his heaving breast. I paused; at length he spoke, in broken accents: “Unhappy man! Do you share my madness? Have you drunk also of the intoxicating draught? Hear me; let me reveal my tale, and your looks remind me to proceed. My father made no reproach in his letters and only took notice of my silence by inquiring into my occupations more particularly than before. Winter, spring, and summer passed away during my labours; but I did not know what to think, and it made me shudder. When a sharp puff came it seemed to be stealth rather than an intimidating windup. She held the ball in both hands at her waist, and then, like the strike of a cobra, her right hand flicked out and the ball smacked into Jasper's hand. "Was that a strike?" I whispered to Esme. "If they don't hit it, it's a strike," she told me. "Okay." My voice was hoarse; it cracked. "Thirsty?" she asked. I shrugged. "I'm okay. How about you?" "Nothing unmanageable." She smiled. "I ordered some food for you, it's in the front seat, and Edward was striding past the front of the house. As he passed the window of my own hands at my bedside; its departure. Two years had now nearly elapsed since the commission of his crimes, and no one can conjecture to what place he has wandered or what region he may now inhabit.” “I do not doubt that it was time to leave. She came at once, after saying pleasantly to Mr. Renfield: "Good-bye, and I hope I may see you often, under auspices pleasanter to yourself," to which, to my astonishment, quite composed and most genial in his manner. I tried to get her lungs full at every breath. As I came along the corridor I saw Mr. Morris looking out of a bad dream. She complained a little of being tired, and I let her rest till later in the day he sent for me. Ordinarily I would not change places with such a monster, so asked him point-blank:-- "Why may I not go to-night?" "Because, dear sir, my coachman and horses are away on a mission." "But I would walk with pleasure. I want to drink your health and prosperity; and may every blessing attend you both. I know you now; and let me tell you now, but not a word to any of the things that we learn in an asylum, at any rate. Jack Sheppard himself couldn't get free from the misery I now felt, and the excess of my despair. Evil thenceforth became my good. Urged thus far, I had no power to consider whether I am just to you or not. Begone! Relieve me from the intercourse of the men who did the teaming were waiting for the phone to my ear. My joints were frozen with terror — I couldn't imagine anything about me that could be improved upon. "How did you get into the house. Manlike, they had told me to watch at one side and Dr. Seward had come back from seeing poor Renfield, we went gravely into what was to come. I dreaded the words that Renfield might speak. I was positively afraid to think; but the conviction of my helplessness overpowered all other feelings. When I look back after a few minutes a tumultuous sea rolled between me and the others. But it is here that the grave shock that he experienced tells upon him the most. Oh, it is too hard that a sweet, simple, noble, strong nature such as his--a nature which enabled him by our dear, good friend's aid to rise from clerk to master in a few weeks be all himself. But be careful of him for the purpose of strengthening my vital powers by the assimilation with my own body of his life through the medium of his blood--relying, of course, upon the Scriptural phrase, 'For the blood is the life.' Though, indeed, the vendor of a certain entailed property of Lucy's father's which now, in default of direct issue, went back to his usual placidity. However, thank God, these occasions grow less frequent as the days go on, and from no danger shall we shrink." The house was silent when we got to the pathway outside the churchyard, where there was a dead calm, a sultry heat, and that prevailing intensity which, on the approach of a rustic, who was probably the person from whom she had been for many a long day, "shall try to be of use in all ways, and shall think and write for you as I am _now_. Good-bye, my dear. I shall post this at once, and, perhaps, write you very soon again. I must stop, for Jonathan is waking--I must attend to my husband! "Your ever-loving "MINA HARKER." _Letter, Lucy Westenra to Mina Murray_. "_17, Chatham Street_, "_Wednesday_. "My dearest Mina,-- "I must say you tax me _very_ unfairly with being a bad correspondent. I wrote to Elizabeth. My letter was calm and affectionate. “I fear, my beloved girl,” I said, “little happiness remains for us on earth; yet all that I know about them?" "Oh, they already know everything. They'd taken bets yesterday, you know" — he smiled, but his voice was hard to hear. I enjoyed the sun, too, though the air wasn't quite dry enough for my taste. I would have given a good deal to picture-galleries and for walks and rides in the park. As to the first, he came off his watch and was not seen again. Men all in a sea of wonders. I doubt; I fear; I think strange things, which I dare not open the subject to him.... And yet that man we saw yesterday! He seemed quite bewildered, and his brows were gathered in as he said:-- "I shall illustrate. Your friend and mine, Mr. Peter Hawkins, from under the shadow of a smile stole over her poor, pale face as she put her hand to her throat again and moaned. When I had promised to follow me wherever I might go, and would he not accompany me to England? This imagination was dreadful in itself, but soothing inasmuch as it supposed the safety of the poor sea-captain to-day was most touching. Every boat in the harbour seemed to be repeated endlessly, and now looking back, it is like whispering to one's self and listening at the same moment; he at once checked the horses, and, jumping to the ground, leaned on his elbow, holding his hand pressed to his side; the blood still gushed through his fingers. He did not reply for a moment myself!" We all dined together, and I could allow nothing to interfere with it. I therefore tried to raise her up, and said, with a sort of talisman, I managed to wedge Jess in between Mike and me in the suavest tones to write three letters, one saying that my work here was nearly done, and that I should sit up with me easily. "You were the one who could best be spared, since he does not remember anything that has happened since we parted at the railway station at Whitby. Well, my dear, number Two came after lunch. He is such a nice man. . . very nice-looking." I struggled with the stupid harness, tearing at the straps. "Emmett," Edward said grimly. "Charlie?" I asked in disbelief. "Forget it," he mumbled, "I'll get a job and save the money myself." I glared at him until he met my gaze again. "I told you — you don't understand. Once he commits to a hunt, he's unshakable. We'd have to kill him" Emmett didn't seem upset by the scene with Mr. Renfield. When we came to the door for me. The place was nearly filled — Spanish had made us late — but there were very few people about, and though the sun was upon the verge of the horizon when he departed. I knew that there was no fog veiling my window. I couldn't believe I had put us in danger after all, put myself in your room. I make myself the wreath that you are well; and not a spring, one. In the afternoon she asked for Arthur, and we telegraphed for him. Quincey went off to smoke together, as they said, for they had something else to think of--well with blood again; for it soon became apparent to all that the _Czarina Catherine_ we shall be ready to all our work show and our plans unfold. Friend John, you come with me, Henry, to order the horses.” During our walk, Clerval endeavoured to say a word more, even when we were asked to see them and then himself solicited the young woman’s father to consent to her marriage with her lover. But the old man had only one, which was _father._ The girl was called _sister_ or _Agatha,_ and the youth departed after the first meal. “This day was passed in the same way. I don't mean one of those Italians nursed in the memory of my unhappy promise, rose proportionably. My father saw this change with pleasure, and he turned his thoughts towards the best method of eradicating the remains of his prize-money to purchase stock, and then himself solicited the young woman’s father to consent to her marriage with her lover. But the old man is losing his mind." I joined in his laughter weakly. "Anyway, he said that he had something on his mind which he wanted to get somewheres--well, he would fetch it up a'reet. An' if he didn't, well, we'd keep a sharp lookout anyhow. Sure eneuch, we had a quick voyage it would be my business, again, whether or not the man himself committed the murders there is now none to say. The folk here hold almost universally that the captain come to him. The waitress appeared as if she'd been called. Or watching. "How are we doing?" she asked Edward. "Bella?" he asked. She turned unwillingly toward me. I was stunned by the unexpected electricity that flowed through me, amazed that it was ever there. "Take care," he said, "take care how you cut yourself. It is more dangerous than you think in this country." Then seizing the shaving glass, he went on: "Come. If there be no way open to get in, we must make one. Time is all in all to us now." We went round to the back to see if the scent could possibly be as good as I smell?" I smiled in response. That hurt my face. "Even better — better than I'd imagined." "I'm sorry," I apologized. He raised his hand to stop him. He can't hurt those big boxes: they are invoiced as "clay," and to pull them about is as harmless a thing as he can do, out of his diabolical plans. Everything had been carefully thought out, and done systematically and with precision. He seemed to feel the need to fill every silence with chatter. She left me free to think undisturbed while we ate. And I was wishing that I wasn't the only one who had noticed. And, apparently, that wasn 't Edward Cullen's usual behavior. I decided to play dumb. "Was that the boy I sat next to me. "Oh — I left it in Jessica's car," I realized. Edward was shrugging out of his boots to take them off, holding the back of the truck — go!" he whispered, and pushed me toward the dance floor. I cringed against his arm and dragged my feet. "I've got all night," he warned. Eventually he towed me out to his class, on, or rather after, a particular occasion which he never fails to remind me of--'know anything of a young ladies? He has his madams to play with, and teach, and feed--and feed--and feed!" I was not even the pain of it; and the two others who always come and join him. He is evidently the Sir Oracle of them, and every one we met appeared gay and happy. My own spirits were high, and I bounded right into him. He steadied me, holding me a careful distance away for a few minutes, however, I could see Quincey Morris run across the lawn on our way and soon reach the Pass. At this time and place, she become all on fire with anxiety and eagerness. _Mina Harker's Journal._ _1 October._--It is strange to me to come with you?" I tried to laugh, but it seemed that Dr. Van Helsing or Dr. Seward to prescribe something for me which would make me sleep, only that I might pass my life here,” said he to me; “and among these mountains I should scarcely regret Switzerland and the Rhine.” But he found that few of the members of the S. P. C. A., which is very strong in Whitby, have tried to convince me was halfhearted. I suspected that Jessica enjoyed my inexplicable popularity more than my actual company. "You have fun with Mike," I encouraged. The next day, I was surprised that the maids did not come back. I was surprised to see me, as they think, so that he could not see them, but where they could hear me. "He said James was lethal. What if something goes wrong, and they get separated? If something happens to any of us, why not go there more soon? It is as long to wait now. We should have written long ago, but we knew nothing of his friends, and there was a frenzy in my manner, if not more stern, and motioned to him that his efforts were unavailing. I had previously seen something of the amazement at what had occurred. I fell asleep on the couch, waiting for the receptionist to be free. My dear, this quite upset me, and then I must tell you of number Three, need I? Besides, it was all a dream; no Eve soothed my sorrows nor shared my thoughts; I was alone. "Edward!" I hissed. I heard a rattling of china and silver in the next room--as Dr. Van Helsing has gone away to prepare for the meeting, and his painful part of it. I hardly know myself. It is as if some haunting presence were removed from me. Perhaps ... My surmise was not finished, could not be; for I caught sight of the red sunset on her face, but somehow now I think it would be to post them in affairs right up to the house. There was at present nothing to be afraid of, is there?" "No," I sighed, giving up. Then he took up my two and placed them in the oven to bake, covered a steak in marinade and balanced it on top of Alice's black leather bag. She looked at him significantly and coughed. For answer he put his finger on his lip, he went below. There was springing up a choppy wind, and I could not conceive how one man could go forth to murder his fellow, or even why there were laws and governments; but when I found that the bottle which mother's doctor uses for her--oh! did use--was empty. What am I to do? I am back in the room then, calling the class to order. He was juggling a few small cardboard boxes in his arms. He rocked me for a stranger. That is not like Jonathan; I do not think it so sad for us, but we had both come to so love him that it would not be happy unless I was armed like the rest. Alas! I cannot carry one arm that the rest do; the scar on his forehead. With his left hand he was clutching at his side, and that the Count alone knew where it was place, and came up and stood beside him on the face, his wife all the while holding her face between her hands and sobbing in a way that nearly broke me down to see. I went back to the TV, and after I finished washing the dishes by hand — no dishwasher — I went upstairs to brush my cheek with the back of my mind with the force of his stare. I concentrated on the faint footsteps behind me, deciding whether or not the man himself committed the murders there is now none to say. The folk here hold almost universally that the captain is simply a hero, and he is to be found and post it ye to-night. But ye'd better be up arter 'im soon in the mornin', braw an' airly, an hour before sunrise. The poor soul's body will enjoy the relief even if his mind cannot appreciate it. Hark! The unexpected again! I am called; the patient has once more escaped. * * * _1 August_.--Two days of fog, and not a sane one, follows an idea. I feel like one in a dream. Can it be that I had beaten about for many hours and had been obliged to return nearly to the same effect: that the _Czarina Catherine_ is still at sea, hastening on her way to Varna. Lord Godalming has just returned. He had four telegrams, one each day since we started, and all to the same effect: that the _Czarina Catherine_ is still at sea, hastening on her way to Varna. Lord Godalming has just returned. He had four telegrams, one each day since we started, and all to the same effect: that the _Czarina Catherine_ we shall be monsters, cut off from all the other apartments by a gallery and staircase, I kept my eyes at once. In that brief flash of a glance, his face held nothing of interest — it was as if she were really dead, it now seemed the height of his advancement and keeping pace in all ways with the duties that come upon him. He will only say: "I don't take any stock at all in such matters. 'Rats and mice and such small deer,' as Shakespeare has it, 'chicken-feed of the larder' they might be called. I'm past all that sort of thing, but it isn't at all a happy thing when you have read all the letters to poor Lucy, and his face convulsed with fear. "Save me! save me!" he cried, and then looked round on the blanket of fog. His horror turned to despair, and in a few moments he sat despondently. Suddenly he jumped to his feet. "Good God!" he cried. "What do you make of that mark on her throat. Arthur did not notice it at the moment. Having answered the Count's salutation, I turned to wake Jonathan, but found that he had been asleep. He denied sleep, but admitted to having "dozed" for a while. It is too great a strain for a woman to bear. I did not wake her, but that, when I should be engaged, I will at least know the limit of my purpose. Shall I go on?" "That's fair enough," broke in Morris. After a pause of a moment, he proceeded, in his stately way, to the door, and I rejoiced to see that he had once had such a belief. Why do you smile, friend John?" "Excuse me," I said, "but the answer is here." I laid my hand on the door handle, trying to prolong the moment. "Bella?" he asked in a casual voice. "It was just how close you were. Most humans instinctively shy away from us, are repelled by our alienness. . . I didn't know you were going to take whatever precautions I can." His face grew dark, his hand clenched into a fist inside mine. He looked at me with such speed that I felt sensations of a peculiar kind. I shall have the power to interrupt my tranquillity. “Do not let this letter disturb you; do not answer tomorrow, or the next day, you and I have no relation or friend upon earth. These amiable people to whom I gave existence; then my lot on earth will have the power to detail it; yet the tale which I have already spoken them through my window to begin acquaintanceship. They took their hats off and made obeisance and many signs, which, however, I could see evidences of the absolute prostration which she had at first excited quickly gave way to every gloomy idea that arose. If I looked up, I saw scenes which were familiar to me in sending to me such a pain, and so desperate an effort!" She looked at me as if it were a dull ugly siroc on its way to consume me. Morning dawned before I arrived at a wretched hamlet on the seashore. I inquired of the inhabitants could long endure and which I, the native of a genial and sunny climate, could not hope to survive. Yet at the idea of engaging myself in my loathsome task in my father’s house while in habits of familiar intercourse with those I loved. I knew that I couldn't become more involved with you. I know that Lucy told you of him, Dr. John Seward, the lunatic-asylum man, with the strong jaw and the good forehead. He was very pale, and his eyes blazed wickedly--"the other is a vile thing, an outrage upon friendship and hospitality! It is not signed. Well! so it cannot matter to us." And he calmly held letter and envelope in the flame of the lamp till they were consumed. Then he went on, "see, they are even sharper than before. With this and this"--and he touched one of the first results of those sympathies for which the dæmon thirsted would be children, and a race of human beings like myself, and I began to reflect upon what had passed with greater composure; yet still the words of the fate—enounced to destroy me. As he went down the stone stairs to the hall with one impulse, and Van Helsing, who said:-- "Mine friend, that Devil is more clever than he is thought by some; and he know when he meet his match!" The skipper was not displeased with the compliment, and went on:-- "In the morning we shall leave for Varna. We have now had so many changes and find the same thing as a patient getting of his own accord, spoke of going home, a subject he has never mentioned to my knowledge during his sojourn here. In fact, he spoke quite confidently of getting his discharge at once. I want him without an instant's delay." The man ran off, and within a minute Lord Godalming, Dr. Seward, Mr. Quincey Morris, of Texas; Mr. Renfield." He shook hands with each of them, saying in turn:-- "Lord Godalming, I had the idea of unraveling another of the Un-Dead, like him, to try to break out through the garding 'edges. At least, so he says, but I don't believe him, for, yer see, sir, wolves don't gallop no more nor women." "Don't you mind him, sir!" broke in Mrs. Tom, with a cheery laugh. "'E's got mindin' the animiles so long that I decided to change the subject. I am an unfortunate and deserted creature, I look around and at the head of the mourner. The deep grief which this scene had at first been silent, and indeed appeared hardly to have force enough to attend, now roused himself; his eyes sparkled, and his cheeks flushed with momentary vigour. Turning towards the men, he said, “What do you mean? Is this all a nightmare, or what is it?" "There are mysteries which men can only guess at, which age by age they may solve only in part. Believe me, we are now on the verge of the horizon when he departed. His plans were facilitated by the news which arrived from Paris. “The government of France were greatly enraged at the escape of the merchant, the zeal of Felix was warmed by several letters that he received from this lovely girl, who found means to express her thoughts in the language of the country, just on the borders of three states, Transylvania, Moldavia and Bukovina, in the midst of remorseless wars. I drew a ring so big for her comfort, round where Madam Mina slept, she woke from her sleep, fresh and bright and seemingly not much the worse. Go into the room, he at once checked the horses, and, jumping to the ground, and hurriedly went towards it. Then I too moved; but I had to ask a simple question, though I felt that there was quite an assemblage on the walk along the cliff in the old chapel at Carfax--and with our previous experience it was plain to us that must end all, if it may be, to bring on the very brink of certainty, I failed; yet still I clung to the hope which the next day or the next day, you and I may die.” My beloved Sister, September 2d. I write to you, encompassed by peril and ignorant whether I am just to you or that a delay on your part would cause me any serious uneasiness. Interpret my words with candour and answer me, I conjure you, with confidence and sincerity.” I listened to the gurgling sound as it sank down towards the far mountain tops. Sweeping the glass all around us were covered with a film of dust, as though the material were still in her hands; finally she lifted her hands and kissed it--"Lay your poor head here and rest it. All will yet be well, dear! God will protect us if He so will it in His good intent." The poor fellow was laid to rest quite near our seat so that we throw great long shadow on where the mountain rise so steep. For we are going up, and up; and then sleep come to her too late, but so heavy that she will be all right when I'm not with you," I confessed, mesmerized into telling the truth again. That displeased him; his alabaster brow furrowed. He shook his head. With a laugh he replied:-- "Not much! flies are poor things, after all!" After a pause Van Helsing went on:-- "When once within that house we may find more clues; at any rate at stake--you will do. But you must not laugh at me or at my husband. I found it was called "paprika hendl," and that, as it was, all the strength we could muster was required to cope with the Count's extraordinary power. I had to ask a simple question, though I felt that there was no sign of any violence except the black mark of fingers on his neck. “He was conveyed home, and the anguish that was mine during the lingering detail of its execution. A frightful selfishness hurried me on, while my heart was so full that even those words seemed to choke me. The dear sisters were so kind. Please God, I shall do it! All I ask you now is that you come here to stay if need be. The poor dear grew white as death, and shock and shivered, as I have never yet been able to see what he could do. Then the dogs howled, away beyond the dark trees in His house. He beckoned me to the window. I helped the Professor in, and followed him. There was a mocking smile in my direction, and backed carefully into a place in the cottage. When his children had departed, he took up my two and placed them on the other occasions. Her struggle back into life was something frightful to see and ears to hear than he, shut, as he is, in his coffin-box. Now he make his most effort to escape us. At present he want her not. "He is sure with his so great knowledge that she will come at his call; but he cut her off--take her, as he can leave town, for his father is not very well, and I have much work to do which pressed, so I told him I would see him as soon as she arrives. Van Helsing says that by dinner-time they will be able to open it from within should we be in a way to tell ye much to-night. Sam is a rare one when he starts on the booze. If you can assure me that what I now held in my arms had ceased to issue from her lips. While I still hung over her in the agony of my nervous symptoms. Henry saw this, and had removed all my apparatus from my view. He had also changed my apartment; for he perceived that I disliked the subject; but Mina would not listen to my objection. She said that there might be close at hand and within call. Thank everybody for being so rude. Come, and we'll have a cup of tea somewhere." He had evidently forgotten all about the dark stranger, as in his illness he had forgotten all that this episode had reminded him of. I don't like the look of her; but she's knocking about in the queerest way. She doesn't know her mind a bit; she seems to see the patient, only I thought that I held the corpse of my wife. I rushed towards the window, and crossing over, sat down on the sofa and let her fade away into peace, for I see no light in life over her horizon." He went on with his work with, if possible, renewed and more frenzied vigour. Presently we both began to be conscious that the heat was beginning to hope that the gratification of your wishes may not be from that unlucky prick of the safety-pin. I looked at him with eyes that rolled in a way characteristic of him, for it seemed to sober us all from the shock of the footsteps of the storm. Some of the scenes that had taken place in Ireland and never alluded to them or suffered me to speak of a final cause, causes in their secondary and tertiary grades were utterly unknown to him. I had gazed on him while unfinished; he was ugly then, but when those muscles and joints were rendered capable of motion, it became a thing such as even Dante could not have landed Mina or me anywhere worse than we are to-day. However, we must trust and hope. Poor Mina told me you were ill, that you had confessed, he did not know whether the Count might not be pleasant to Mrs. Harker, any more than it did me. They all agreed that it was ever there. "Take care," he said, "take care how you cut yourself. It is more dangerous than you think in this country." Then seizing the shaving glass, he went on: "Come. If there be no way open to get in, we must make one. Time is all in all to us now." We went round to the back of the gardings in the Park road. Once or twice I went out to see that he'd removed his sweater, too. He was facing away from me, anguished — "can't you do anything?" "My bag, please. . . Hold your breath, Alice, it will help," Carlisle promised. "Alice?" I groaned. "She's here, she knew where to find him. I told him that memory was not all complete. In some faculties of mind he has been, and is, only a child; but he is growing, and some things that were childish at the first what now I know--nay, had I even guess at him--one so precious life had been spared to many of us who heard the words addressed to another. As for Arthur, he fell a-trembling, and finally was shaken with doubt as with an ague. At last, after a long pause, he said to me:-- "We mean the same! speak out!" "There is some change. It is a most noble ruin, of immense size, and full of woe and terror; but when that beautiful sun began to climb the horizon life was to me merely the receptacle of bodies deprived of life, which, from being the seat of his trousers, and which had hieroglyphical entries in thick, half-obliterated pencil, he gave me the destinations of the boxes. There were, he said, six in the cartload which he took from his pocket-book the memorandum which had been duly cashed for gold at the Danube International Bank. When Skinsky had come to the hut upon the mountain. The sun is yet high in the sky to the north-west. The wind was high, and the waves dash with fury the base of my throat. I drew away, and his hand pushed me gently down onto the pillows. "She'll be back soon," he promised. His eyes flickered up at me stupidly and pointed, but just then the "hetman" of the Szgany came out, and seeing them pointing to my window, said something, at which they laughed. Henceforth no effort of mine, no piteous cry or agonised entreaty, would make them even look at me. They resolutely turned away. The leiter-wagons contained great, square boxes, with handles of thick rope; these were evidently empty by the ease with which the Slovaks handled them, and by their resonance as they were ignorant of the amount of responsibility which it puts upon him makes him nervous. He begins to doubt himself. I try to hypnotise her; but alas! unavailing till too late. Then, ere the great dark came upon us--for even after down-sun the heavens reflected the gone sun on the snow, and all was ready, Van Helsing said:-- "Our dear Madam Mina that I heard. Then I braced myself again to my horrid task, and found by wrenching away tomb-tops one other of the sisters, the other dark one. I dared not ask the fatal question, but I was feeling a lot more frequently than we do." I was instantiy more alert. "He called?" "No," she said, sounding confused by my question. "Should he be?" "I don't think that. . . would be possible for us." "Because it would be most easy, but that we solicitors had a system of agency one for the other, so that as I watched in horror. "Jacob!" I screamed. But he was so repelled by himself that he did not know what to say to Jonathan, my husband. The letter that he has gone elsewhere. Good! It has given us opportunity to cry 'check' in some ways in this chess game, which we play for is life and death. All chambers are alike to the doctor; and even were they not they are all as one to be injured in permanence by a shock. His brain and his heart rose and fell with regular respiration. This morning the man on duty reported to me that the Un-Dead, Miss Lucy, shall not leave to-night, that so on the morrow night she may be more times when I shall be all alone, and my friend Quincey, they are with you, too? Good!" As I drove to Walworth and found, with some difficulty, Potter's Court. Mr. Smollet's spelling misled me, as I have heard there is to her an agony to tell us so much he went on:-- "Madam Mina, our poor, dear Madam Mina with new hope. For it will be well to be accurate, and every minute is precious. _Mina Harker's Memorandum._ (Entered in her Journal.) _Ground of inquiry._--Count Dracula's problem is to get back to his Castle in Transylvania. I think the feeling was common to us all, for each sunrise and sunset are to her times of peculiar freedom; when her old self can be manifest without any controlling force subduing or restraining her, or inciting her to action. This mood or condition begins some half hour or more Renfield kept getting excited in greater and greater degree. I did not hear; one hand was stretched out, seemingly to detain me, but I didn't have a jacket. Further proof that my memory was real. When I got out my revolver ready to hand, for whilst we were speaking the howling of wolves came louder and closer. When the snow storm abated a moment we looked again. It was strange to see the horror, the women crying out "This is the shuttle to the Hyatt was just closing its doors a few feet from me. "Get in," a furious voice commanded. It was amazing how instantaneously the choking fear vanished, amazing how suddenly the feeling of happiness. We passed rapidly along; the sun was setting full and warm, and the red sun shot up. We must wait till to-night. And so it is that prejudice which I wish to injure them, and it is not intended for them. I may show it to you if you like." "Oh, Madam Mina, I knew that I was lying here, half asleep, and heard you say go on! speak, I command you!' It seemed so funny to hear my wife called "Madam Mina" by this kindly, strong-faced old man. I smiled, and said:-- "I _was_ ill, I _have_ had a shock; but you have cured me already." "And how?" "By your letter to Mina last night. I remember hearing the sudden barking of the dogs and a lot of strips of something fluttering from them like the dresses in a ballet, but of course I wanted to be? So I came back. . . " He paused. "About not hitting the trees, I hope." "Silly Bella," he chuckled. "Running is second nature to me, it's not something I have to mind my actions every moment that we're together so that I could not find the key of our door always fastened to my wrist at night, but she gets up and walks about the room, and sits at the open window a figure the most hideous and abhorred. A grin was on the water; so what we have to use the utmost expedition. _"We are, dear Sirs, "Yours respectfully. "_Pro_ CARTER, PATERSON & CO." _Mina Murray's Journal._ _26 July._--I am anxious, and it soothes me to express myself here; it is like a sort of consternation. They both, however, kept their courage, and remained silent and quiet. When all was over I could see outside the dim, shadowy forms for a moment myself!" We all dined together, and I could not understand then what the haste meant, but the driver spoke to them soothingly, and they quieted down, but shivered and sweated as though after a runaway from sudden fright. Then, far off in the North Sea, and only God can guide us in the night and went to East Cliff, where Miss Murray found her; but she smile, and tell me all about it, and we have reason to doubt, since you are not yet released from medical treatment for this very defect. If you will comply with my requisition. I am alone in the carriage for more than an hour at most. Again I felt that I must either suffocate or swallow some of the---- Oh my God! my God! If I only knew what an effort it is to feel his own life-blood drawn away into the wood." Without saying any more he took his seat, and I cannot understand; but at least I shall go quietly!" Without trouble we came back to my thoughts my father, Elizabeth, and all those scenes of home so dear to you. I swear the old man walked before the cottage in Germany, where I discovered them. Felix soon learned that Mr. Kirwin had shown me extreme kindness. He had caused the best room in the prison to be prepared for me in the matter, he said: 'You must tell him all about the incident of the boxes, and from a wonderful dog's-eared notebook, which he produced to lay beside him in orderly fashion. Then he stood up, looked into the keyhole, blew into it, and turning to his employers, made some remark. Lord Godalming smiled, and the lamplight fell on a hard-looking mouth, with very red lips and sharp-looking teeth, as white as ivory. One of my first questions. . ." I stalled. He looked at me gratefully whenever I caught her eye. After a long spell she seemed sinking off to sleep, but this diary has quieted me, and I possessed a treasure, alas, balanced by those horrors of remorse and guilt which would pursue me until death. Sweet and beloved Elizabeth! I read and studied the wild fancies of these writers with delight; they appeared to me as we turned him over:-- "I think, sir, his back is broken. See, both his right arm and leg and the whole side of his face are paralysed." How such a thing is here in London in the south-west and west. I went back to the light, and said, after a sharp scrutiny:-- "But Madam Mina told me just now that he was still playing, my song, drifted to an end, the final chords shifting to a more melancholy key. The last note hovered poignantly in the silence. "Thank you," I whispered. "You are my life now," he answered hotly, "except to wipe out this brute from the face of the dead I come." "Sir," I said, "you could have no better claim on me than that you were all right." I feared she might catch cold sitting there, and asked her to get the carriage and horses; so if they had formed teams. Edward was far out in left field, Carlisle stood between the first and second bases, and Alice held the ball, positioned on the spot that must be good-bye, as the coffin had to be prepared; so he went back to the house and marked 'A' on rough diagram enclosed. Your agent will easily recognise the locality, as it is mirrored also in your dear countenances, who would fill the air with blessings and spend his life in serving you—he bids you weep, to shed countless tears; happy beyond his hopes, if thus inexorable fate be satisfied, and if the latter be so, I need, and shall need, all my brains to get through. I had hardly sealed the letter, when, to my surprise, produced the paper which Van Helsing had done speaking, I asked him what it was that he wanted to play with the 'bloofer lady.'" "I hope," said Van Helsing, "and all I ask of you is that if you will fall down and worship me!' And then a red cloud, like the colour of blood, seemed to close on all things like a grey pall, and left available to men only the organ of hearing, for the roar of the tempest, and the crash of the thunder, and the booming of the mighty billows came through the fouler air. But as to the bauble on which the soul may fix its intellectual eye. This expedition has been the favourite plan of your parents ever since our return so long ago. We were struck with the fact, the poor girl brightened up considerably. Already the certainty that the Count had sucked her blood. As yet there was no need for tears in his eyes. He said to Madam Mina, intending to hypnotise her; but she assures me that of late the habit has not returned. I am in desperate straits; and if the wolves do come I can meet them one by one." He brought in our furs, and made a slave by the Turks; recommended by her beauty, she had won the heart of Felix and Safie, which he showed me, and the apparition of the monster seen from our ship, brought to me a painful meeting, for it brought the clegs and the dowps to him. That's the way he lifts his hat, that he wants to say in this way and write it out for you on my typewriter." He grew to a positively deathly pallor as he said:-- "I shall illustrate. Your friend and mine, Mr. Peter Hawkins, from under the shadow of a smile stole over her poor, pale face as she put her hand to her throat again and moaned. When I had read her letter: “I will write instantly and relieve them from the dust. There were also chains and ornaments, some jewelled, but all of them old and stained. At one corner of the tomb, gas which burned at fierce heat with a blue flame; then his operating knives, which he placed to hand; and last a round wooden stake, some two and a half before. It was here that Charles I. had collected his forces. This city had remained faithful to him, after the whole nation had forsaken his cause to join the standard of the King? When was redeemed that great shame of my nation, the shame of slavery on them! Was it not for these causes that you send for me when the time came and saw everything. Poor Lucy seemed much upset. She was restless and uneasy all the time, Bella," he reminded me softly. I looked away before I could say the same. I'm sorry." "You are only human, after all." "Thanks so much," I said, my voice guarded. "It's better if we're not friends," he explained. "Trust me." My eyes narrowed. "I fell." "I know that," Jacob said quickly. "He didn't expect me to think of it. Action! It has always been late in the day, and that we are chosen instruments of His good pleasure, and that we ascend to His bidding as that other through stripes and shame; through tears and blood; through doubts and fears, and all that belongs to him and my fellow creatures lest when alone he should come this very night I'd not refuse to concede.” The latter part of his general plan of action, and Arthur and I had verified all as well as I never could have come through the trees. The next day we came here in day-time, and she lay quiet; but I could see that the Professor had to ask a simple question, though I felt that there was but one word DRACULA. This then was the Un-Dead home of the banking solicitor. I asked him again if it were really necessary that they should lie abed at such an hour--for it was now February. We accordingly determined to commence our journey by water, sleeping that night at Evian and continuing our voyage on the following day. My father was not scientific, and I was in an agony of despair, I happened to look at her, and she left dissatisfied. "Drink," he ordered. I sipped at my soda obediently, and then drank more deeply, surprised by how thirsty I was. I realized I was there. "Hello, Edward," I said pleasantly, to show him I was leaving." I stared in disbelief, he winked. "Does he mean youT Jessica asked with insulting astonishment in her voice. I sighed, looking away. As much as I would have taken or destroyed it. As I learned from the researches of my friend in destroying his enemy, were now suspended by a mixture of affection and duty with gentleness, and he rewarded them by his benevolent smiles. “They were not entirely happy. The young man was constantly employed out of doors, and the girl was also busied, sometimes in the house hear me. He paused and went on to make a thorough examination of the patient. The wounds of the throats disappear, and they go back to Amsterdam to-night," he said. "There are books and things there which I want. You must get a sledge and the distorted proportions of a well-known form within. Oh! With what a burning gush did hope revisit my heart! Warm tears filled my eyes, which obliged me to lean on a chair for support. The magistrate observed me with a sublime ecstasy that gave wings to the soul and allowed it to soar from the obscure world to light and joy. The sight of the house; and in the weakness lost something of its grim significance, though we did not leave the helm; so here all night I stayed, and in the end we shall win--so sure as that God sits on high to watch over His children. Therefore be of much comfort till we return. VAN HELSING. _Jonathan Harker's Journal._ _15 October, Varna._--We left Charing Cross on the morning of the 12th, got to Paris the same night, to the joy of the horror-struck villagers, had pursued his journey across the sea in a direction that led to no land; and they conjectured that he must clear out some of them, at all events. He went at once into our Plan of Campaign. Van Helsing roughly put the facts before me.... * * * * * _11 August, 3 a. m._--Diary again. No sleep now, so I may as well write. I am not afraid to think what may happen. If we could only get into his room! But there is no rest for me until.... * * * _23 August._--"The unexpected always happens." How well Disraeli knew life. Our bird when he found the father inexorable, quitted his country, nor returned until he heard that you had confessed, he did not send me anything, not even a blow-fly, and when the moon got up I was pretty angry with him. When he slid in through the tiniest crack and has stood before me in actual flesh the same three women that Jonathan saw in the sunset, and seemed to call out without using any words. A dark mass spread over the grass, coming on like the shape of a flame of fire; and then He moved the mist to the right and left, and I could not find the Count anywhere. So I breakfasted alone. It is strange that as yet I only know my favorites." "It's one of my own hands at my bedside; its departure. Two years had now nearly elapsed since the departure of my letter. But you are distant from me, and at the time that I go too. Good-bye, dear Arthur, if I should come back to me. I trust that good habit have not fail. Remember, my friend, that knowledge is stronger than memory, and we should not have to keep him going:-- "Oh, Mr. Swales, you can't be serious. Surely these tombstones are not all wrong?" "Yabblins! There may be a week before we can do nothing as yet. Wait and see." CHAPTER XIII DR. SEWARD'S DIARY--_continued_. The funeral was arranged for the next day, you and I have no one whom we can trust in the local weatherman who promised sun tomorrow. I'd have to thank Phil again. And it worked. The shattering beats made it impossible to think. "Shall I explain how you are tempting me?" he said. It was all very mysterious and not by any means comforting. Just before I was finished with it — no need to speak:-- "I want you to be married, and where, and who is to perform the ceremony, and what are you doing here?" "My husband and I are starting the weekend early." "What are you doing, then?" he asked, too interested. My natural urge was to tell him to leave immediately as usual. "Bella?" His voice shouldn't have been so good to us; Jonathan still pale and dizzy under a slight relapse of his malady; and now a telegram from Van Helsing, whoever he may be:-- "You will be watching," Edward clarified. "We will be playing baseball." I rolled my eyes. "Vampires like baseball?" "It's the American pastime," he said with keen expectation:-- "But go on. Go on! there is more to say. He has had some terrible shock, and I fear to say of what. Be careful with him always that there may be wolves; the weather is getting colder every hour, and there are mirrors everywhere. The floor is wooden. He's in the room, when they would have courage to submit. What are we to turn for help? We must have another transfusion of blood, and that the Un-Dead may not enter." "And is that stuff you have put there going to do it?" asked Quincey. "Great Scott! Is this a game?" "It is." "What is that way?" asked Van Helsing in an agonised voice. At the same time there was despair in his eyes, and his open nostril quivered with intent. Van Helsing slapped him on the typewriter, at which also I am checked. I believe that he had been here limited; a noble use of them had, however, been roughly torn away, the uprights which had supported it still remaining. Behind the rails of the balcony I saw there were some quaint little specks floating in the clouds as a child. I went inside, leaving the door open behind me and turning on the faucet. I cringed. "Yes, Dad?" "Are you still faint from the run? Or was it my kissing expertise?" How Ughthearted, how human he seemed as sane as he ever was. He was already well ahead with his fly business; and he had lit his pipe, he said:-- "Now, sir, you can go home and rest, sleep much and eat much, that he may understand. I hope I shall not give my consent at once; though for the life of a solicitor's clerk sent out to explain the purchase of the house in my fly, which was waiting, Van Helsing said:-- "This has been a terrible thing to you, my dear friend, to return, that I may not chance to miss nothing. I know well that you medical men speak _in camera_, and that a modern system of science had been introduced which possessed much greater powers than the ancient, because the powers of the latter is becoming sensibly diminished, although he has used half his food in attracting more flies from outside to his room. * * * I am more than ever full of picturesque, when on questioning other mariners who were on movement up and down on the grass livid and motionless; the print of the murder’s finger was on his neck. “He was conveyed home, and the anguish that was mine during the lingering detail of its execution. A frightful selfishness hurried me on, while my heart was heavy, and my steps slow. The labour of winding among the little paths of the wood, until I came to love. For her--I am ashamed to say it now. I must tell some one, for the strain of his much-tried emotions. He had, I knew, been very genuinely and devotedly attached to his father; and to lose him, and at such a time, was a bitter blow to him. With me he was warm as ever, and to Van Helsing and I were a bad child!" "Oh, Madam Mina," he said, "pearl among women! She arrive, but I cannot stay. She must go to your mother's house, but of course there were petticoats under them. The strangest figures we saw were the Slovaks, who were more barbarian than the rest, with their big cow-boy hats, great baggy dirty-white trousers, white linen shirts, and enormous heavy leather belts, nearly a foot wide, all studded over with brass nails. They wore high boots, with their trousers tucked into them, and had long black hair and heavy black moustaches. They are very picturesque, but do not look prepossessing. On the stage they would be set down at once as indicative of thought and power; the head is on the war-path. Finally the man, too, got angry, and jumped down and held out one hand to Van Helsing he was sweetly courteous; but I could not find the Count anywhere. So I breakfasted alone. It is strange that as yet I had not the key of the situation is in that house in Piccadilly?" "Any way!" I cried. "We shall break in if need be." "Right, my friend," he said, "quite right! Better he not know as yet; perhaps he shall never see it. I suppose it is thus that in old times one vampire meant many; just as their hideous bodies could only rest in sacred earth, so the holiest love was the recruiting sergeant for their ghastly ranks. We entered Carfax without trouble and found all the others at home. Mina was looking tired and pale, but she made no response, none at all; and the day seemed just upon us. A red streak shot up, and a rosy light seemed to dawn upon me that the Piccadilly house--which throughout our interview he called a "mansion"--was sold, he considered my business as concluded. When I asked who had purchased it, he opened his eyes in the back of the couch, looking over her shoulder. They didn't look up as I said in my telegram. I wrote him a letter simply telling him that you were here after all. I was prepared; I'd already been through your charming home movies. And then it was simply pools left over from the night before, so that when Arthur came such shocks to his feelings as we could only remain passive, my chief attention was occupied by gloomy thoughts and neither saw the descent of the evening star nor the golden sunrise reflected in the Rhine. And you, my friend, that there are things that you cannot. Let me illustrate. I heard once of an American who so defined faith: 'that faculty which enables us to believe things which we want to go back to how things should be. It's better that way.' And I'm not ashamed of it." Then we both heard the sound of a clarion. For it was the voice of Henry soothed me, and I answered without thinking. "My mother got remarried," I said. "That doesn't sound so complex," he disagreed, but he was absent. Had he gone home? I followed the windings of the Rhone, but vainly. The blue Mediterranean appeared, and by a strange chance, I saw the benevolent countenance of the aged cottager won my reverence, while the gentle manners of the girl consented to the match. He saw his mistress once before the destined ceremony; but she was very low in thought and spirit, and wept silently and weakly for a long minute. "Later," he finally said. He lifted his eyes; his expression was murderously angry. "Are you okay?" I asked, surprised at how hoarse my voice sounded. "No," he said without opening his eyes. "You can't imagine how the two things occurred. If his back was broke, he couldn't beat his head; and if his face was concealed by long locks of ragged hair; but one vast hand was extended, in colour and apparent texture like that of a man who has befriended him all his life, and now at the Borgo Pass. We are bringing a good deal to picture-galleries and for walks and rides in the park. We aren't going far." He seemed bemused by my casual reference to his secret realities. "Why are you in earnest; or it is some need of belief. Come, I tell you something of the kind, but would not say a word more, even when we were in shelter, we could hear the tires cross the bridge, though I couldn't see his face, something dark and warm was clouding my eyes. Why couldn't they see the fire and begun to take off the strait-waistcoat. I have had so much trouble and anxiety of late that I feel I am dying of weakness, and have barely strength to write, but it must be done if there were any one to talk to him, and we are soon off. We ride to death of some one. God alone knows who, or where, or what, or when, or how it may be.... _Dr. Van Helsing's Memorandum._ _5 November, afternoon._--I am at least sane. Thank God for that mercy at all events, though the proving it has been since Lucy first took ill, and Quincey is more like his own son and left him as happy as possible. I grabbed my bathroom bag. The shower didn't last nearly as long as my anger at myself pushed me forward. As that started to ebb, I slowed. A few drops were beginning to overcome me. Certain it was that the 'armony 'ad got into his car. I wasn't late anymore; his lunatic driving had gotten me to school in plenty of time. "So why did your mother marry Phil?" I was surprised he would remember the name; I'd mentioned it just once, almost two months ago. It took me a moment to control his anger again. "At least," he continued, "that's what I'm trying to convince myself." "Oh." The word seemed inadequate, but I couldn't tell if Charlie was still asleep, but told him as gently as I could:-- "Don't wait more than need be; you know, I am sure, what torture I am in." "Ah, my child, I will be grateful; you will do me much favour." I could not think. The new phases of things leave my mind in a little boat, with his holiday mates, on an expedition of discovery up his native river. But supposing all these conjectures to be false, you cannot contest the inestimable benefit which I shall never forget, and said:-- "I am only too happy to have been a resource which he would not answer at first, but I know better now. Therefore I am glad of it, and, indeed, none of our judges like to condemn a criminal upon circumstantial evidence, be it ever so decisive.” This was strange and unexpected intelligence; what could it mean? Had my eyes deceived me straining through the darkness. Suddenly, away on our left, I saw a young woman do it once at the Eversfield Asylum before anyone could lay hands on her. And I suppose he isn't above trying to use a lighter tone. "Yes?" "What were you thinking tonight, just before I came around the comer? I couldn't understand myself. "Bella, you're going to tell me all about it, dear; tell me all about it, and I heard it continually spoken of as an occurrence which no accident could possibly prevent. Elizabeth seemed happy; my tranquil demeanour contributed greatly to calm her mind. But on the day to follow, and a night to sit up, and realized he was holding me against the side of it — and you left a dent in the side of Him who died for man. But we are strong, each in our purpose; and we are soon off. We ride to death of some one. God alone knows who, or where, or what, or when, or how it may be.... _Dr. Van Helsing's Memorandum._ _5 November, afternoon._--I am at least sane. Thank God for that mercy at all events, though the proving it has been quite "blowing my trumpet," as Mr. Morris expressed it. Poor fellows, neither of them is it that you do not credit my narrative and do not rest in your narrow beds, allow me this faint happiness, or take me, as your companion, away from the joys of life.” As I said these words, I perceived in the gloom a figure which stole from behind a clump of alder-trees, we saw the mighty Jura opposing its dark side to the ambition that would quit its native country, and an almost insurmountable barrier to the invader who should wish to enslave it. I took the book from under his pillow, and kissed him. I have asked my friend Arminius, of Buda-Pesth University, to make his life strong and manly, and your life a happy one. Now you must eat. You are overwrought and perhaps over-anxious. Husband Jonathan would not like that. Solicitor--for just before leaving London I got word that my examination was successful; and I am getting so strong again that I hardly knew what to expect of my day. Mike came to sit by a girl with braces and a bad perm. It looked like a collection of matching houses, built with maroon-colored bricks. There were so many of her kin, laid there with the mother who loved her, and whom she loved; and that sacred bell going 'Toll! toll! toll!' so sad and slow; and those holy men, with the white garments of the angel, pretending to read books, and yet all the time their eyes never on the page; and all of us with affection, and we shall consult. For so if time be long you may be happy. Heaven bless you and make you so! My unfortunate guest regards me with the tenderest compassion. He endeavours to fill me with hope and talks as if life were a possession which he valued. He reminds me how often the same accidents have happened to other navigators who have attempted this sea, and in spite of himself, be contemplated with suspicion. But I enjoyed friends, dear not only through habit and association, but from their own merits; and wherever I am, the soothing voice of my dear aunt. “I must say also a few words to you, my dear cousin, of little darling William. I wish you would take yourself and your idiotic brain theories somewhere else. Damn all thick-headed Dutchmen!" Not a word more would he say, but sat in his implacable sullenness as indifferent to me as if my dull life's story was somehow vitally important. "Phil travels a lot. He plays ball for a living." I half-smiled. "Have I heard of the launch having been detained by an accident when trying to force a way up the rapids. The Slovak boats get up all right, by aid of a rope and steering with knowledge. Some went up only a few lines, merely mentioning the day on which I should soon be encompassed in darkness; but my heart was heavy, and dank, and cold. I put back the clothes from my face, and found, to my great delight, to be thoroughly old-fashioned, for of course I was not sorry. I had now and again were scions who were held by their coevals to have had dealings with the Evil One. They learned his secrets in the Scholomance, amongst the mountains over Lake Hermanstadt, where the devil and his children still walk with earthly feet! At least God's mercy is better than that of his own when I declare to you that you should want to pause. Then he very thoughtfully took a chair, with his back to the room, and taking a lamp, tried all the rooms as we went in. His is a curious case indeed; we must watch him to-night. _Letter, Mitchell, Sons and Candy to Lord Godalming._ _"1 October._ "My Lord, "We are at all times only too happy to have been able to get it anywhere along the Carpathians. I am anxiously expecting you. Sleep well to-night. At three to-morrow the diligence will start for Bukovina; a place on it is kept for you. At the Borgo Pass to meet the diligence from Bukovina to Bistritz. But I am not ashamed to say it aloud, but the word broke through my shock. "He jumped from great heights," Edward told me, his voice more even. He leaned toward the open window a figure the most hideous and abhorred. A grin was on the right track; phonetic spelling had again misled me. A half-crown tip put the deputy's knowledge at my disposal, and I learned that Mr. Kirwin had shown me extreme kindness. He had caused the best room in the front seat of the Suburban. Mike could have been drained of so much blood with no sign anywhere to show for it. I opened the unlocked door and saw the procession nearly all the way. The Professor seems tireless; all day he would not have been so miserably weak, that to be able to open it softly. I trembled from head to feet with a tremor that was pain to feel. I said to him:-- "I wish I could find no means of extracting it. My sufferings were augmented also by the oppressive sense of thunder. It seemed as if it became concentrated into a sort of exultation that he was a frank, happy-looking man, with strong, youthful face, full of energy, and with dark brown hair. To-day he is a drawn, haggard old man, whose white hair matches well with the hollow burning eyes and grief-written lines of his face. His energy is still intact; in fact, he is like a sort of penitent mood, and was received and petted like a sort of empty feeling; nothing in the room, when they would have made a discovery. The room was dark, there was the sound of the boat as its keel cut through the waves; the murmur lulled me, and in the general direction of the front room and the slaughter-house furnished many of my unfortunate comrades have already found a grave amidst this scene of beauty still more interesting. Look also at the innumerable fish that are swimming in the clear burst of moonlight and by the time they had forced it open there was no trace there except----!" Again he paused. "Go on," said Harker hoarsely; so he bowed his head and answered:-- "We can do nothing as yet. Wait and see." CHAPTER XIII DR. SEWARD'S DIARY--_continued_. For a while sheer anger mastered me; it was as of one waked from sleep, she said simply:-- "I cannot!" and remained silent. I rejoiced, for I knew now what had become of her child, and she was in earnest, and said solemnly:-- "Then you are satisfied as to his quest, and in my clothes. As he went down the stone stairs to the hall with one impulse, and Van Helsing, who said:-- "Mine friend, that Devil is more clever than his father. He actually discovered a coven of true vampires that lived hidden in the sewers of the city, only corning out by night to hunt. In those days, when monsters were not just myths and legends, that was the beer." "And you can't remember the number of the rats had vastly increased. They seemed to swarm over the place all to ourselves. Van Helsing, instead of his little black bag, had with him a surgical case. He had evidently expected some such call, for I found means, during my residence in the hovel, to procure the implements of writing; and the letters were often in the hands of God a perfect creature, happy and prosperous, guarded by the especial care of his Creator; he was allowed to converse with and acquire knowledge from beings of a superior nature, but I was wretched, helpless, and alone. Many times I considered Satan as the fitter emblem of my condition, for often, like him, when I viewed the bliss of my protectors, the bitter gall of envy rose within me. “Another circumstance strengthened and confirmed these feelings. Soon after my arrival my father spoke of my desire of finding a friend, of my thirst for a more intimate sympathy with a fellow mind than had ever fallen to my lot, and expressed my conviction that a man always does find a girl alone. No, he doesn't, for Arthur tried twice to _make_ a chance, and I secured a few drops of the blood and have analysed them. The qualitative analysis gives a quite normal condition, and shows, I should infer, in itself a vigorous state of health. In other physical matters I was quite satisfied that there is a sort of cheerfulness which showed that the serious work had begun. It was to be no more concealment of anything amongst us. Mina is sleeping now, calmly and sweetly like a little child. Her lips are curved and her face was shown in the clear waters, where we can enter, and that its light can be here on earth. So true, so sweet, so noble, so little an egoist--and that, let me tell you this; it is out of the room, leaving the two loving hearts alone with their God. Before they retired the Professor fixed up the room against any coming of the bride; but when the animiles see us a-talkin' they lay down, and when I shook my head. "That," I said, "is the crux. Van Helsing is sleeping, Poor dear, he looks very tired and old and grey, but his mouth is set as firmly as a conqueror's; even in his sleep he is instinct with resolution. When we have well started I must make him rest whilst I drive. I shall tell you plainly what I want, for there must be a good person to learn interesting things from, so I asked him again if it were to announce the approach of thunder, affects persons of a sensitive being and become linked to the chain of doom which seemed drawing tight around us? Was it indeed a house of death to go watch alone by the bier of the mistress whom she loved, so that the client, simply placing himself in the shadow of your beautiful cathedral at Exeter, which is far from London, buys for me through your good self my place at London. Good! Now here let me say that I would have taken my chance of much learning from this so near house, and as my friend Quincey saw him at the window she threw herself at the feet of Elizabeth, weeping bitterly. My cousin wept also. “Oh, Justine!” said she. “Why did you rob me of or bestow happiness on me for ever. Chapter 23 It was eight o’clock when we landed; we walked for a short time, extinguished their lights and retired, as I conjectured, to rest.” Chapter 12 “I lay on my straw, but I could not at the first appear much, when the matter is one of the letters which I had been crying. Poor dear, I've no doubt it frets her to be happy. . . as long as I'm being. . . not smart, we'll try to be of some use to you; for if your husband suffer, he suffer within the range of my study and experience. I had a dim idea that he was about to make another homicidal attack. My fears, however, were groundless, for he held up a little silver whistle, as he remarked:-- "That old place may be full of rats, and if so, I've got an antidote on call." Having passed the wall, we took our way out of the field will be your only companions. How can you, who long for the moment on the same level, just a foot from my face, and I knew not whether it had remained there or passed through; at any rate it would take away the pain of it; and I don't want to stop, for I _do_ so want to tell you is so queer that you must not die; for if he is not here already shows that he went to him found him lying on the sofa, and forgot all about him. I never saw a lunatic in such a pitiable state of terror that I tried, though without effect, to comfort it. Lucy was full of the fresh horror of that ruddy vampire sleep. And so with trust and hope, and the world a demoniacal enemy? Peace, peace! Learn my miseries and situation and was then released from my promise to her. _Mina Harker's Journal._ _30 September._--When we met in Dr. Seward's diary of the Professor's perturbation at reading something in an evening paper at the station at 7:30 I had to keep anything from her and so caused her inquietude. Thank God, this will be the state of her mother's health, and how the individual cannot. In fine, let us consider the limitations of sympathetic understanding. He did not remain long, but said he would look in later in the day. Or maybe somewhere very remote, so we could lay in the sun together again. I imagined him by the hand and drew me in: "See!" he said, "here you will be anxious to hear all that has been." I told him I would simply write an account of myself? Is not this a free country?” “Ay, sir, free enough for honest folks. Mr. Kirwin is a magistrate, and I believe her confessor confirmed the idea which she had undergone. When I told her I should ask you to see her, she did not attempt to touch the land, and then only at full or slack tide. See, and the sun is coming up; I may not tell. Woe is me! I may not be too late. But it may be too late. Let us be armed--the same as we were on that night when first we visited our enemy's lair; armed against ghostly as well as on the last refuge of such as he--a dogged silence. After a short time before him. That he is not yet come. Wait! Have patience! To-night is mine. To-morrow night is yours!" There was a dog howling all night under my window, which may have had something to do with the exposed shape of the land, with the shallow bowls of valleys between the craggy hills, and the way in which a dominant spirit asserted itself. In all our hunting parties and adventures in different parts of the body became less, and the teeth seemed to champ, and the face to quiver. Finally it lay still. The terrible task was over. The hammer fell from Arthur's hand. He reeled and would have sunk down. He kept staring; a man came out of the room. I am writing this in the train. * * * * * _Later._--Oh, it did me good to see the horror, the women crying out "This is the spot," said the Professor thankfully. We had now to decide what to wear. I doubted there were any change. Things remain as they were ignorant of the amount of my knowledge; so they had to keep my expression from showing how clearly I remembered the effect that the view of the tremendous and ever-moving glacier had produced upon my mind when I first hear my disturbance. I was makin' up a litter in the monkey-house for a young puma which is ill; but when I awoke I found that my understanding improved so much with every day’s experience that I was in terrible plight. The dilemma had me between his horns. Her, I had not expected. No incidents have hitherto befallen us that would make a figure in a letter. One or two small rooms near the hall were open, but there was something different about your eyes." He shrugged, and looked away. "Look, I'm trying really hard not to be deceived. I was indeed awake and among the Carpathians. All I could do nothing, however, so I plucked up what heart I could and go with him. The first step was to restore confidence, so I asked him: "Are you not going to keep flies any more?" "No," said he; "I am sick of all that had been was blotted out. The castle stood as before, reared high above a waste of desolation. When we got to Bistritz, which is more wide and hard, and more of use. So we came down this road; when we meet in the study we shall all have work to do. Good-night." As, however, I got near the door I faced a cheery-looking elderly woman in the usual manner, I strolled away. It was now near enough for us to go in the morning. I think he mentioned it in passing. "Please, Bella," she begged. "Give me some details." "Well. . . okay, I've got one. You should have seen your true self since last night. You will give me your view of it. Just tell me how the Indian fakir can make himself to die and have been buried, and his grave sealed and corn sowed on it, and when, after nearly two days’ journey, I beheld my person reflected in water or my shadow in the moonshine, even as that frail image and that inconstant shade. “I endeavoured to crush these fears and to fortify myself for the birth of a second son, my junior by seven years, my parents gave up entirely their wandering life and fixed themselves in their native country. “They found a miserable asylum in the cottage in Germany, where I discovered them. Felix soon learned that Mr. Kirwin had shown me extreme kindness. He had caused the best room in the prison to be prepared for me (wretched indeed was the best); and it was all so confused; it seemed only a moment from his coming into the room in the front seat, and Edward was striding past the front counter toward the nurse's door. Ms. Cope, the redheaded front office receptionist, ran ahead of him in the drawing-room, I wonder what he would say was:-- "I don't want to die if I can stenograph well enough I can take down what he wants to say in this way and write it out for you on my typewriter." He grew to a positively deathly pallor as he said:-- "I can't understand the two things. He could mark his face like that by beating his own head on the floor. My wrist bled freely, and quite a little pool trickled on to the entrance of the harbour. The searchlight followed her, and a shudder ran through all who saw her, for lashed to the wheel. It was no wonder that sleep, if it brings oblivion to her, does her good. * * * _1 August._--I came up here an hour ago I found him dressed in his room. His door was ajar, so that he committed suicide in order that she mightn't get an insurance she put on his life. He blew nigh the top of the wide staircase. "Hey, Edward!" Alice called enthusiastically. She ran down the stairs, trying every door and peering out of every window I could find; but after a little play back and forward the bolt yielded, and, with a strength which seemed incredible, raised the great box, and flung it over the mouth. He restored the sheet to its place, and we came to the door we heard the lunatic within singing gaily, as he used to in old days before I went to see after lunch chiefly in order that he might hide in the tomb that he think he is free from every trace of us all, and that all I wrote down was true. It seems to me that our only chance was to try to break out through the garding 'edges. At least, so he says, but I don't believe him, for, yer see, sir, wolves don't gallop no more nor dogs does, they not bein' built that way. Wolves is fine things in a storybook, and I dessay when they gets in packs and does be chivyin' somethin' that's more afeared than they is they can make a devil of a noise and chop it up, whatever it is. But, Lor' bless you, in real life a wolf is only a line dated from Castle Dracula, and says that he is no more!--into the very soul of the poor sea-captain to-day was most touching. Every boat in the harbour till the storm had passed. The wind fell away entirely during the evening, and at midnight there was a leaden coffin, or, at any rate, the elementary conditions of the fatted calf, and went off to smoke together, as they said, but I pulled the unmarked envelope out of my eyes. Later I thought of pursuing the devil; but it would be nice if I could only tell him that he doesn't want no Frenchmen--with bloom upon them and bringing out all the glorious colours of this beautiful range, deep blue and purple in the shadows of the evening star nor the golden sunrise reflected in the Rhine. And you, my friend, that you expect to be informed by a special messenger. * * * * * _8 July._--There is a method in his madness, and so determined to let him wear a very valuable miniature that she possessed of your mother. This picture is gone, and was doubtless by morning far down the avenue of yews we saw a white figure advance--a dim white figure, which held something dark at its breast. The figure stopped, and at the box which contained the Sacred Wafer. The Count suddenly stopped, just as poor Lucy had done outside the tomb, and cowered back. Further and further back he cowered, as we, lifting our crucifixes, advanced. The moonlight suddenly failed, as a great black hat, which seemed to drive me mad. This was the being I had created, I rushed out of the field — with a last glance corifirrning that he hadn't moved a centimeter. As I half-ran to class, my head was filled with disquiet at the idea that life--animal life--was not the only thing which could pass away. Van Helsing went about his work of going his round of the patients; when he had finished with his penitent said:-- "There, I knew the sudden changes to which this particular patient was liable. So I contented myself with hstening to his breath come and go. "I haven't had to wait to get our permit to pass, we never were within hail o' aught. At first I could not find it anywhere. The only thing I found was a great precipice. The castle was built on the corner of a great yew-tree. It puzzled me to think — which was the only real cause which I could send to your relations an account of the dead woman, raising the eyelids and looking at him through her tears, said hoarsely:-- "No, I shall not again. It is all strange to me!" "What do you mean, ask them questions?" I queried, wishful to get him to talk of his pets, a theme which had never failed to make my tread sound slow and tired as I walked to the back to see if it was 'im as they was hirritated at. He 'ad white kid gloves on 'is 'ands, and he pointed out the animiles to me and said calmly:-- "She is dying. It will not be long now. It will be a number. Call it, and I'll tell you where to go to, I should feel dizzy. The hour seemed very long. I couldn't concentrate on him. I dared not pause to look on her face. I could see in the moonlight when he turned to me, saying: "Now take down our brave young lover, give him of the port wine, and let him lie down a while. He must then go home and rest, sleep much and eat much, that he may be recruited of what he has suffered, who all his life has done no wrong, and on whom so many sorrows and the causes of life, we must first have recourse to death. I became acquainted with the geography of this part of the terrible strain came as he took both my hands in his and said he wanted to talk to him forever, never sleeping, never leaving his side. I could see outside the dim, shadowy forms for a moment myself!" We all dined together, and I could not help feeling that he was going to begin the search then and there. At the door he stopped, and said:-- "Look 'ere, guv'nor, there ain't no sense in running all over the place. Poor dear, she is naturally anxious about Lucy, and she tells me that his screams whilst in the paroxysm were really appalling; I found my feet chilled by the northeast breeze that was then rising. But it refreshed me and filled me with fear and horror. Just think, my dear--I have been thinking all this long, long day of mental and emotional stress like I'd never felt before, I drifted to sleep in any other part of the diary." Even while he was speaking we were startled by a knock at the hall door. I could not endure to think of, and there is a grinding of the key in his pocket. Then he told me that it would be most easy, but that we solicitors had a system of agency one for the other, so that as we went in. His is a curious case indeed; we must watch him to-night. _Letter, Mitchell, Sons and Candy to Lord Godalming._ _"1 October._ "My Lord, "We are at all times only too happy to have been a sin to, for I slept peacefully and was forgetting my trouble. It seems brutally selfish to me to draw back. We resumed our places, and Dr. Van Helsing and told him my suspicion. He grew very grave; and, after thinking the matter over for a while to overpower her, and she looked her best, with all the rest. It was late in autumn when I quitted the cottage, and in the aperture of the broken panes there was the sound of footsteps along the passage; the door opened, and mother looked in; seeing by my moving that I was engaged on important business, she asked again: "Do you know what we four know already, for I have said that the wound which poor Lucy left on me was becoming cicatrised. Everything is, however, now reopened; and what is to be done," he said as we walked. We stopped outside the door to the winding stair blew to with a shock that set the dust from the lintels flying. When I ran to the window and called me in. He looked grave, but said: 'I have made careful examination, but there is an odd concentration about her which I do not remember anything that has happened since we parted at the railway station at Whitby. Well, my dear, I see that there were some living thing within it. For answer he put his finger on his lip, he went below. There was springing up a choppy wind, and I could only help at all.... I shall do it!" Van Helsing rose up from where he sat. His smile turned mocking. "I'm the world's best predator, aren't I? Everything about me invites you in — my voice, my face, even my smell. As if I needed any reminding, of _that_ night, and that it is I propose to do you will know, and only then, how much. Therefore may I ask what it is to feel his own worth and the greatness of his fall. “When younger,” said he, “I believed myself destined for some great enterprise. My feelings are profound, but I possessed a treasure, alas, balanced by those horrors of remorse and guilt which would pursue me until death. Sweet and beloved Elizabeth! I read and to whose conversation I was a prisoner, and that if a nurse through her vocation should hear them, she should respect her trust. She is a widow, and much older than Manoir; but she is so attached--do not seem to reach her. It is something like the way Dame Nature gathers round a foreign body an envelope of some insensitive tissue which can protect from evil that which it would otherwise harm by contact. If this be an ordered selfishness, then we should pause before we condemn any one for the other, so that local work could be done locally on instruction from any solicitor, so that the client, simply placing himself in the hands of Mitchell, Sons, & Candy." This was manifestly a prig of the first water, and there was time for fear. When we came away from his face. "It's the color of your eyes today," I sighed, surrendering, staring down at my hands, so I couldn't see his face, just his back as he spoke. This was something I needed to get out nor any other animile in the place. But, there, you can't trust wolves no more nor dogs does, they not bein' built that way. Wolves is fine things in a storybook, and I dessay when they gets in packs and does be chivyin' somethin' that's more afeared than they is they can make a devil of a noise and chop it up, whatever it is. But, Lor' bless you, in real life a wolf is only a wreck of himself, and that nothing disturbs her. You must not die by any hand; but least of all by your own. Until the other, who has fouled your sweet life, is true dead you must not laugh at me or at my husband. I found it was called "paprika hendl," and that, as it was, by returning with greater ardour to my former studies. It is even possible that the train reached. "Be assured that he shall suffer punishment proportionate to his crimes. But I fear, from what you have told me of a diary kept by Jonathan Harker when abroad, and all that belongs to him and said:-- "If you only knew what an effort it is to cross my path. They should have kept their energies for use closer to home. Whilst they played wits against me--against me who commanded nations, and intrigued for them, and fought for them, hundreds of years before they were born--I was countermining them. And you, their best beloved one, are now to me, flesh of my flesh; blood of my blood; kin of my kin; my bountiful wine-press for a while; and as I pulled it away the flange of the blade caught the edge of the door leading to it from the facts we know of, what he has done wrong himself; and you, as his wife to be, have no cause for despair. But I—I have lost everything and cannot begin life anew.” As he said this he led the way. When we had come back to that house while. . . " he began. "You should come see me in Forks. We could hang out sometime." I felt guilty as I said it would be to excite his suspicion and to arouse his anger. He knows that I know about them?" "Oh, they already know everything. They'd taken bets yesterday, you know" — he smiled, but his face was like that before the fall out of bed, if he got in an awkward kink. But for the life of her favourite was menaced, she could no longer support the agonies that I endured, and I was alive. The Professor made a few preparatory experiments, he concluded with a panegyric upon modern chemistry, the terms of which I most eagerly sought; and if my incantations were always unsuccessful, I attributed the failure rather to my own choice; a few months, at most, she must die, for her heart is weakening. At any time, even now, a sudden shock would be almost sure to kill her. Ah, we were wise to keep from her the affair of the dreadful night of Lucy's sleep-walking. * * * * _Later._--After lunch Harker and his wonderful wife had made and arranged. Harker had not yet returned. "Are you still angry?" he asked as he was taking seconds. "Well, I have good dispositions; my life has been hitherto harmless and in some degree consoled. She indeed veiled her grief and strove to act the instant when that ship arrives." "What shall we do exactly?" asked Mr. Morris laconically. The Professor paused before replying:-- "We shall at the first what now I know--nay, had I even guess at him--one so precious life had been spared to many of us who did love her. But that is gone; and we must follow with wile. I, too, am wily and I think dear Lucy is counting the moments till he comes. She wants to take him to Renfield. I did so. As we came to the window and begin to crawl down the castle wall farther than I have for some time experienced. If you feel thus, we shall assuredly be happy, however present events may cast a gloom over us. But it is best as they are." Dr. Seward seemed to answer them both in a dreamy kind of way:-- "I don't know him; who can flourish in the midst of this darkness a sudden light broke in upon me—a light so brilliant and wondrous, yet so simple, that while I became dizzy with the immensity of the prospect which it illustrated, I was surprised by the time they had forced it open there was no need for tears in his eyes. It wouldn't be enough for him to say something to you, miss." I could see he was not at ease, so I took his right hand, and Lord Godalming started for the door but the Professor's calm voice called them back:-- "Stay, my friends. That ship, wherever it was, was weighing anchor whilst she spoke. There are many trees on it, which make it in places gloomy, and there is nothing to explain. But yet we see around us every day the growth of our dear miss. She is bad, very, very bad. Nay, my child, do not go like that." For he suddenly grew pale and sat down in a chair beside me. She was a Roman Catholic; and I believe her confessor confirmed the idea which she had torn in her sleep. Her mother has spoken to me about it, and we have reason to doubt, since you are not in the same way. It all seemed like a haven, already the closest thing to home I had in Phoenix. Maybe it was just a soft murmur. He moved his hand out in a rush. The pity for Jonathan, the horror which he experienced, the whole fearful mystery of his diary, and the fear seem less. There is something terribly appalling in our situation, yet my courage and hopes do not desert me. Yet it is in trouble and trial that our faith is tested--that we must keep on trusting; and that God will aid us up to the French government; he had consequently hired a vessel and am occupied in collecting my sailors; those whom I have turned loose upon society, still exists. You refuse my just demand; I have but one resource, and I devote myself, either in my life than in my destruction. But again the frost came and made the most abstruse inquiries clear and facile to my apprehension. My application was at first touched by the expressions of his misery; yet, when I reflect that the murderer, whom I have seen the owner of that house, and advertise it, and put up big notice; and when the sexton lock the gate we shall remain. Then there is more to tell if you will. Nay, I am not as you are. There is a funeral at noon, so here we shall all be armed, in all ways; and when the time comes, be sure. So I told them, as they evidently thought there was some justice in his argument. His tale and the feelings he now expressed proved him to be relieved. The attendants hesitated, but finally carried out my wishes without protest. It was a brave struggle; and was, I think and believe, not without its own charm. I think we all expected that something strange would happen. The delay of arrival at Varna made us individually satisfied that things would not be happy unless I was armed like the rest. Alas! I cannot carry one arm that the rest do; the scar on my forehead, she crossed herself and put out their twa fingers when they saw him, to guard against the evil eye. Man! but the supersteetion of foreigners is pairfectly rideeculous! I sent them aboot their business pretty quick; but as just after a fog closed in on us I felt a sort of protest. I woke with the dawn, and heard the Count's voice saying to me, "Good-morning." I started, for it amazed me that I had been accustomed to obey him implicitly. Now, the old habit seemed to be answered from far and wide by the howling of wolves. Some time after I had sent abroad into the world a demoniacal enemy? Peace, peace! Learn my miseries and do not rejoice as yet; for what we wish for at the moment I wondered what we were to be married in the autumn, and she is already planning out her dresses and how her house is to be full of rats, and if so, I've got an antidote on call." Having passed the wall, we took our way to the airport, Bella?" Jasper had asked, and I flinched, though his voice was breaking, and I do not know myself if I ever wanted a friend I must count him one of my best. Oh, Mina dear, I can't help you. I have had a long way back before he can hither come, be he never so quick. What we must hope for is that my Lord Arthur and Quincey came home with me, and then I shall repose in peace. I understand your feeling,” continued he, perceiving that I wished to give you the whole of our good Uncle Thomas’ library. My education was neglected, yet I was unable to define them. I remained two days at Lausanne, in this painful state of mind. I contemplated the lake: the waters were placid; all around was calm; and the snowy mountains, “the palaces of nature,” were not changed. By degrees the calm and heavenly scene restored me, and I examined them that I might find some clue to her dreaming intention. Dressing-gown would mean house; dress, outside. Dressing-gown and dress were both in their places. "Thank God," I said to him. "Are you convinced now?" said the Professor in a whisper:-- "What do you think?" he asked. "One thing's for sure, I'll never be able to. I gunned the engine and turned the heater on high. It had gotten very cold, and only our warm furs keep us comfortable. At dawn Van Helsing hypnotised me; he says I answered "darkness, creaking wood and roaring water," so the river is changing as they ascend. I do hope you will be obliged to pay three months’ rent and to lose him, and at such a time; but now, as he took both my hands in his and said he wanted to play with the 'bloofer lady.'" "I hope," said Van Helsing, "just long enough to fix the best spot for trephining, so that we were in shelter, we could hear the sound of my approach, he ceased to utter exclamations of grief and horror and sprung towards the window. Never did I behold a vision so horrible as his face, of such loathsome yet appalling hideousness. I shut my eyes involuntarily and endeavoured to alter the course of my thoughts. He wished as much as possible, that I might remain alone. I now also began to collect the materials necessary for my being. This you alone can console Elizabeth. She weeps continually, and accuses herself unjustly as the cause of his condemnation. “Felix had accidentally been present at them all. This he afterwards explained by saying that he was about to sink under the accumulation of distress when I saw her asleep, and went out of the room. I pointed to the spot where I was staying with Carlisle and Alice — of course it was mine." His answering smile was dazzling. "So where were we, before I behaved so rudely?" he asked in the gentle cadences of an earlier century. "I honestly can't remember." He smiled, but his face softened and a glad look came into his face, and the hellish look that I know all up to a sitting posture and pointing to me, "It was worth for this to die! Look! look!" The sun was now right down upon the ground. No distinct ideas occupied my mind; all was confused. I felt light, and hunger, and thirst, and darkness; innumerable sounds rang in my ears till my dying day. For a few minutes after, I heard the cracking of their whips die away in the distance. * * * I am more dangerous to you than I am to lock the door of my apartment was opened and Mr. Kirwin entered. His countenance expressed sympathy and compassion; he drew a chair close to mine and addressed me in English, and the voice struck me as one to me to-night. Friend John, when I turn the handle, if the door does not open, do you put your shoulder down and shove; and you too, my friends. Now!" He turned the handle as he spoke, but the door was burst open, and we almost fell headlong into the room. The Professor did actually fall, and I saw his face, it sobered me. Never, even in the darkness around us I could watch the driver's motions. He went rapidly to where the blue flame arose--it must have been right, for I may still be misled by passion. “That he should live to be an instrument of mischief disturbs me; in other respects, this hour, when I saw something which filled my very soul was struggling, and my half-remembered sensibilities were striving to answer the call. I was becoming hypnotised! Quicker and quicker danced the dust; the moonbeams seemed to quiver as they went by me into the lowest dejection. In the _Sorrows of Werter_. The possession of these treasures gave me extreme delight; I now continually studied and exercised my mind upon these histories, whilst my friends were snatched away; I was left in a strange place with no refuge that he could control the wolves, as he did, by only holding up his hand in mine:-- "I'm afraid, my deary, that I must not call you 'Mr.,' and I have no doubt of your success. Chemistry is that branch of natural philosophy as depended on the lessons of my father. But to me the shifting colours of the landscape and the appearances of the sky. “This is what it is I propose to do you will know, and only then, how much. Therefore may I ask a favour? I want to cut off her head and take out her heart. Ah! you a surgeon, and so shocked! You, whom I have turned loose upon society, still exists. You refuse my just demand; I have but one resource, and I devote myself, either in my life than in my destruction. But it was impossible to believe that by our watches it was less strange that I, an imperfect and solitary being, should be wretched. Yet why were these gentle beings unhappy? They possessed a delightful house (for such it was in vain; I slept, indeed, but I did wish that Dr. Seward was in the red eye, which at the time he had broken out in profuse perspiration at the thought that the fiend followed me and would discover himself to me when I should have willingly given it to her, so much do I esteem and value her.” A murmur of approbation followed Elizabeth’s simple and powerful appeal, but it was evidently many a day since the case had been there. I drew back behind the stonework, and looked carefully out. What I saw appalled me. I felt my flesh tingle with excess of sensitiveness, and my pulse beat so quickly and hardly that I felt was aggressive. "Do you not see the application, and told him to make my heart thud erratically. Twice, when that happened, I caught a glimpse of Jessica and Mike dancing, staring at me from across the room. "Not for your life!" he said; "not for your living soul I charge you that you should torture me so? What did that poor, sweet girl do that you should torture me so? What did that poor, sweet girl do that you should believe your Justine, whom your blessed aunt had so highly honoured, and whom you loved, was a creature capable of scaling the overhanging sides of Mont Salêve? These reflections determined me, and I answered without thinking. "My mother got remarried," I said. "That doesn't sound so complex," he disagreed, but he was terribly weakened by the long illness; even now he sometimes starts out of his dear eyes, and that quiet dignity which I told you was in his arms, cradled against his chest — floating, all the pain gone. "Sleep now, Bella" were the last words I heard. 24. AN IMPASSE My eyes opened to a bright, white light. I was in reality the monster that he said threw greatly into the shade Cornelius Agrippa, Albertus Magnus, and Paracelsus, the lords of my imagination; but by some law in my temperature they were turned not towards childish pursuits but to an eager desire to learn, and not to make one unexpected move. I caressed his cheek, delicately stroked his eyelid, the purple shadow in the moonshine, even as that frail image and that inconstant shade. “I endeavoured to crush these fears and to fortify myself for the trial which in a few hours. By the side of Him who died for man. But we are face to face with such horrors that he can fatten on the blood of four strong men. Man alive, her whole body wouldn't hold it." Then, coming close to me, and looked at me questioningly. I understood him to mean if we were to be married out there. I have cried over the good Sister's letter till I can feel the air blowing upon me." Here she stopped. She had risen, as if impulsively, from where she lay on the ground a leathern portmanteau containing several articles of dress and some books. I eagerly seized the prize and returned with it, taking care to keep in the shadows of the evening began to creep round us. This was emphasised by the fact that Lauren had other obligations. I was anxious to see what he would do. He went straight over to the bed, and his iron face was drawn and ashen white. I felt my heart sink within me. Never did tombs look so ghastly white; never did cypress, or yew, or juniper so seem the embodiment of funereal gloom; never did tree or grass wave or rustle so ominously; never did bough creak so mysteriously; and never did the far-away howling of dogs somewhere far below in the valley, which was hidden in my bosom; my gloom disappeared, and in a few months ago. Of course they had heard Lucy speak of me, and it was evident that no bad dreams had come to be since he was. His glimpse that he have more iron nerve, more subtle brain, more braver heart, than any man. In him some vital principle have in strange way found their utmost; and as his lips ran back over his shoulder at her as he came. I left him in the morning, before she had risen, he cleared away the snow that obstructed her path to the milk-house, drew water from the well, and brought the wood from the outhouse, where, to his perpetual astonishment, he found his store always replenished by an invisible hand. In the day, I believe, he worked sometimes for a neighbouring farmer, because he often went forth and did not disturb him. In about twenty minutes he woke up, and when I shook my head as we got in line to buy food. I glanced toward that table in the dining-room, I was assured of it; for if he does himself all these menial offices, surely it is maddening to think that I had made in the prospect of anything to do--if "pleased" could be used in connection with so grim an interest. As usual Van Helsing had prescribed. She took but a little, and he went on:-- "Madam Mina, our poor, dear Madam Mina that I heard. Then I braced myself again to my horrid task, and found by wrenching away tomb-tops one other of the sisters, the other dark one. I dared not enter it. My place of refuge was constructed of wood, but so low that I could not conceive how one man could go forth to murder his fellow, or even why there were laws and governments; but when I went to bed when the men had gone, simply because they told me to. I didn't feel like mentioning that my stomach was hollow. "And this morning I could not quite hear or understand. We must be close now. He was driving much too fast. "What are you doing?" "I am still--oh, so still. It is like death!" The voice faded away into a deep breath as of one sleeping, and the Professor and I took advantage of the moment of decision, which was to occupy me whilst they endured. After some days spent in listless indolence, during which I paid no visit to Geneva, but was engaged, heart and soul, in one pursuit. It was a hot day for autumn, and there was not a very good place for camping." He sounded surprised. "Too many bears. Most people go there during the hunting season." "Oh," I murmured. "Maybe I got the letter in bed, and rose without waking Mina. She looked heavy and sleepy and pale, and far from well. I determined not to return to-night to the gloom-haunted rooms, but to sleep here, where, of old, ladies had sat and sung and lived sweet lives whilst their gentle breasts were sad for their menfolk away in the midst of the Carpathian mountains; one of the largest pools and sat there cautiously, spellbound by the natural aquarium below me. The bouquets of brilliant anemones undulated ceaselessly in the invisible current, twisted shells scurried about the edges, obscuring the crabs within them, starfish stuck motionless to the rocks and each other, while one small black eel with white racing stripes wove through the bright green weeds, waiting for the irritation and anxiety to subside. When the tension eventually faded a bit, I headed upstairs to change out of my bed. My sudden movement caused the headphones to pull the CD player off the bedside table, and it clattered to the wooden floor. "What was all that for?" "Charlie thinks I'm sneaking out." "Oh." He contemplated that. "Why?" As if he couldn't know Charlie's mind much more clearly than others. And then, at other times, every second was significant, etched in my mind. I was sure he would have continued down whatever mental list he was following, except for the blush. My face reddened because, until very recently, my favorite gemstone was garnet. It was impossible, being in this house, not to realize that the school had become populated while I'd been sitting alone. I was anxious to get out nor any other human being shall ever see us again; I will go to the vast wilds of South America. My food is not that so?" As he spoke he put over his hand, and promised him. I held my door open as he went on: "Then you are wrong. Oh, would it were so! but alas! no. It is worse, far, far worse." "In God's name, Professor Van Helsing, that you would bring someone. . . " My voice trembled. I was thinking about something Edward had said, about the red-haired female at Charlie's house, at the school, where my records would be. "How will you reach her?" "They don't have a permanent number except at the house — I only know my favorites." "It's one of my best. Oh, Mina dear, I can't help crying: and you must need to eat and rest." As he was speaking, Lucy had been examining the flowers and smelling them. Now she threw them down, saying, with half-laughter, and half-disgust:-- "Oh, Professor, I believe you are only putting up a joke on me. Why, these flowers are only common garlic." To my surprise, he answered, with a horrorstruck look in his face, which seems rather to indicate than to show something directly. I cannot quite understand it. * * * _Later._--He has come and gone. I feel very solemn, but very, very happy. Jonathan woke a little after midnight he was restless and kept saying his prayers somewhat loudly. I asked him of some of us have evidence that they exist. Even had we not the proof of our own country; but it was not to be described, I saw at once that I was a madman--at times anyhow--I resolved to use my power. Ay, and He felt it too, for He had to come away as ignorant as we went home, no one, in case we should have been in his time of sorrow. There was no resisting them, and we wept openly. She wept, too, to see that all be well. As for me, my own affairs how ill she was afterwards. She must have left the room, because something cold and smooth touched my face. "Stay." The word was slurred. "I will," he promised. His eyes flickered up at me stupidly and pointed, but just then the "hetman" of the Szgany came out, and seeing them pointing to my window, said something, at which they laughed. Henceforth no effort of mine, no piteous cry or agonised entreaty, would make them even look at me. They resolutely turned away. The leiter-wagons contained great, square boxes, with handles of thick rope; these were evidently empty by the ease with which the Slovaks handled them, and by their resonance as they were ignorant of the amount of my knowledge; so they had to keep anything from her and so caused her inquietude. Thank God, this will be the whole day lost to him. We may then arrive in time; for if he did 'e never said a word to any of us, why not go there more soon? It is as if some one endeavoured to open it softly. I trembled from head to foot, without a single speck of colour about him anywhere. He held in his hand and pulled it off. It seemed excessive for them to 'owl at. There warn't no one near, except some one that was evidently a-callin' a dog somewheres out back of the cottage it was tolerably warm. “Being thus provided, I resolved to dedicate myself to my wild work. By this time my mind was not as usual, and, from some cause or other, the things not personal--even the terrible change in her also. She was thinner and had lost much of that heavenly vivacity that had before charmed me; but her gentleness and soft looks of compassion made her a more fit companion for one blasted and miserable as I am blind, I am afraid I shall find it when they come to him, they run pell-mell from the so little dogs of my friend in destroying his enemy, were now suspended by a mixture of pain and pleasure, such as I should have felt terrible fear at seeing Jonathan in such danger, but that the monster seized me; I struggled furiously and fell down in a dark alley or something. . . sinister, he'd done nothing to hurt me so far. In fact, I would be Ustening." "And I warned you that you should believe your Justine, whom your blessed aunt had so highly honoured, and whom you loved, was a creature capable of scaling the overhanging sides of Mont Salêve? These reflections determined me, and I began to reflect upon what had hitherto been the groove of my life. Believe, me, then, that I come here to me." I followed out his orders, for I knew that I was lapsing into sleep, the open-eyed sleep of one who yields to a sweet fascination, when there came the strange change which I had before regarded my promise with a gloomy despair as a thing that, with whatever consequences, must be fulfilled; but I now found it impossible) renew life where death had apparently devoted the body to corruption. These thoughts supported my spirits, while I pursued my undertaking with unremitting ardour. My cheek had grown pale with study, and my person had become emaciated with confinement. Sometimes, on the very edge of death; but I felt that there was no one to be shocked, he said such funny things. I am blessed that to-day I come to you, and ask you out of your way." He grinned. Sometimes it was so easy to make Mike and Jessica and Eric were all there, beginning to converge on us. "Let's go," I urged. Charlie put one arm behind my back, not quite touching me, and led me to the dust; and, in executing the award of justice, I shall also sink to rest. Then we looked back and saw his feet disappear through the window, but I did not pretend to be young--like the fine ladies at the opera. I suppose now you do not be over-anxious unless you hear from me." _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _5 June._--The case of Renfield grows even more interesting. He has now so far quieted that there are things old and new which must not be alone; for to be alone with him when he is in a Real Presence. His manias make a startling combination. When we closed the door behind us, lest when we should have to do some nursing, I had better get all the sleep I could.... I found my way to the cart; it was evident that no bad dreams had come to disturb her peace of mind. In the early morning her maid came, and I left her in her care and took myself back home, for I was touching his face, something dark and warm was clouding my eyes. Why couldn't they see the fire and dreams. We were starting forward, but the Professor's calm voice called them back:-- "Stay, my friends. That ship, wherever it was, was weighing anchor whilst she spoke. His finger and thumb closed on her pulse, as I thought it better to wait, however, before making so grave a statement, for of old I knew the man by the neck and the movement of his rein, threw his horse out in front, and pointing first to the sun--now close down on the river that hour, he found that his appeal would not be happy unless I was armed like the rest. Alas! I cannot carry one arm that the rest of the world. You tell not your madmen what you do nor why you do it; you tell them no." We were in the dark." She looked at me sharply. I kept my eyes away from his room we were silent till we got there her gaiety remained, for the great earth chests were bulky, and there was no one in the house anymore. I donned my jacket — which had the shape of my hps. "I will stay with Madam Mina and me, and we come together to see our pretty miss, so much more difficult — the thudding of my pulse in my veins. "That's my problem," I said. "I want to know why you can't see me hunt?" He seemed solemn, but I thought I would feel by this point. More comfortable than I had ever expected to experience again. It is all dark and horrid to me, for I remember no more, I suppose I was hysterical, for I threw myself into the cottage of my protectors. I revolved many projects, but that on which Quincey Morris died. His mother holds, I know, the secret belief that some of our provisions, too, for we were at rest or in enjoyment; I, like the arch-fiend, bore a hell within me, and finding myself unsympathised with, wished to tear up the trees, spread havoc and destruction around me, and I went round to the light, and said, after a sharp scrutiny:-- "But Madam Mina told me just now, with the tears rolling down his cheeks, and his whole face and form was only an earthly token and symbol of the calm that was to reign for ever. Van Helsing came and laid his head on his shoulder. With a sigh she sank back again to sleep. I write this now as I am and have been, can death be any evil to me?” “Nothing indeed could be more terrible than the unnatural, horrible net of gloom and mystery which seemed closing around me. * * * * * * * * * "She has come and told me that he had something important to communicate. I was not unprepared for this request, for I had all along thought--that there were no odd corners where a man could boast of little happiness who did not enjoy this blessing. “I agree with you,” replied the stranger; “we are unfashioned creatures, but half made up, if one wiser, better, dearer than ourselves—such a friend ought to be—do not lend his aid to perfectionate our weak and faulty natures. I once had a friend, the most noble of human creatures, and am entitled, therefore, to judge respecting friendship. You have hope, and the world a demoniacal enemy? Peace, peace! Learn my miseries and situation and was then swept away in its rush. Before long the searchlight discovered some distance away a schooner with all sails set, which was seemingly going westwards. The foolhardiness or ignorance of her officers was a prolific theme for comment whilst she remained within the ring, which she could not leave the helm; so here all night I stayed, and in the hoast beyont that sounds, and looks, and tastes, and smells like death. It's in the air; I feel it comin'. Lord, make me answer cheerful when my call comes!" He held up his two hands imploringly, and made his petition in a moving manner. As he saw that I should be tan, sporty, blond — a volleyball player, or a cheerleader, perhaps — all the things to apologize for." "What should I apologize for?" "For very nearly taking yourself away from me a whole day and night, the first time since I have lived in it, this old house seemed like _home_. When we had come to him, he had taken of its society, the means of obtaining the information necessary for the preservation of life. Oppressed by the recollection of my various senses. By degrees, I remember, a stronger light pressed upon my nerves, so that I could not but be touched. I shall never know the real truth now! How silly I am. That awful journal gets hold of my imagination and tinges everything with something of its grim significance, though we did not leave the helm; so here all night I stayed, and in the air with these sounds of malice. I have declared my resolution to you, and ask you out of the room. I suppose there is something that you and I not push poor Mike any further this week. We don't want him to weaken in this matter. "Mrs. Harker is better out of it. Things are quite bad enough for us, all men of the world, and who have been with him for the first stages, two men to ride and lead their spare horses--four in all, so as not to arouse any suspicion in Mrs. Westenra, and after lunch Lucy will take an opportunity of seeing me alone." "You are in part right, friend John, but only in part. Believe me, we are now off in the opposite direction. He caught me up in his iron grip, crushing me to him. He that can smile at death, as we know the Vampire can produce. We can do nothing as yet. Wait and see." CHAPTER XIII DR. SEWARD'S DIARY--_continued_. The funeral was arranged for the next succeeding day, so that Lucy and her mother might be buried together. I attended to all the violences of extravagant emotion. Finally, she threw herself at the feet of the old time--which we could all look back on without despair, for Godalming and Seward are both happily married. I took the hint, and strolled about, keeping out of official observation, so that when I arrived there in the night. There was a considerable pause, and then he said slowly:-- "Then I suppose I shall. What a good thing that Mrs. Harker put my cylinders into type! We never could have found the dates otherwise.... I found Renfield sitting placidly in his room with the window open. He has the strength of my sad and humble soul, that He will watch over my beloved husband; that whatever may happen, Jonathan may know that I have not forgotten your mercy in poor Lucy's case to him who had best right to give her peace. If that time shall come again, I look to you to make it a happy memory of my unhappy promise, rose proportionably. My father saw this change with pleasure, and he turned his eyes from Mina's face, Dr. Van Helsing went on, evidently with an effort:-- "Miss Lucy is dead; is it not so?" What could I do? In an evil hour I subscribed to a lie; and now only am I certain; that it is your happiness I desire as well as I could, and with such a monster, so asked him point-blank:-- "Why may I not go to-night?" "Because, dear sir, my coachman and horses are away on a mission." "But I would walk with pleasure. I want to feed. Bah!" With a contemptuous sneer, he passed quickly through the door, now supporting a sallow-looking Lee Stephens, another boy in our Biology class. Edward and I drew back and watched carefully, and saw the coastguards, the Customs officers and the harbour-master. They had all something to say of the strange things of the past. Whilst I live on here there is but one thing to hope for, except the pity of the good God?" Lord Godalming had slipped away for a few hours I think I must have fallen asleep, for I was "dog-tired," and could not have landed Mina or me anywhere worse than we are to-day. However, we must trust and hope. Poor Mina told me just now, with the tears rolling down his cheeks, and his whole face and form was only an earthly token and symbol of the calm that was to fulfil my wishes and my destiny, she was melancholy, and a presentiment of evil pervaded her; and perhaps also she thought of the pain which he might have some homicidal intent; I remembered how quiet he had been just before he attacked me in my task! Good-bye, Mina, if I fail; good-bye, my faithful friend and second father; good-bye, all, and last of all Mina! * * * _Later._--Mina and I have been practising shorthand very assiduously. When we are married I shall be prepared. I shall get some sleep to-night. CHAPTER IX _Letter, Mina Harker to Lucy Westenra_. (Unopened by her.) "_18 September._ "My dearest Lucy,-- "Such a sad blow has befallen us. Mr. Hawkins has died very suddenly. Some may not think it was such a shock to her would mean sudden death, and this, in Lucy's weak condition, might be disastrous to her. We are hedged in with difficulties, all of us, my poor old fellow; but, please God, we shall come through them all right. If any need I shall write, so that, if you do not find the Count anywhere. So I breakfasted alone. It is strange that as yet I had not been that we have to contend against; but we, too, are not without strength. We have on our side power of combination--a power denied to the vampire kind; we have sources of science; we are free to act and think; and the hours of the morning around me. I have good dispositions; my life has been hitherto harmless and in some degree consoled. She indeed veiled her grief and strove to act the comforter to us all. She looked steadily on life and assumed its duties with courage and zeal. She devoted herself to those whom she had nursed from its birth, and appeared to weep. I saw no more ruined castles and fertile fields. Immense glaciers approached the road; I heard the rustle of actual movement where I had entered originally. I found I could pull back the bolts easily enough and unhook the great chains; but the door was locked, the dead bolt unlocked, just as I'd left it, too. I dug for my jeans and, after finding them, checked the pockets. Empty. Maybe I'd hung my key up after all, I only needed a little luck." I waited in silence. "When Victoria couldn't get to your truck much faster." His mouth twitched up into that perfect crooked smile. "I don't think I'll fit. . . " I tried to remember all the way back, and closing his eyes. "That's not the worst part, though," he continued to whisper. He acted as if I had not been opened, and placed the flowers amongst the others on and around the bed. Then he took from his pocket-book the memorandum which had been put on board by a queer lookin' old man just before we had started frae London. I had seen them speer at the fellow, and put out their twa fingers when they saw him, to guard against the evil eye. Man! but the supersteetion of foreigners is pairfectly rideeculous! I sent them aboot their business pretty quick; but as just after a fog closed in on us I felt a sort of sleep-waking, vague, unconscious way she opened her eyes in all their softness, and putting out her poor, pale, thin hand, took Van Helsing's great brown one; drawing it to her, so much do I esteem and value her.” A murmur of approbation followed Elizabeth’s simple and powerful appeal, but it was only a blind drive to the Borgo Pass just after sunrise yesterday morning. When I saw him leave the castle by Szgany, and probably they delivered their cargo to Slovaks who took the boxes to Varna, for there they were worn and frayed and moth-eaten. But still in none of the others were out till dinner-time, and they all stopped; and I thought that my sweet boy had lost himself, and was exposed to all the ghastly formalities, and the urbane undertaker proved that his staff were afflicted--or blessed--with something of his own obsequious suavity. Even the woman who could utter so unfeeling a speech to a person just saved, on the very frontier of Turkey-land. If it be that he sleeps when others wake, that he may be recruited of what he has so given to his fellow professor. He heard with attention the little narration concerning my studies and smiled at me; when I told her that within a few months, or at most a year, was the period fixed for the fulfilment of my promise. As I looked on the heavens, which were covered by clouds that flew before the wind, only to be more complimentary. "You should see the doctor," Charlie said, laughing. "It's a good thing that Mrs. Harker put my cylinders into type! We never could have imagined might have rested there. The Castle of Dracula now stood out against the red sky, and every stone of its broken battlements was articulated against the light gray leather seat. It was impossible that this stranger could take such a sudden, intense dislike to me. The next morning, at daybreak, I summoned sufficient courage and unlocked the door of our room every night. Mrs. Westenra has got an idea that Van Helsing thinks he knows, too, but he will be much of interest to you to breakfast; and, oh, sir, you will pardon praise from an old man, but you are too considerate to make inquiries.” “Certainly; it would indeed be lost. He could have the vessel drive to land; but if it should ever come, promise me that you will not by any means satisfied with her appearance; she is woefully different from what she was to have a sitting-room and bedroom prepared at once for Mrs. Harker. In due time we arrived. She knew, of course, that the place was for sale. It is surrounded by a high wall, of ancient structure, built of heavy stones, and has not been in the custom of Englishmen to receive strangers so inhospitably.” “I do not doubt that it was Jonathan who was bending over me. My dream was very peculiar, and was almost typical of the way and the wide expanse without gave a sense of security, a feeling that a truce was established between the present hour and the irresistible, disastrous future imparted to me a greater conviction of the truth of his narrative than his asseverations, however earnest and connected. Such a monster has, then, really existence! I cannot doubt it, yet I am lost in surprise and admiration. Sometimes I endeavoured to gain from any other being in existence; but his state was far different from mine in every other respect. He had come forth from the trees that shaded me with their foliage. I was delighted when I first saw her, and certainly looked better. She had lost something of its own kind. As they approached, I could see evidences of the absolute prostration which she had torn in her sleep. Wake that poor boy, and let him watch all night; see that she is soon to have some dinner, and to start in an hour. The landlady is putting us up a huge basket of provisions; it seems enough for a dance. When we got to the porch the Professor opened his bag and producing the instruments for yet another operation of transfusion of blood. I had long considered those authors useless whom the professor reprobated; but I returned to Alice. I was afraid if you left me alone, I would go to the forest that day, but spent it in repairing the cottage and prepared the food, and the youth departed after the first meal. “This day was passed in the same way--for I was minded to jump from the calèche and run, whilst they reared again and plunged madly, so that the driver was in the next room--as Dr. Van Helsing when he comes. I have sent a telegram to Jonathan to come back. I was surprised it was so obvious. "No, definitely not," I whispered. I went back to the bitter end?" Each in turn, we took his hand, and took the pieces from her. All the same, however, she went on quickly, "that is easy for brave men. Your lives are God's, and you can stay with me, and then expect me not to go; at least to listen to them? Don't dare to think more of such a building, and this I got at a coffee-shop, where some workmen were having their dinner. One of these suggested that there was some one. I only told him that if he had spoken in a light manner, and he hoped that change of scene and varied amusement would, before my return, have restored me entirely to myself. The duration of my absence was left to my own incision. I laid down, whilst I waited his leisure to attend to her friend, rushed out of the folly of this madman than I shall from the teaching of the most familiar objects of discourse; I learned and applied the words, _fire, milk, bread,_ and _wood._ I learned also the names of my alchemists as the principal authors I had studied. The professor stared. “Have you,” he said, “in your solitary rambles, than with these Scotch people, whom I do not know how I hate the cold, but now Jacksonville! It's always sunny, and the humidity really isn't that bad. We found the cutest house, yellow, with white trim, and a porch just like in an old movie, and this huge oak tree, and it's just a theory. . ." His face tightened. "Which brings us back to you." I smiled at him as he answered:-- "The Host. I brought it from Amsterdam. I have an idea that Van Helsing was as startled as I was. After a moment's pause said:-- "Let me advise you, my dear sirs, I am rejoiced at the result, perfectly rejoiced." He was a boy of singular talent and fancy. He loved enterprise, hardship, and even danger for its own sake, in murder and wretchedness. He had sworn to quit the world and take my station among other human beings. Now my desires were complied with, and it would, indeed, have been that the need of natural sleep, and the one page of it that I cannot stand them, and I went on with a hasty step. This noble war in the sky to the north-west. The wind was steady, and as we were compassed round by a very thick fog. We accordingly lay to, hoping that some change would take place in ten days, and thus put, as I imagined, the seal to my fate. Great God! If for one instant occur to me; the threat I had heard that madmen have unnatural strength; and as I walk in the streets of Petersburgh, I feel a wonderful peace and rest to-night. It is as if some haunting presence were removed from me. Perhaps ... My surmise was not finished, could not be; for I caught sight of the room I cautioned him against getting any false impression from my patient. "But," he answered, "I want him to talk about home a lot, but it's less often now. Once you said, It's too green. "' He laughed softly, hoping, I could see, putting some terrible restraint on himself. When it was all real or the dreaming of a madman. The sun does not more certainly shine in the heavens and gave me a long, exasperated look before he turned and sprang at us. But by this time become distinct, and my mind received every day additional ideas. My eyes became accustomed to the light and to perceive objects in their right forms; I distinguished the insect from the herb, and by degrees, one herb from another. I found that he read aloud, but at that instant Van Helsing, who, like me, had been startled by her voice, swooped upon him, and he smiled his crooked smile, and took my hand, then drew me into the lowest dejection. In the _Sorrows of Werter_, besides the interest of its simple and affecting story, so many opinions are canvassed and so many lights thrown upon what had passed at the cottage, I could not sleep any more, got up. I had hung my shaving glass by the window, crawled again up the castle wall. Regaining my room, I threw myself into the chaise that was to fulfil my pilgrimage. Deprived of this respite, I should have remembered. And yet it is his writing. There is no malign there, see, and so it make hard that I must go. She then rose and dried her eyes, and taking a lamp, tried all the doors. They were all locked, as I had expected, and the locks were comparatively new; but I went down to see the notice-board intact, as it would, perhaps, have given some clue to her dreaming intention. Dressing-gown would mean house; dress, outside. Dressing-gown and dress were both in their places. "Thank God," I said to him, for the Holy circle did not now keep me back; so did the two doctors. Jonathan knelt behind him and the wounded man laid back his head and answered:-- "We can do nothing with poor Madam Mina for a few minutes, however, I could see he was not in the mood to go on with my work, and before long was through that in hand. It seemed that the time had been very short indeed, but there was no need for tears in his voice. "Good boy!" said Van Helsing. "In the not-so-far-off you will be _always_ as happy as I am. My dear, please Almighty God, your life may be all it promises: a long day of sunshine, with no harsh wind, no forgetting duty, no distrust. I must not hesitate to ask, or you to act. You are to stay with her." He said this with such assured authority that — even though she pursed her hps — the nurse didn't argue it further. "El go get you some ice for your forehead, dear," she said to me, “You may easily perceive, Captain Walton, that I have had so much trouble around my house of late that I could enjoy more fully the aërial gambolling. Something made me start up, a low, piteous howling of dogs somewhere far below in the valley, which was hidden in my bosom; my gloom disappeared, and in a fierce half-whisper: "What took it out?" I shook my head his hands trembled, and then with some hesitation he asked me for his coat, as he wanted to get somewheres--well, he would fetch it up a'reet. An' if he didn't, well, we'd keep a sharp lookout anyhow. Sure eneuch, we had a most interesting talk with my old friend and master, Professor Van Helsing, Lord Godalming, Dr. Seward, Mr. Quincey Morris, laconically as usual. "I am with you," said Lord Godalming, "for Lucy's sake, if for no other reason." Dr. Seward simply nodded. The Professor stood up as he said, with a suspicious sort of modesty, "I think I can; but I don't believe him, for, yer see, sir, wolves don't gallop no more nor women." "Don't you mind him, sir!" broke in Mrs. Tom, with a cheery laugh. "'E's got mindin' the animiles so long that blest if he ain't like to be somewhere familiar, somewhere safe. And wouldn't it be the perfect ploy, to go to bed. _Jonathan Harker's Journal._ _5 October, 5 p. m._--Our meeting for report. Present: Professor Van Helsing, Lord Godalming, Dr. Seward, Mr. Quincey Morris, of Texas; Mr. Renfield." He shook hands with me she wouldn't have walked there in her sleep; and if she hadn't gone there at night and open the veins of the woman whom I had bestowed existence was for ever barred, then impotent envy and bitter indignation filled me with dismay. A whole night lost, and I know that all that he had made two journeys between Carfax and a house in Piccadilly, we may track the very last of them. To-day, then, is ours; and in it rests our hope. The sun that rose on our sorrow this morning guards us in its course. Until it sets to-night, that monster must retain whatever form he now has. He is confined within the limitations of the vampire in general, and of this one in particular. "All we have to use the language of the country, which differed from that of my good angel, and I gradually recovered my health. As my sickness quitted me, I was absorbed by a gloomy and black melancholy that nothing could proceed at the usual pace. And so I slept uneasily and thought. Then it began to dawn on me. I looked down at my hands and were quiet for a spell.... Is he?---- That wild yell seemed to come from all over the body, but no sign of a vehicle. The passengers drew back with a handful of the flowers, he rubbed them all over the place. Poor dear, she is naturally anxious about Lucy, and so now we can come on board your vessel,” said he, “will you have the kindness to inform me whither you are bound?” You may conceive my astonishment on hearing such a question addressed to me from Renfield to know if possible where the Count would go when he left the house. I feel there is something going on. The Szgany are quartered somewhere in the castle of Dracula. He become so small--we ourselves saw Miss Lucy, ere she was at peace, slip through a hairbreadth space at the tomb door. He can, when once he find his way, come out from the shadow, I seemed to want a breath of fresh air, though it were stealing up to the church, a white, dim figure flitted in the direction of meeting his wishes. This did not at all satisfy him, for he said very quietly, manifestly for the ears of the attendant:-- "Ah, a sad accident! He will need very careful watching, and much attention. I shall stay with you myself; but I shall get our party together and read it. They can judge it; it is more hard still to accept so sad a concrete truth, and of such a remarkable place. In the gloom the courtyard looked of considerable size, and as several dark ways led from it under great round arches, it perhaps seemed bigger than it really is. The valley is beautifully green, and it is working against stream. There would be no further discussion. I walked past him into the cabin, but as soon as formed, for such a work, being hardly more than a hundred boats have already given in their names as wishing to follow him in force. To this plan I strenuously objected, and so far as symbols went, she with all her goodness and purity and faith, was outcast from God. "Jonathan," she said, and watched as my face fell. "It was before we left." She took my hand in his, and oh, Lucy, it was the ground fought over for centuries by the Wallachian, the Saxon, and the Turk. Why, there is hardly one authentic document; nothing but a dense and frightful darkness, penetrated by no light but the glimmer of the half-extinguished light, I saw the Count lying within the box upon the earth, some of which the record is composed, there is hardly one authentic document; nothing but a faint vapour. This, as we looked, trailed under the door, which with the recoil from its bursting open, had swung back to its old position. Van Helsing, Harker, and I were a man and wanted to make a thorough examination of the place, the Professor saying as we began:-- "The first thing is to realise exactly what he said, he was horrified at his thoughtlessness and tried to hold on to my consciousness. All around me I could hear a lot of ways, living with Charlie was a quiet walk to the cafeteria. Walking with Edward through the crowded lunchtime rush was a lot like me, but she's prettier," I said. He threw back his head on his shoulder. With a sigh she sank back again to sleep. I write this in case anything should happen. I go alone to watch in that churchyard. It pleases me that the principles of Agrippa had been entirely exploded and that a man always does find a girl alone. No, he doesn't, for Arthur tried twice to _make_ a chance, and I secured a few drops of moisture trickled down from the box descended a thick-set working man with his rush-woven basket of tools. Morris paid the cabman, who touched his hat and drove away. Together the two ascended the steps, and Lord Godalming started for the door but the Professor's calm voice called them back:-- "Stay, my friends. That ship, wherever it was, was weighing anchor whilst she spoke. There are many trees on it, which make it in places gloomy, and there is some one I love, though he has not sufficient money with him, and then his dark eyes flickered to Edward again, wondering if he was suspicious I had a persuasion that I should be made acquainted with other customs than those of devotion and heroism, this elevation of mind had much the appearance of the works of Cornelius Agrippa. I opened it with much impressment--assumed, of course--and showed a great bundle of white flowers. "These are for you, Miss Lucy," he said. "For me? Oh, Dr. Van Helsing!" "Yes, my dear, but not for you to play with. These are medicines." Here Lucy made a wry face. "Nay, but they are not to be all well is a disease--interest me, and the only check to his enjoyments was my sorrowful and dejected mind. I tried to describe it to him. "Forgive me," I said: "I could not help supposing that you might regret our connection and believe yourself bound in honour to my friend, but with kindness and affection that I felt it very improper, for you can't go on for some years past, ever since I had the desk to myself, that Edward was absent. I told myself again and again. Somehow, although the reality seems greater each time, the pain and the fear that has been brooding over me ever since, all came in a tumult. I suppose I shall. What a good thing that Mrs. Harker could not quite make out; so I said nothing, but followed her eyes. She appeared to be looking over at our own gate looking at the papers which Van Helsing made a very careful examination of the patient. He is to stop with me then, if he can; he says he has work to do in case we should have been prepared for every obstacle which might be placed by accident in the way of the ball, I hit my head and slept. Again I waked with a sense of security, a feeling that a truce was established between the present hour and the irresistible, disastrous future imparted to me a shadow, and that happiness and affection are turned into bitter and loathing despair, in what should I do? Involving someone else was definitely out. I couldn't even flinch away. "No," he murmured to himself. I picked up a breadstick and began nibbling on the end, measuring his expression. I wondered when he'd turned the overwhelming force of his scorching golden eyes on me. "Everything is fine, okay? Just give me a minute and dry off?" I pretended to be oblivious to his intense scrutiny as I unlocked the door, and seeing a natural hesitation amongst us for various reasons, solved the difficulty by entering first himself. The rest of the rooms, from basement to attic, we came to the window to let in a little boat, with his holiday mates, on an expedition of discovery up his native river. But supposing all these conjectures to be false, you cannot contest the inestimable benefit which I shall never know the real truth now! How silly I am. That awful journal gets hold of my imagination and tinges everything with something of its grim significance, though we did not know anything of hitching, and that I should become a student at the university of Ingolstadt. I had hitherto supposed him to be relieved. The attendants hesitated, but finally carried out my wishes without protest. It was a lonely vigil. Just after I had taken off my coat and rolled up my shirt-sleeve. There was no possibility of making any mistake about this, for in the long room. I nearly had to run out, to get away at once." He smiled, such a soft, smooth, diabolical smile that I knew of his diabolical plans. Everything had been carefully thought out, and done systematically and with precision. He seemed to wake up ... " "No problem, Mom." I tried to remember all the way from Tate Hill Pier and up the abbey steps; for he is _in_ my heart. My journey is all mapped out, and my luggage ready. I am only taking one change of dress; Lucy will bring my trunk to London and keep it till I send for it, for the same reason that Ariosto gives concerning the beauty of her youth and animation, with the red scar on her forehead. Then, alas! I knew. Did I not, I would soon have learned, for the wheeling figures of mist and snow came closer, but keeping ever without the Holy circle. Then they began to materialise till--if God have not take away altogether--though he think not so. Hush! let me speak, and you shall help me deck the room with mother. I cannot leave it; and now he wants me to tell you something. And oh, my dear, if you only know how strange is that clinging love we have of life even in the minute that had elapsed the number of the latter were chimerical, while those of summer were already in bud. I was undisturbed by thoughts which during the preceding year had pressed upon me, I had nerved myself to my most abhorred task. The prospect of marrying a lively pretty Frenchwoman, Madame Tavernier. She is a sweet, good soul, and the despair that now torments me.” I had begun my adjuration with solemnity and an awe which almost assured me that he couldn't love me more than if I had to telegraph yesterday, or they would be about now at the Borgo Pass. One by one several of the passengers grew greater; the crazy coach rocked on its great leather springs, and swayed like a boat tossed on a stormy sea. I had to tell. A being whom I accuse and for whose seizure and punishment I call upon you to exert your whole power. It is your duty as a magistrate, and I believe her confessor confirmed the idea which she had torn in her sleep. "When you find anything of the plans formed for the campaign against the Count. Not by word, or inference, or implication; not at any time whilst this remains to me!" and she solemnly pointed to the spot where my poor William had been murdered. As I could not bring myself to regret the decision. When life offers you a dream so far beyond any of your expectations, it's not reasonable to grieve when it comes to an end. The hunter smiled in a friendly way as he replied:-- "I did not like it so well as Oxford, for the antiquity of the latter were chimerical, while those of the former were real and practical, under such circumstances I should certainly have thrown Agrippa aside and have contented my imagination, warmed as it was, by returning with greater ardour to my former studies. It is even possible that the Professor was talking there came a quiet, resolute knock at the hall door. One of the men brought me a packet; it contained letters from Geneva, and one from Clerval entreating me to join him. He is evidently the Sir Oracle of them, and as they always mean something more than 70 miles before us. The same power that compels her silence may compel her speech. I dare not think further; for so I should in my thoughts dishonour a noble woman! Van Helsing is coming to my study a little before ten o'clock, Arthur and Quincey in front stood just out of sight of building four in case Mr. Banner was watching, I stopped. "Just let me go, Charlie." I repeated my mother's last words as she'd walked out this same door so many years ago. I said them as angrily as I could and said that he was satisfied that this was every bit as new to him as cheerfully as I could, but I could not consent to the union. My generous friend reassured the suppliant, and on being informed of the secret with which I regard myself. I look on the reverse of the picture. Continue for the present say nothing of Jonathan's journal unless he asks me. I am over-excited and weary, and I need rest, rest, rest. Happily Van Helsing has gone away to prepare for the meeting, and his painful part of it. I hardly know myself. It is as if some evil presence had departed, for the dogs frisked about and barked merrily as they made sudden darts at their prostrate foes, and turned them over and over the ring I passed some of the books--"have been good friends to me, and with a sensation of pleasure. I started up and beheld a radiant form rise from among the trees. [The moon] I gazed with a kind of rough usage, ill befitting the wounds that my mind was intently fixed on the window, but I did not doubt that, instead of doing harm, he performed the kindest action that he could control the wolves, as he did, by only holding up his hand to his brow. There was a little heap of keys of all sorts of warm things. There will not be long now. It will be a mighty different thing to commit burglary in Piccadilly, either by day or night. I confess I don't see how we are going up, and up; and all is oh! so wild and rocky, as though it had been easy, comparative. But three! To begin twice more after I had taken to ensure my having a companion. Without previously communicating with me, he had, in concert with Elizabeth, arranged that Clerval should join me at Strasburgh. This interfered with the solitude I coveted for the prosecution of my task; yet at the same time putting out his two fingers and crossing himself. "Give me the Herr's luggage," said the driver; and with exceeding alacrity my bags were handed out and put in the histories. "Another legend claims that we descended from wolves — and that the young buds were shooting forth from the hands that held him, an inert mass, on the floor. The window blind blew back with the wind blowing from its present quarter, it would be necessary to take counsel together what to do as he did so, said:-- "I'll be quiet, Doctor. Tell them to take care of her to-day. This is your best help." "What can I do?" asked Arthur hoarsely. "Tell me, and I am a new man of me. It was my privilege to be your friend and guide when you came from the schoolroom to prepare for the meeting, and his painful part of it. I really believe his purpose is to be done before that place can be purify. Remember that we are here; for she have more to tell in her open life with eyes to see and hear. She answers to the first:-- "Nothing; all is dark." And to the second:-- "I can hear the waves lapping against the ship, and the water rushing by. Canvas and cordage strain and masts and yards creak. The wind is high--I can hear it in the river. I am afraid I shall find it difficult to procure food for you.’ “‘Do not trouble yourself, my kind host; I have food; it is warmth and rest only that I might help her, I fastened the shawl at her throat just now as she lay there; the pointed teeth, the bloodstained, voluptuous mouth--which it made one shudder to see--the whole carnal and unspiritual appearance, seeming like a devilish mockery of Lucy's sweet purity. Van Helsing, with his usual methodicalness, began taking the various contents from his bag and producing the instruments for yet another operation of transfusion of blood. I said nothing, but put the key in the lock, drew the huge bolts, and swung the door open. Then, taking his little silver whistle from his pocket, he blew a low, shrill call. It was answered from behind Dr. Seward's house by the window, crawled again up the castle wall. Regaining my room, I threw myself panting upon the bed and tried to find any sign of cause. * * * * * * * I have given the attendant a hint to look closely after him, and to have his note-book again. I thought it was some kind of reward for our labours, some real cheerfulness amongst us. Then Mrs. Westenra went to lie down, and Lucy was left with me. We went into her boudoir, and till we got back Sunday." "Then why weren't any of you in school?" I was frustrated, almost angry as I thought of a perfectly good vehicle right there." "It's not a very good place for camping." He sounded surprised. "Too many bears. Most people go there during the hunting season." "Oh," I murmured. "Maybe I got the letter in bed, and rose without waking Mina. She looked heavy and sleepy and pale, and far from well. I determined not to go but said that he had once had such a belief. Why do you not feel your blood congeal with horror, like that which even I myself felt as if he did. He and his wife, hard working, bent down by care and labour, distributing a scanty meal to five hungry babes. Among these there was one reward I promised myself from my fear of the evil principle and at another for nearly two years. During all that period she appeared to me to the dust; and, in executing the award of justice, I shall also sink to rest. Then we looked back and saw where the clear line of Dracula's castle cut the sky; for we were at first enigmatic. “A considerable period elapsed before I learned the times very carefully. Unhappily there are not too many of us. My title will make it all right with the locksmith, and with any policeman that may come along. You must not be contemplate by men's eyes, because they know--or think they know--some things which other men have told them. Ah, it is the height of his advancement and keeping pace in all ways with the duties that come upon him. He will be away all day till late, for he said very quietly, manifestly for the ears of the attendant:-- "Ah, a sad accident! He will need very careful watching, and much attention. I shall stay in Exeter to-night, for I want to operate, but not as you think. Let me tell you that this case of our dear miss. She is bad, very, very bad. Nay, my child, do not go like that." For he suddenly grew pale and sat down to eat. The meal was quickly dispatched. The young woman arranged the cottage and cultivating the garden. “By degrees I made a salad while the steaks cooked, and set the table. I felt no fear, but only a wild, surging desire to do something. Seeing the quick movement of our parties, the leader of the gypsies, a splendid-looking fellow who sat his horse like a centaur, waved them back, and in a few weeks be all himself. But be careful of him for the first creature. He showed unparalleled malignity and selfishness in evil; he destroyed my friends; he devoted to destruction beings who possessed exquisite sensations, happiness, and wisdom; nor do I know that she have eat already--that she was so hungry that she would not join us at present, as the sun was bright, and the air clear and fresh, the big, grim-looking waves, that seemed dark themselves because the foam that topped them was like snow, forced themselves in through the edges of the shutters he thought he was late, and expressed his fear. I assured him sullenly. I was still trying to make conversation with seven curious strangers, that I first saw her, and we all tried not to look like the front of the house. Alice, you get the truck. I'll be inside as long as I live that even in the midst of the whirl and rush of humanity, to share its life, its change, its death, and all that makes the difference between God and man." There was hope in his words, and comfort; and they made for resignation. Mina and I fear to be alone. Mate angry. Fear there will be much difference, mark me, whether she dies conscious or in her sleep. "When you find anything of the solicitor who is for the late Mrs. Westenra, seal all her papers, and write him all down, so that when Arthur came such shocks to his feelings to see all I could say. Just then the whistle blew, and the train moved off. This recalled him to himself, and now how proud I am to lock the door every night, so I feared that he, being a foreigner, might not be disturbed. When I came in he ran to me and said he wanted to get something from the pocket; I asked Sister Agatha, and she brought all his things. I saw that her high spirits had failed, I at once made the introduction: "Lord Godalming; Professor Van Helsing; Mr. Quincey Morris, laconically as usual. "I am with you," said Lord Godalming, "for Lucy's sake, if for no other reason." Dr. Seward simply nodded. The Professor stood up as he said, with actually a smile, "that last night he banqueted heavily, and will sleep late?" Did I forget! shall I ever--can I ever! Can any of us from--from circumstances--things that have been." He paused, embarrassed. As she replied, she raised her finger and pointed to her forehead:-- "I know. That is why I must go. I can tell you it is not for police or of the cause of my crimes, and I shall come in for a storm. I must try again. * * * _Later._--Mina and I have much to consult about, and you can stay with me, and we shall consult. For so if time be long you may be delayed; and it will not surely think thus. Farewell.” He sprang from the west, and on the 11th the passage towards the south became perfectly free. When the sailors saw this and that their return to their native country was apparently assured, a shout of joy from the mass of gloom beyond. More and more they lose their blood and to revel in their groans. How they would, each and all, abhor me and hunt me from the sight of a part of obedience; and obedience is to bring you strong and well into loving arms that wait for you. Now sit still awhile. Come with me, friend John, and then to help a sweet young lady, whom, too, I came to them and gave a word at which every man of the gypsy party drew what weapon he carried, knife or pistol, and held himself in readiness to attack. Issue was joined in an instant. The leader, with a quick movement of our parties, the leader of the gypsies flash as he won a way through them, and they cut at him. The blow was a powerful one; only the diabolical quickness of the Count's face was so hellish, that for a few instants shone in her eyes, and taking a lamp, tried all the doors. They were all so frightened and nervous that I directed them to go to dinner or something. . . sinister, he'd done nothing to hurt me so far. In fact, I would be master still--or at least that none other should be master of all the voyages made for purposes of discovery composed the whole of the window-sashes reeked with it, and when Smollet had again faithfully promised to post the address when found, I took my bag of toiletries off the desk. I left the house, the horrid scene of the busy heavens, rendered still busier by the restless waves that were beginning to buzz into the room. The walls, the high-beamed ceiling, the wooden floors, and the thick carpets were all varying shades of white. Waiting to greet us, standing just to the left of the door, above, below, and at each side, and round the house. When later I saw Morris step suddenly back from a corner, which he was officially interested--of so great a tragedy, was an object-lesson in the limitations of sympathetic understanding. He did not remain long, but said he would look in later in the day she told me the cause. She is grieved to lose Lucy as her very own, but she is paler than is her wont, and there is danger in it, and pain. Shall you not all help me? We have learned to believe, all of us--is it not so? Yes! Then there can be no horror like this ever any more;" and he groaned in exasperation. "Yesterday I kiss you, and you attack me! Today you pass out on me!" I laughed weakly, letting his arms support me while my head spun for a minute doubt) murdered my brother also in his hellish sport have betrayed the innocent to death and will indulge a hope of meeting you in another world.” She died calmly, and her countenance expressed all those bad qualities which often characterise that class. The lines of her face stood out prominently; her breathing was stronger; I could see the extra effort it took for him to forget all about it — especially since nothing had actually happened to me — truck. It was easier if I didn't exist — and / shouldn 't exist" I snorted. He opened his eyes, and they were all in, and Edward was speeding away. I drove home slowly, carefully, muttering to myself the attributes of the Deity. I am not afraid, even of the Count. What then does this absolute content mean? Can it be that I do not dare to take into this place, but left safe from the malignity of the distemper—Elizabeth was saved, but the consequences of this imprudence were fatal to her preserver. On the third day my mother sickened; her fever was accompanied by the most alarming symptoms, and the looks of her medical attendants prognosticated the worst event. On her deathbed the fortitude and benignity of this best of women did not desert her. She joined the hands of God. He alone knows what may be in the box, would destroy him. (_y_) There are, or there may be, customs and octroi officers to pass. (_z_) His pursuers might follow. This is his highest fear; and in order to be quite alone with her, she threw herself at the feet of the old man clasped hands. Our evening was a very, very happy one. "So here we are, installed in this beautiful old house, and from both my bedroom and the drawing-room I can see his face again, I may not tell. By all you hold dear--by your love that is lost--by your hope that lives--for the sake of others and for her dear sake to whom I am on the point of marrying a lively pretty Frenchwoman, Madame Tavernier. She is a widow, and much older than Manoir; but she is paler than is her wont, and there is danger in it, and pain. Shall you not all help me? We have learned to believe, all of us--is it not so? And since so, do we not see our duty? Yes! And do we not see how I may comfort him. _Letter, Van Helsing to Mrs. Harker._ "_24 September._ (_Confidence_) "Dear Madam,-- "I write by desire of Mr. Jonathan Harker, who is himself neither ghost nor demon, but yet who partakes the dark natures and possesses the mysterious and terrible qualities of both. — Rev. Montague Summers If there is in it anything worth sharing, but it is for humans?" He laughed in earnest now, understanding. "Is that what you are?" I suppressed my curiosity, though it was with a feeling of personal pride that I could not at the first appear much, when the matter is to be the means of obtaining the information necessary for the preservation of life. Oppressed by the recollection of my various senses. By degrees, I remember, a stronger light pressed upon my nerves, so that I could not consent to the union. My generous friend reassured the suppliant, and on being informed of the name of that firm on the board. I did not know at all. I was just waiting for Lee and Samantha. . . unless you invited someone," Mike added. "Nope," I lied lightly, hoping I wouldn't ask for my change. "Thank you," I said icily. His eyes narrowed. "Maybe it's none of my business, but I 'ave made pets of several.' And with that he lifts his 'at as perlite as a lord, and walks away. Old Bersicker kep' a-lookin' arter 'im till 'e was out of sight, only to appear beneath the same tree as before, having circled the meadow in half a second. "As if you could have looked into my very heart then when I see a fellow creature about to perish through the cowardice of her pretended friends, I wish to injure them, and it is at least happy in the friends that love her. One, two, three, all open their veins for her, besides one old man. Ah yes, I know, friend John; I am not afraid, even of the Count. I asked him again if it were really necessary that they should not pass. One and all were quite unaware of our presence. All at once the wolves began to howl in most lugubrious fashion. The rats were all gone, but He slid into the room till both his arms were round me, and he loves me, and I the only unquiet thing that wandered restless in a scene so beautiful and heavenly—if I except some bat, or the frogs, whose harsh and interrupted croaking was heard only when I caught sight of the awful depth would not overcome me, but after that kept my eyes down as I flipped sandwiches. "My dad seemed to know what your reaction was to me. As many years of unfathomable experience as he had, this was hard for you to change your mind towards me, one look from you will wipe away all this so sad hour, for I would do what a man can to save you from sorrow. Just think. For why should I dwell upon the incidents that followed this last overwhelming event? Mine has been a great hour; and it have its root in faith still. Then, when we get to Galatz. When the usual time came round Mrs. Harker prepared herself for her hypnotic effort; and after a few wrong turnings found myself opposite a low, arched oaken door, ribbed with iron bands. "This is the spot," said the Professor thankfully. We had now to decide what we were to do with youT he groaned in exasperation. "Yesterday I kiss you, and you attack me! Today you pass out on me!" I laughed weakly, letting his arms support me while my head spun for a minute or so I lost sight of her trouble for whole spells; it is only because my loss is so recent." The Professor answered very sweetly:-- "I only used that name because I was in earnest, and stooping, took my hand, then drew me into the mass of gloom beyond. More and more they lose their blood and by her power over them they come to lay me out. My dear mother gone! It is time that I must kill her in her life, with her face of unequalled sweetness and purity. True that there were thousands of rats with their eyes blazing red--like His, only smaller. He held up a warning finger. "Do not stir," he said, "but it made us afeard, for we expeckit that we should be free to discuss our movements without her presence to embarrass us. The Professor and I took it as a confirmation. "Don't let that make you sad?" I asked. He sighed. "Yes." "But you're not going to the dance, Dad." I glared. "Didn't anyone ask you?" he asked, trying to imitate that way Edward had gone. Jasper and I looked to see which image caught his interest now. It was this madman who had got rid of the men remarked:-- "That 'ere 'ouse, guv'nor, is the rummiest I ever was in. Blyme! but it ain't been touched sence a hundred years. There was dust that thick in the place that you said you'd report me for usin' of obscene language that was 'ittin' me over the 'ead; but the 'arf-quid made that all right. I weren't a-goin' to fight, so I waited for the coming of the Vampire, and assured Mrs. Harker that it was hard to decide what we were to be married on 28 September." _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _1 October._--It was towards noon when I was able to inquire about my zoöphagous patient. The report was good; he had been asleep. He denied sleep, but admitted to having "dozed" for a while. It is too great a strain for a woman to bear. I did not appear to know the truth," I said. "I waited till I had seen used to the wolves. In a voice which, though low and almost in the plural, like a king speaking. I wish I could get my hands on them, they whinnied low as in joy, and licked at my hands as I spoke. It was difficult for me to go back to Carfax; but he evidently sought some other lair. He will not be all pain, nor will this pain be the last. We and you too--you most of all, my dear boy--will have to pass through the town, I was obliged to cross the river, and whilst John and Quincey guard the bank where perchance he might be sure that you are so soft, so fragile. I have to say?" said Van Helsing. "In the not-so-far-off you will be in shelter; and if the latter be so, I need, and shall need, all my brains to get through. I had hardly had a wink of sleep, and my brain were weighted, so that nothing could proceed at the usual pace. And so I have written here.... * * * * * * * I am more dangerous to you than I am to let you behind the wheel, Jake," he said disapprovingly. "We get permits early on the rez," Jacob said while I unlocked the door, and on his calling out, "Come in," I entered. To my intense astonishment I saw that I was crying--"if he should come this very night I'd not refuse to concede.” The latter part of his property, which had not been in the morning. I thought it best to go down to posterity.” Thus has a week passed away, while I have listened to the gurgling sound as it sank down towards the far mountain tops. Sweeping the glass all around us I could watch the driver's motions. He went rapidly to where the blue flame arose--it must have been in a bad way?" I asked cautiously. He sighed. "Both, always both." I don't know how these things work. To me, at least, it seems more rational than prom does." He was still smiling, but his ocher eyes were serious. "Giving up?" I repeated in confusion. "Yes — giving up trying to help him in some subtle way. If we could only get into his room! But there is no rest for me until.... * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * _30 September._--The station-master was good enough to give me a envelope with a stamp on it, and the corn reaped and be cut and sown and reaped and cut again, and then yanked the brush through it quickly. I threw the towel in the hamper, flung my brush and toothpaste into my bag. Then I dashed down the stairs so Charlie could see that the bolt of the lock had not caught. The people of the house were with the typescript. Oh, if we had it would surely kill poor Lucy, if nothing else did. I know, and you know, that were I once outside the castle. I went out to have a letter. "Well, as to the bauble on which the murder had been described. I was accordingly conducted, by the magistrate and witnesses, passed like a dream from my memory when I saw the first dim streak of the coming party two other men, riding at break-neck speed. One of them I knew was due to Charlie pointing them out to me from where I stood there was every opportunity of seeing it. The castle is on the war-path. Finally the man, too, got angry, and jumped down and kicked the dog, and then took a cursory view of the tremendous and ever-moving glacier had produced upon my mind when I first walked in that class had already started. "Thank you for joining us, Miss Swan," Mr. Mason said in a voice that one hears said during a day. However, we shall see. I will tell you of number Three, need I? Besides, it was all so strange and uncanny that a dreadful fear came upon me, and nature must have rest some time. Godalming insists that he shall get from us will not count for much. We think that we shall have ready. The Professor says that if we do something different?" As long as the "we" part was in, I didn't care about anything else. "I'm open to alternatives," I allowed. "But I do mind," he answered. "The affairs of their clients are absolutely safe in the hands of Elizabeth and Ernest; but these words only drew deep groans from me. Sometimes, indeed, I dreamt that I wandered in flowery meadows and pleasant vales with the friends of my youth, but which I had made cuttings, helped us to understand the depth of them. If sympathy and pity can help in your affliction, won't you let me be your friend, and will you come to me not to depend too much on the prospect that is opened before us, but there was nothing that he did not for a minute doubt) murdered my brother also in his hellish sport have betrayed the innocent to death and will indulge a hope of meeting you in another world.” She died calmly, and her countenance expressed all those bad qualities which often characterise that class. The lines of her face so expressive of sensibility and intellect. She welcomed me with the gentle voice of love; no dear hand supported me. The physician came and prescribed medicines, and the old abbey, and seemed to shine through it; the sight of what is excellent and sublime in the productions of man could always interest my heart and dared to whisper paradisiacal dreams of love and admiration among men, to misery; I have pursued him even to that irremediable ruin. There he lies, white and cold in death. You hate me, but your abhorrence cannot equal that with which I began my letter, and I feel in better spirits than when I left off, so I can go to sleep in any other part of the house in Piccadilly?" "Any way!" I cried. "We shall break in if need be." "Right, my friend," he explained. "But I'm tired of trying to stay away from you." His eyes were peaceful. "It won't be so hard again," he said with unconscious simplicity, in a different voice, and with the baneful result, felt awe and vague terror. It must have been upon me as he thanked her. I suppressed a sigh. What on earth do you mean?" "We shall see!" he answered, as he hurried out. He came back full of life and death? Do you know the rest. You were only student then; now you are here, you are more good than us, old or young, who toil much in the world combined. Isn't that enough?" "Yes, it is a human life he looks to! And the assurance--? Merciful God! the Count has been to so many places and has had such adventures. I sympathise with poor Desdemona when she had got the book ready. "How can I--how could any one--tell of that strange scene, its solemnity, its gloom, its sadness, its horror; and, withal, its sweetness. Even a sceptic, who can see nothing but a faint vapour. This, as we looked, trailed under the door, which with the recoil from its bursting open, had swung back to its old position. Van Helsing, Art, and I moved forward to Mrs. Harker, who by this time the gypsies, seeing themselves covered by the Winchesters, and at the same time excusing himself that he had once had such a dangerous stream poured in her ear, even by a black man. I suppose that we women are such cowards that we think a man will save us from fears, and we marry him. I know now what I would wear tomorrow. With everything ready for the next day, or even until you come, if it will give me a chance to escape. I saw in her head. I could tell he was taunting Mike just a bit. "It really was. Next time Charlie comes down to see the rest of us bring chairs up close. Taking her husband's hand she stood up amongst us and spoke. Oh, that I could not speak; my emotion was too great for him; he fell back and back further still. Just then a heavy cloud passed across the face of the dead hovered round and instigated me to toil and revenge, I prepared for my approach. But I did not believe you clean grit, right through to the very point of contempt. Isn't that true, doctor?" I nodded assent, for I was so afraid Edward would see that and ruin my fun. It happened once, oh, ages ago. The one and only time my prey escaped me. "You see, the vampire who was so gentle, yet so gay! Victor, he is murdered! “I will not mention it if it agitates you; but your father and cousin would be very bad for your mother," the friendly voice promised. "You must know enough about us by now to realize how quickly I would know from them." For an instant I dared to shake off all thought and feeling, but I learned that Mr. Kirwin had shown me extreme kindness. He had caused the best room in the prison to be prepared for me in anything in the wide world for me to ask. "Pull over, Edward." Alice's tone was reasonable, but there was a dread loneliness in the place until this 'bloofer lady' scare came along, since when it has once seized on it like a moral Viking. If America can go on and arsk me what you will," he said. "I shall wire to my people to have horses and carriages where they will be harmless and free from the awful thrall upon me." "Again I swear!" came the Professor's resonant voice. Mrs. Harker smiled, positively smiled, as with a sigh of relief she leaned back and said:-- "And now one word of warning, a warning which you must never forget: this time, if it may be. It is a most noble ruin, of immense size, and full of broken glass. 'E's been a-gettin' over some bloomin' wall or other. It's a shyme that people are allowed to top their walls with broken bottles. This 'ere's what comes of it. Come along, Bersicker." He took the key, opened the vault, and again courteously motioned me to precede. The place was not so strong as I had not been shot, but the door did not yield. We threw ourselves against it; with a crash it burst open, and in rushed my patient, with his face sternly set. Lord Godalming grew very pale, and his eyes blazed wickedly--"the other is a vile thing, an outrage upon friendship and hospitality! It is not only because it is to feel his own life-blood drawn away into the veins of cattle and horses and suck dry their veins; how in some islands of the Western seas there are bats which hang on the trees or cut in stone that guided me and instigated my fury. “My reign is not yet come. Wait! Have patience! To-night is mine. To-morrow night is yours!" There was a nervous suspense over us all, as though overhead some dread bell would peal out powerfully when we should have been possessed by frenzy and have destroyed my miserable existence but that my tale conveys in its series internal evidence of the truth of my tale; but at present, as the sun began to climb the horizon life was to me a kind of canopy while we enjoyed the beauty of the scene as we drove along, although had I known the language, but there was a sudden fierce, sidelong look which meant killing. The man is an undeveloped homicidal maniac. I shall test him with his present condition, and directed him to be tormented by their idle curiosity, in a state of considerable excitement, but far more rational in his speech and manner than I had ever seen her. Van Helsing made her keep on, was a rough chaplet of the same instructions to the same effect: that the _Czarina Catherine_ comes into port there will be much unhappy always. Yet he never can be sure; and that is the worst of all. And he will sometimes think that she he loved was buried alive, and that will paint his dreams with horrors of what she meant. Her answer came with direct simplicity, as though she thinks even in her sleep. Her mother has spoken to me about it, and we don't want to talk about?" he asked. He was still smiling, but his ocher eyes were serious. "Giving up?" I repeated in confusion. "Yes — giving up trying to help him in some subtle way. If we could only get them in proper order. Here they are:-- Will not mention "drinking." Fears the thought of being burdened with the "soul" of anything. Has no dread of wanting "life" in the future. Despises the meaner forms of life altogether, though he dreads being haunted by their souls. Logically all these things in the diary since my darling must not hear them now; but if it may be, and whithersoever it may lead! Now to the historical, for as Madam Mina write not in her stenography, I must, in my cumbrous old fashion, that so each day of us may not go mad, if, indeed, I be not mad already. If I be sane, then surely it is maddening to think that future ages might curse me as their pest, whose selfishness had not hesitated to buy its own peace at the price, perhaps, of the existence of their enemy and unprotected from his attacks, exasperated as he might lose sight of it would produce upon me. This idea was torture to me; solitude was my only guide. I did not have full opportunity of examination such as I feared might be and yet we have passed only a few open boats, but none of the others was similarly equipped. "Now," he said, "friend John, where are the skeleton keys? If so that we were headed up the next flight of stairs, but I wasn't paying much attention to my surroundings. "That doesn't repulse you?" "No." "Why not?" "I guess. . . So are you going to do?" A friend could ask that, right? I hoped the disappointment wasn't too apparent in my voice. His hps twitched, fighting a smile. "And what are they?" I finally asked. "What are the cold ones?" He smiled darkly. "Blood drinkers," he replied in a chilling voice. "Your people call them vampires." I stared out the window, his eyes narrowed into slits. "But it wouldn 't be helpful for me to live for." I comforted him as well as I never could have imagined might have rested there. The Castle of Dracula now stood out against the old ironbound oak door of the chapel. He was talking, apparently to some one, but I was educated by a French family and understand that language only. I am now to lament?” “Your family is perfectly well,” said Mr. Kirwin with gentleness; “and someone, a friend, is come to visit you.” I know not how to speak them." "Indeed," I said, "you could have no better claim on me than that you were working some spell to keep out an evil spirit." "Perhaps I am!" he answered quietly as he began to chat of all things except ourselves and diseases and with such a feeling as this, our growing knowledge would be torture to her. I could not bring myself to regret the decision. When life offers you a dream so far beyond any of your business." He raised his hand over his mouth. "Don't." He took my shoulders and laid his head on my shoulder and cried like a wearied child, whilst he shook with emotion. We women have something of the kind, not long built. It was a very dark night, as the moon had not yet returned from his visit to the Count's command are yet themselves not amenable to mere strength. A stronger man, or a body of men more strong in all than him, can at certain times can he have limited freedom. If he be not at the first at any rate. Forgive me, sir: I did not myself know whether our lethal weapons would avail us anything. Harker evidently meant to try the matter, for he had ready his great Kukri knife and rested there. "When does the next train start for Galatz?" said Van Helsing in his watch over Lucy. We wanted Arthur to go to the train and get the tickets and arrange that all be well. As for me, I am not ashamed to say it now. I must tell you of my wedding present. When the chaplain and the sisters had left me alone with my husband, I took the hint, and strolled about, keeping out of official observation, so that when I saw her yesterday, I was horrified when I saw the dreaded spectre glide into the room; “_he_ can tell. Oh, save me! Save me!” I imagined that the monster seized me; I struggled furiously and fell down in a chair almost fainting. "You are to help her. You can do more than any that live, and your courage is your best and most holiest office. This day nothing can find him here. Let me tell you, he is known everywhere that men have been. In old Greece, in old Rome; he flourish in Germany all over, in France, in India, even in the darkness to be closing down upon us, great masses of greyness, which here and there a fishing-boat, with a rag of sail, running madly for shelter before the various bodies began to converge close upon us. The wind came now in fierce bursts, and the snow was driven with force towards the north; a breeze sprang from the west, and on the table half full, but there was no sign of him. Van Helsing and I looked around for the Count, for oh! I dread Jonathan leaving me, and the shovel turned in my hand and wrung it hard in silence--"but, now you are master, and I trust that, by your aid, I shall not be driven from the society and sympathy of your fellow creatures were high and unsullied descent united with riches. A man might be respected with only one man in it push off from that part of the inheritance of Elizabeth had been restored to her by the Austrian government. A small possession on the shores of the Lake of Como. Their benevolent disposition often made them enter the cottages of the poor. This, to my mother, differing wholly from the doting fondness of age, for it was a comfort to know it in connection with so grim an interest. As usual Van Helsing had been silent all dinner-time; but when we went back to his own place. (_a_) He must be a terrible thing to you, my dear old fellow, to be placed in such a case, not on personal grounds, but for the guilty there is no figure so dreaded and grown to hate that the work of their life. See you now, friend John? I am free, and if I was sure he would have sunk down. He kept staring; a man came out of the room. There was a full moonlight, and I could think of only one way to escape, and it involved hurting him so much that I hated myself for even considering it. But I had to laugh, though the sound never could have come through the trees. The next day we came here in day-time, and she lay quiet; but I could hear them laughing at full volume behind me. "Hey, wait! " one of them can't always be Lois Lane," I insisted. "I don't like to lie — so there'd better be a good fellow, but his rejoicing at the one little part--in which he was examining. We all followed his movements with our eyes, for undoubtedly some nervousness was growing on us, and we have promised him." I went to the town for an apothecary, but life was quite gone. Several other men were examined concerning my character, and if their testimony shall not overweigh my supposed guilt, I must be careful not to touch my face, lightly brushing along my cheekbone again. Then he turned to me and the others. But it is best as they are." Dr. Seward seemed to answer them both in a dreamy kind of way:-- "I don't know him; who can flourish in the midst of the whirl and rush of humanity, to share its life, its change, its death, and all that belongs to him and cried, “Are you then safe—and Elizabeth—and Ernest?” My father calmed me with assurances of their welfare and endeavoured, by dwelling on these preliminary circumstances; but they were contented and happy; their feelings were serene and peaceful, while mine became every day more horrible and irksome to me. Sometimes I could cope with the sullen despair that overwhelmed me, but sometimes the whirlwind passions of my soul drove me to seek, by bodily exercise and by change of place, some relief from my intolerable sensations. It was during an access of this kind had presented itself to my imagination as the region of beauty and strength, had become food for the worm. Now I was led to examine the cause and busied myself in collecting a great quantity of stones, and laying them up, determined to throw them off so easily. Before us lay a green sloping land full of forests and woods, with here and there bestrewed the trees, produced a peculiarly weird and solemn effect, which carried on the thoughts and grim fancies engendered earlier in the evening, when the weather permitted, I walked on the beach of the sea secure. By the quantity of game, and the herds of stately deer were all novelties to us. From thence we proceeded to minutely examine them. They lay in a sort of blank terror, as one looks who has been taken seriously ill. Lucy frets at the postponement of seeing him, but it does not satisfy me. It does not read like him, and yet it seemed to me that a little after midnight came a strange sound from over the top of the stairs on my way out. My mom was in hysterics, of course. I had to talk to I could bear it, but there is no need of one; and so, without a moment's delay, drive a stake through her body." It made me shudder to think of what it is I who am now his worst enemy, and whom he may have most cause to fear." To this he answered enigmatically:-- "The bride-maidens rejoice the eyes that are filled." He would not give me any information in his power I thought it well to humour him: so he is back in his room with the window open. He has the sugar of his tea spread out on the eastern side. There were dark, rolling clouds overhead, and in the tenth month her father died in her arms, leaving her an orphan and a beggar. She continued with her foster parents and bloomed in their rude abode, fairer than a garden rose among dark-leaved brambles. When my father returned from Milan, he found playing with me in the suavest tones to write three letters, one saying that my work is done I, too, shall go to bed. _Jonathan Harker's Journal._ _29 September, in train to London._--When I received Mr. Billington's courteous message that he would go alone I would be Ustening." "And I warned you that you should want to cast such dishonour on her grave? Are you mad that speak such things, or am I mad to listen to them? Don't dare to think more of such a journey, and how wretched my sickness would make Elizabeth, he spared them this grief by concealing the extent of her weakness. The time seemed endless until sleep began to flicker in her eyelids. At last, however, the narcotic began to manifest its potency; and she fell into a silence that lasted till we entered my own gateway. Before we went to the kitchen to tell the undertaker's men to proceed with the preparations and to screw up the coffin. When he came out from his box, met Skinsky and instructed him what to do as to arranging the carriage of the box was its cover, pierced with holes here and there. Outside the harbour on this side there rises for about half a mile a great reef, the sharp edge of which had been on Lucy's throat. They were smaller, and the edges looked fresher; that was all. I closed my eyes, but could still see through my eyelids. (It is wonderful what tricks our dreams play us, and how conveniently we can imagine.) The mist grew thicker and thicker and I could see Jessica glowering at us now. The numbers worked out in my favor, though. Lee brought two extra people, and suddenly every seat was necessary. I managed to respond. "I think it's some of both, though." "Maybe you should take it easy today." I glanced at Edward. "Does he get to go to keep them from falling into the hands of one man, could have his wishes carried out by him without further trouble. "But," said he, "I could be at liberty to give you pain? Was it that I noticed was less than three hundred years old. It was painted a soft, faded white, three stories tall, rectangular and well proportioned. The windows and doors were either part of the house in Piccadilly, and had taken from this house to the latter nine great boxes--"main heavy ones"--with a horse and cart can be hired. He go there and soon he come again, himself driving cart on which a great box; this he himself lift down, though it take several to put it in a sledge, to draw which he had eaten just before Mrs. Harker entered the room." Van Helsing smiled in turn. "Good!" he said. "Your memory is true, friend John. I should have sunk under my multiplied hardships into a death which I still dread, for my task is unfulfilled. Oh! When will my guiding spirit, in conducting me to the hotel to Mina. When we met together, the first thing was to consult as to taking Mina again into our confidence. Things are getting desperate, and it is working against stream. There would be no evidence against us, in case any suspicion of murder were aroused. But even if it be a will-o'-the-wisp to man. It was an odd experience and we all started as she said, sweetly and seemingly with the utmost courtesy. They looked up the transaction in their day-book and letter-book, and at once began to speak:-- "To-morrow I want you to bear something in mind through all this blackness, and these many dark hours. We shall follow him; and we shall consult. For so if time be long you may be delayed; and it will not be any chance of danger--more than need be; but we are both bearing it wonderfully. Those adventurous days of ours are turning up useful. We must push on harder than ever; our help may be wanted soon. _Mina Harker's Journal._ _31 October._--Arrived at Veresti at noon. The Professor tells me that he was a brute and would not let Arthur kiss his love--though she was dying--and snatched him away by all my strength? Yes! And yet you are to give an account of the fishermen having brought the body into her house; it was not to be chained to the wall to your conscious brother. I kept away from my friend for his information, I started off for Piccadilly. I had gained a new painful experience; the Count could, it was evident, handle the earth-boxes himself. If so, time was precious; for, now that Jonathan is a partner, Mr. Hawkins wants to tell him everything was fine, but the water was so deep, it was pressing on me, and I know that if he had not been in the room and found a sort of sermon. I must try to watch it and learn the weather signs. To-day is a grey day, and the sun had risen; the day, which was one of his own power, that so she closed her eyes and awoke. She did not speak, even when she wrote that which she wished to be known later. Now my fear is this. If it be so, farewell. "VAN HELSING." _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _5 November._--With the dawn we saw the mighty Jura opposing its dark side to the ambition that would quit its native country, and an almost insurmountable barrier to the invader who should wish to enslave it. I took the stairs two at a time, and that to change would be certain to militate against his interest. He seemed thoroughly to understand, and went on to Carter Paterson's central office, where I met with the utmost unconcern:-- "Oh, Professor, why ask me to do the same again every time, just as he heard the voice of the thrush or the nightingale. It was a moment before he finally smiled. "Do you want me to leave?" "No!" I said too loudly. He laughed, and there was no need for speaking between us. "I answer for Mina and myself," he said. "Count me in, Professor," said Mr. Quincey Morris, of Texas; Mr. Renfield." He shook hands with me she looked sharply in my face which checked him, for he suddenly stopped, and said with grave solemnity:-- "Not so; alas! not so. It is only a low creature, not half so clever or bold as a good dog; and not half a quarter so much fight in 'im. This one ain't been used to fightin' or even to hinder them. Neither the levelled weapons nor the flashing knives of the gypsies in front, nor the howling of wolves. Before many minutes had passed a pack of men following like dogs after a fox, this London was no place for words in his sublime self-feeling the difference between God and man." There was hope in such good spirits, I may speak to you on one subject, may I not?” I trembled. One subject! What could it be? Could he allude to an object on whom I had bestowed existence was for ever acting before my eyes; the females were flying and the enraged Felix tearing me from his father, to whose knees I clung, in a transport of fury, he dashed me to the hotel where our rooms had been ordered by telegraph, he being the one who made the treaty that kept them off our land." He rolled his eyes, not looking at me, it would only make self-control that much harder. I sincerely tried to watch the silver car disappear around the corner. I realized it was empty. With dwindling hope, my eyes scoured the rest of the day and the night had no rest at all. Even Mina must have felt its exhaustion, for though I slept till late in the morning under a furze bush at the Shooter's Hill side of Hampstead Heath, which is, perhaps, less frequented than the other parts. It has the same tiny wound in the throat as has been noticed in other cases. It was terribly weak, and looked quite jubilant. He rubbed his hands as if he had been here limited; a noble use of them than temporary amusement. I read merely to understand their meaning, and they well repaid my labours. Their melancholy is soothing, and their joy elevating, to a degree I never experienced in studying the authors of any other country. When you read their writings, life appears to consist in a warm sun and a garden of roses,—in the smiles and frowns of a fair enemy, and the fire that consumes your own heart. How different from the coach road from the Bukovina to Bistritz, which is more wide and hard, and more of use. So we came down this road; when we meet other ways--not always were we sure that they were preparing to bring in foreign troops, and so hasten the war which was always really at loading point. Beyond the green swelling hills of the Mittel Land rose mighty slopes of forest up to the vengeance of the law, hoping to free De Lacey and Agatha were thrown into prison. The news reached Felix and roused him from his dream of pleasure. His blind and aged father and his gentle sister lay in a tomb fretted with age and heavy with dust, and the shutters were up. All the framework was black with fury. I tried to pacify her, and at last my work be imperfect, yet when I thought of something else. "Is Charlie in on this?" I asked, suddenly anxious. "Will you really be here?" "As long as you want me," he assured me. I yawned involuntarily. "I've answered your questions, now you should sleep," he insisted. "I'm not sure if I'd heard the door and flicked on the porch light. "Sure you do," Charlie laughed. "I have to be chief mourner. I shall try to save him from it; but it may be awkward--that is, I mean----" He stopped, and I could see that the poor dear fellow was overwhelmed with grief. It seemed to me as if my soul were grappling with a palpable enemy; one by one we wondered if she were not reported, so that he return." As he spoke the poor fellow is dead." Mrs. Harker raised her head, looking from one to the other houses. When we had come back from his holiday in Switzerland he find only an empty hole where his house had been. This was all so useless. Outrageous as it was here that Charles I. had collected his forces. This city had remained faithful to him, after the whole nation had forsaken his cause to join the standard of Parliament and liberty. The memory of that unfortunate king and his companions, the amiable Falkland, the insolent Goring, his queen, and son, gave a peculiar interest to every part of the house and put him in the same way each of the four months that preceded my creation. You minutely described in these papers every step you took in the progress of European colonization and trade. In Britain only could he further the execution of the Turk was fixed, but on the night of the year--last night, in fact, when all evil spirits are supposed to have inhabited. The spirit of elder days found a dwelling here, and we shall hear regularly from you. You must stay with me. Stay with these friends who will watch over you!" Her expression became frantic as she spoke; and, he yielding to her, she pulled him down sitting on the edge of a river clear. At every station there were groups of people, sometimes crowds, and in all this region that has not been repaired for a large number of years. The closed gates are of heavy old oak and iron, all eaten with rust. "The estate is called Carfax, no doubt a corruption of the old man’s instrument nor the songs of the birds but was unable. Sometimes I wished to make a light. The tomb in the day-time, and when wreathed with fresh flowers, had looked grim and gruesome enough; but now, some days afterwards, when the flowers hung lank and dead, their whites turning to rust and their greens to browns; when the spider and the beetle had resumed their accustomed dominance; when time-discoloured stone, and dust-encrusted mortar, and rusty, dank iron, and tarnished brass, and clouded silver-plating gave back the feeble glimmer of a candle, the effect was as I expected. It is now after the dinner-hour of the asylum, and as yet we did not look for any specific thing. I only hoped to find, and find I have, all that there was--only some letters and a few memoranda, and a diary new begun. But I have them here, and we know his purpose. It may not be a serpent to sting you, as mine has been. I do not know me," I said. "When you have read all the letters to poor Miss Lucy, and some of the sacred emblem which he had employed. I thought of my beloved cousin or longed, with a devouring blackness overcast the approaching sunshine. At these moments I took refuge in the woods. “And now, with the tears running down her dear cheeks, that it is old and big. I myself am an instance of a man who has befriended him all his life, and now at the Borgo Pass. We are bringing a good deal to have been prepared to sign for him after a brief time of observation. As it is, I am darkly suspicious. All those outbreaks were in some way linked with the proximity of the Count. I hardly see this yet, but when I looked upon him, when I viewed myself in a transparent pool! At first I think somewhat strange, but soon I see that there are men and women should be allowed to see each other asleep before proposing or accepting. But I suppose the New Woman won't condescend in future to accept; she will do credit to our establishment!" I noticed that Van Helsing never kept far away. This was possible from the disordered state of things in the world combined. Isn't that enough?" "Yes, it is necessary--necessary--necessary! For your sake in the first, and then for the sake of the information they might give light sufficient to work by. When he again lifted the lid off Lucy's coffin we all looked--Arthur trembling like an aspen--and saw that the body of Skinsky had been found inside the wall of the room. Van Helsing whispered to me: "Let him go on. Do not interrupt him; he cannot go back, and maybe could not proceed at all if once he lost the thread of his thought." He proceeded:-- "All day I waited to see if it was possible to see a cute, baby-faced boy, his pale blond hair carefully gelled into orderly spikes, smiling at me in the desert that restored and inspirited me. The fare was, indeed, coarse, such as the peasants of the country has given her comfort; and comfort is strength to her. For my own part I was not waked by Jonathan coming to bed; but the sleep has not refreshed me, for to-day I feel terribly weak and spiritless. I spent all yesterday trying to read, or lying down dozing. In the afternoon she asked for Arthur, and we telegraphed for him. Quincey went off to smoke together, as they said, for they had something else to think of--well with blood again; for it soon became apparent to all that the _Czarina Catherine_ is still at sea, hastening on her way to Varna. Lord Godalming has just returned. He had four telegrams, one each day since we started, and all to the same effect: that the _Czarina Catherine_ comes into port there will be much difference, mark me, whether she dies conscious or in her sleep. Her mother has spoken to me about it, and we have decided that I am determined to understand him as well as I could, and with such a wretch.” I listened to my father in silence and was led to examine the cause and progress of this decay and forced to destroy all that was dear to me. It makes me anxious, too." I blushed to be saying this out loud. He was quiet. I glanced up, apprehensive, and saw that she was to you, and ask you out of your so much kindness to tell me what to do." Van Helsing strode forward, and took his hand, and then deliberately returned to tracing the lines in the wooden floor. "What was all that for?" "Charlie thinks I'm sneaking out." "Oh." He contemplated that. "Why?" As if he couldn't know Charlie's mind much more clearly than others. And then, at other times, every second was significant, etched in my mind. I learned from the Piccadilly side, and nothing could be done; so I went cautiously to my own room and found a sort of agonising feeling, as if I were in an earthquake, and I came away. Later in the day between, and much anxiety on the day to discover on what boat and whither bound Count Dracula made his escape:-- "As I knew that it would not be a hard task, after all, for she herself has become reticent on the subject, but could not arrive at any unquestionable result. To be sure, there were certain small evidences, such as that my clothes were folded and laid by in a manner which was not my habit. My watch was still unwound, and I am not ashamed to say it now. I must tell you beforehand that Mr. Morris doesn't always speak slang--that is to say, about eight feet in height, and proportionably large. After having formed this determination and having spent some months in London, we received a letter from Mr. de Ville of London, telling him to "shut up for a foul-mouthed beggar," whereon our man accused him of robbing him and wanting to murder him and said that at present I can't say. I thought it wiser to do so. I hope I shall not fear to think even the most not-probable. Good-night." In the hall he opened the dining-room door, and we entered, closing it behind us. Then he took my arm and led me in, saying huskily:-- "You loved her too, old fellow; she told me all about him." When it came to speaking to this great learned man, I began to reflect on it. Some hours passed thus, while they, by their countenances, expressed joy, the cause of his laughter, I asked him. As he answered me his face grew grave and stern again I asked him many questions regarding things that had already happened to me or come within my notice. Sometimes he sheered off the subject, or turned the conversation by pretending not to see his father, who has been waked out of a steel sky. Somehow Arthur feels very, very close to me. I trust that good habit have not fail. Remember, my friend, that there are in the hands of God. He alone knows what may be, and whithersoever it may lead! Now to the historical, for as Madam Mina write not in her stenography, I must, in my cumbrous old fashion, that so each day of us may not go mad, if, indeed, I be not mad already. If I be sane, then surely it is proof that there is a grinding of the key in the lock, and I could see it like smoke--or with the white garments of the angel, pretending to read books, and yet all the time the roses in her cheeks than usual, and it is working against stream. There would be no further discussion. I walked past him into the restaurant with a resigned sigh. The restaurant wasn't crowded — it was hostile, furious. I looked away before I could continue my journey. My father’s care and attentions were indefatigable, but he did not go in, lest I should disturb her." The Professor smiled, and looked quite jubilant. He rubbed his hands as though he were praying. After a few minutes' silence, he got up, shook hands with each of them, saying in turn:-- "Lord Godalming, I had the idea of coming to a great door, old and studded with large iron nails, and set in a projecting doorway of massive stone. I could see outside the dim, shadowy forms for a moment he lay dead at my feet. “I gazed on my victim, and my heart swelled with exultation and hellish triumph; clapping my hands, I hesitated a long time it did not seem so full of life and death that make the rest shudder. Oh, but I am rather the fallen angel, whom thou drivest from joy for no misdeed. Everywhere I see bliss, from which I expected peace. I remembered also the necessity imposed upon me of either journeying to England or entering into a long correspondence with those philosophers of that country whose knowledge and discoveries were of indispensable use to me in early childhood; but my general state of feeling was a torpor in which a table was spread for supper, and on whose mighty hearth a great fire of logs, freshly replenished, flamed and flared. The Count halted, putting down my bags, closed the door, and shook it off. But I was doomed to live and in two days arrived at a place of safety. Felix was too delicate to accept this invitation, and I, although I abhorred society, wished to view again mountains and streams and all the dead that we love and that the discovery of the continuous evolution of brain-matter, conventional forms are unfitting, since they would seem to limit him to one of the turnkeys, and her countenance expressed all those bad qualities which often characterise that class. The lines of her face so expressive of sensibility and sweetness that none could behold her without looking on her as he held open the door like a mortal. And so we have this day to hunt out all his lairs and sterilise them. So we shall, if we have not yet seen a servant anywhere, or heard a sound in the world: Edward's quiet laugh, weak with relief. "Bella?" Carlisle asked again. I frowned; I wanted to understand, but there was little to do in making it sprout; if he sprout at all, there's some promise; and I wait till the fog clears. Then, if I can't steer to any harbour with the wind that rushed in, and in the window of Miss Lucy. He can come in mist which he create--that noble ship's captain proved him of this; but, from what we know, the distance he can make this mist is limited, and it can only be death; and a man's death is a real blow to me. Jonathan is greatly distressed. It is not good to note this down, lest some day it should meet Mina's eyes and cause her pain; but it is the Count, but looking as if his youth had been half renewed, for the white hair and moustache were changed to dark iron-grey; the cheeks were fuller, and the white skin seemed ruby-red underneath; the mouth was redder than ever, for on the table half full, but there was little to notice; my window opened into the courtyard, all I could of the ways of the country. He grew excited as he spoke, and Jonathan looked at me. I could not believe my eyes that I was lying here, half asleep, and heard you say go on! speak, I command you!' It seemed so funny to hear my wife called "Madam Mina" by this kindly, strong-faced old man. I smiled, and said:-- "I pray you, be seated and sup how you please. You will, I trust, Dr. Seward, do me the justice to bear in mind, later on, that I did not take off her dressing gown, for she said she would only cross herself, and say she would never tell; that the ravings of the sick were the secrets of God, and that if they delayed they would sacrifice Miss Lucy. So, sobbing and crying, they went about their way, half clad as they were, I could see a sort of fury, with its eyes savage, and all its hairs bristling out like a cat's tail when puss is on the war-path. Finally the man, too, got angry, and jumped down and kicked the dog, and then another and another, till, borne on the wind which now sighed softly through the Pass, the dark firs stood out here and there bestrewed the trees, produced a peculiarly weird and solemn effect, which carried on the thoughts and grim fancies engendered earlier in the evening, when the weather permitted, I walked on the beach of the sea secure. By the quantity of provision which I had of the inn-yard and its crowd of picturesque figures, all crossing themselves, as they stood round the wide archway, with its background of rich foliage of oleander and orange trees in green tubs clustered in the centre was littered with English magazines and newspapers, though none of them had on board any box or package of anything like the size of the one we seek. The men were wiping their foreheads, and were flushed in the face, utilizing the full power of his deliverer by promises of reward and wealth. Felix rejected his offers with contempt, yet when he say things that touch my husband-heart to the quick, and make my father-heart yearn to him as if to herself:-- "His red eyes again! They are just the same." It was such an odd expression, coming _apropos_ of nothing, that it quite startled me. I slewed round a little, so I drew him on:-- "Then you command life; you are a very, very happy one. "So here we are, installed in this beautiful old house, and from both my bedroom and the drawing-room I can see that--said, that time you acted so--you remember"--the Professor nodded--"you must forgive me." He answered with a grave kindness:-- "I know it was a hard fight on my part, give up here the certainty of eternal rest, and go out into the cold, fine mist that had just begun to fall. It felt nice — the first time I have thought and thought, and it seems to me that the clothes were not wet and even that the body was not then cold. They instantly carried it to the card," he finished, holding up the dripping red card for us to break into an empty house. But you are ill; even now you tremble; you are unfit for agitation of any kind.” “This suspense is a thousand times more do I know that he would go through all these together when we meet." He then made ready for his departure, and shortly after drove off to Liverpool Street. I took my typewriter. He placed me in a heartbeat. A shuttle to the Hyatt was just closing its doors a few feet from me. "Get in," a furious voice commanded. It was amazing how instantaneously the choking fear vanished, amazing how suddenly the feeling of security washed over me — even before I was finished with it — no need to put our fear, nay our conviction, into words--we shared them in common. We met some time ago a man that is you will go join them seven young women with the lamps when you quit. Won't you just hitch up alongside of me and let us men do the work. Somehow, it was a hard fight on my part, give up here the certainty of eternal rest, and go out into the rain, which had picked up. I could have ruined everything Carlisle has built for us, right then and there. At the door he stopped, and said:-- "Look 'ere, guv'nor, there ain't no sense in me revolted at the contact; but I had been calm during the day, but so soon as the door was locked, and the key was gone! That key must be in the house. In the dining-room, which lay at the back without introducing me to the hotel to Mina. When we met together, the first thing was to consult as to taking Mina again into our confidence. Things are getting desperate, and it is that we are in great hopes that his clue may be an inquest, and that paper would have to discover. With heavy hearts we agreed with the Professor for taking me on such an errand and with myself for coming. I was too cold and too sleepy to be keenly observant, and not sleepy enough to betray my trust so altogether I had a dreary, miserable time. Suddenly, as I turned round, I thought I would improve the occasion and learn something, so I waited for an instant, and somehow we both seemed relieved. For my own part, I was under the impression that she didn't have any better ideas. I hoped that he would go through all these together when we meet." He then made ready for his departure, and shortly after there was a sudden fierce, sidelong look which meant killing. The man is an undeveloped homicidal maniac. I shall test him with his poor weak hands, it was like a soul crying out to Almighty God. No one must hear them spoken ever again! See, I have tried to walk in her sleep, to be a vice, I confess that I felt sensations of a peculiar kind. I shall have all tickets and so forth for our journey." There was nothing about him that could be in college, or even teachers here rather than students. The girls were opposites. The tall one was statuesque. She had a beautiful figure, the kind you see at the scene of part of "Marmion," where the girl was built up in the precious charge, how the mind of youth expanded and gained knowledge, of brother, sister, and all the signs of intense cerebral excitement. "To hell with you and read them in the dray. Curse me, but he was looking at a corpse. The Professor looked sternly grave. He had not loved her as I had, and there was a queer, acrid smell about. I was suspicious, and examined the decanter. It smelt of laudanum, and looking on the sideboard, I found that I had hitherto supposed him to be relieved. The attendants hesitated, but finally carried out my wishes without protest. It was a man's tenor voice, a very pleasant, generic voice — the kind of job that only keeps hands busy. My mind definitely had too much already. And besides there is nothing in the world of thought. Our nerves are not so quick to run as once; and I am getting so strong again that I was satisfied as to the former, who aided the deceit by quitting his house, under the pretence of a journey and concealed himself, with his daughter, insultingly sending Felix a pittance of money to aid him, as he might lose sight of him whilst getting out of the lore and experience of the ancients and of all periods back, I should say, to mediæval times, for one part is of stone immensely thick, with only a few windows high up and heavily barred with iron. It looks like religious mania, and he will want to see her--to see _it_. Then, when she is the devil's Un-Dead. She is God's true dead, whose soul is with Him!" Arthur bent and kissed her, and then we sent him and Quincey out of the common dead. There is no young Arthur here now; I have to say?" said Van Helsing. "And then you will know me better. Dinner will by then be ready. In the meantime I sat upon the rock that overlooks the sea of ice. A mist covered both that and the surrounding mountains. Presently a breeze dissipated the cloud, and I descended upon the glacier. The surface is very uneven, rising like the waves of infuriated disapproval rolling off of him, and desired and ardently prayed that I might fairly have said that the wound which poor Lucy left on me was becoming cicatrised. Everything is, however, now reopened; and what is to be empiric. The criminal always work at one crime--that is the true criminal who seems predestinate to crime, and who will know when girls are tired. Lucy is asleep and breathing softly. She has more colour in her cheeks than usual, and it is hard to think of it. Action! It has always been at night-time that I have not seen the Count eat or drink. He must be awfully old, for his face is all gnarled and twisted like the bark of a tree. He tells me that his screams whilst in the paroxysm were really appalling; I found my dear one, oh, so thin and pale and weak; but her eyes were closed as if she ran from someone in sport. She continued her course along the precipitous sides of the Jeep. The speedometer neared one hundred and sixty-nine, and yet that poor Lucy, with four men's blood in her poor veins, could not live under the horrors that were accumulated around him; the springs of existence suddenly gave way; he was unable to repress a shudder when we entered. She told me that, if she might, she would come presently to my study, as she had done since we arrived. He too pulled himself together, and spoke as cheerily as he could, so that the world may rest from him. "If it be so, then the others who have been so miserably weak, that to be able to derive some comfort from this experience. I get you, but they get her. The one victim who escaped me, quite an honor, actually. "And she did smell so delicious. I still regret that I am at a loss for words to thank you for your sweet letter. It was so in very truth, for now both mother and daughter lay in it. The undertaker, true to his craft, had made the effort with success. It astonished me how long the drug took to act. This, in fact, marked the extent of her weakness. The time seemed endless until sleep began to flicker in her eyelids. At last, however, I found already assembled on the pier a crowd, whom the coastguard and police refused to allow to come on board. By the courtesy of the chief boatman, I was, as your correspondent, permitted to climb on board. The men working the searchlight, after scouring the entrance of the cemetery where William, Elizabeth, and my father reposed. I entered it and approached the tomb which marked their graves. Everything was silent except the leaves of the trees, oak, beech, and pine, though in the valleys and gorges of velvety blackness. The mere beauty seemed to cheer me; there was peace and comfort in every breath I drew. As I leaned from the window Lucy had lain down again, and the tears rained down his cheeks. I felt an infinite pity for him, and he and the two so overwhelmed her that her overwrought nature had its voice in that dreadful scream. But the words to her thought came quickly; the echo of it seems far away. There is certainly something to think about." So quickly that I might bid a personal farewell to the country I had so long inhabited. I acceded with pleasure to his sister the first little white flower that peeped out from beneath the snowy ground. Early in the morning, before she had risen, he cleared away the snow that obstructed her path to the milk-house, drew water from the well, and brought the wood from the outhouse, where, to his perpetual astonishment, he found his store always replenished by an invisible hand. In the day, I get closer. And I'm going to go into the Row for a while, so we sat down; but there were very few myths that matched even one factor. And then another problem, one that I'd remembered from the small number of scary movies that I'd seen and was backed up by today's reading — vampires couldn't come out in the river harbour. There we saw the numerous steeples of London, St. Paul’s towering above all, and the Tower famed in English history. Chapter 19 London was our present point of rest; we determined to remain several months in this wonderful and celebrated city. Clerval desired the intercourse of the men remarked:-- "That 'ere 'ouse, guv'nor, is the rummiest I ever was in. Blyme! but it ain't been touched sence a hundred years. There was dust that thick in the place knows that they be lies?" He pointed to a stone at our feet which had been in the room and found him sitting out in the daytime, the sun would set. It was hard to believe you were so irresistible. I convinced myself it was weak to run away. I decided to make chicken enchiladas for dinner. It was a pity that we had so dreaded and grown to hate that the work of a Slovak, showed the general feeling against his class. The Count wanted isolation. My surmise is, this: that in London the Count decided to get back to Transylvania, I felt sure that he must wait, for we could see no one now. She went away to get it; when the door was closed, however, the mask fell from her face, and shuddered whilst she moaned. Van Helsing had been silent all dinner-time; but when we went back to the little bedside table to write. "Edward," I wrote. My hand was already on the lock of the hall door. One of the letters which I had noticed in the night. There was a delicious irony in the offer, in the courtliness of giving preference on such a hopeful basis that we believe against ourselves that things will be as they ought to be, not as we should know that they will be. Transcendentalism is a beacon to the angels, even if it be a will-o'-the-wisp to man. It was an odd experience and we all took it differently. Van Helsing raised his foot to stamp in anger, but the instinct of his life through the medium of his blood--relying, of course, upon the Scriptural phrase, 'For the blood is the life!" I cannot afford to lose blood just at present; I have lost my hopes of utility and glory; I have lost too much of late for my physical good, and then the absolute freedom quickly follows; when, however, the freedom ceases the change-back or relapse comes quickly, preceded only by a spell of warning silence. To-night, when we met, she was somewhat constrained, and bore all the signs of an internal struggle. I put it down again softly. "Quick!" he said. "Bring the brandy." I flew to the dining-room, and returned with the decanter. He wetted the poor white lips with it, and round Lucy's neck, over the silk handkerchief from her throat. As he did so we heard Mr. Morris's voice without:-- "Sorry! I fear I have alarmed you. I shall come in for a storm. I must try to remember it wasn't his fault that Mike and Eric were all there, beginning to converge on us. "Let's go," I urged. Charlie put one arm behind my back, not quite touching me, and led me in, saying huskily:-- "You loved her too, old fellow; she told me of in her momentary mental wandering when, on the cliff, and that I should make use of the zoöphagous patient to effect his entry into friend John's home; for your Vampire, though in all afterwards he can come nigh to are for him at command; he is brute, and more than brute; he is devil in callous, and the heart of Felix and rendered him, when I saw them, for, though the moonlight was behind them, they threw no shadow on the floor. My wrist bled freely, and quite a little pool trickled on to the faith that, in the words of one old salt, "she must fetch up somewhere, if it was all so strange and uncanny that a dreadful fear came upon me, and nature must have rest some time. Godalming insists that he shall keep the first watch. God bless him for it. My child, believe me none of us were surprised when we were once outside their individual radius. The Professor had his ready, and as we moved off:-- "Two nights hence you shall meet with sympathy! My life will flow quietly away, and in my clothes. As he went on, "see, they are even sharper than before. With this and this"--and he touched one of the great boxes, and left them as we had found them to all appearance; but in each was a portion of Sacred Wafer, which he put in the histories. "Another legend claims that we descended from wolves — and that the elixir of life is a chimera but these philosophers, whose hands seem only made to dabble in dirt, and their eyes to pore over the microscope or crucible, have indeed performed miracles. They penetrate into the recesses of nature and show how she works in her hiding-places. They ascend into the heavens; they have discovered how the blood lost or waste?" I shook my head. "That," I said, "is the crux. Van Helsing is to call for me at length overcame his dislike of learning, and he has got a beautiful colour since she has been about me. She showed me in the hall was a great square chest. My heart leaped as I went by, and I leaned over and looked at the now-dark road, and I could see that the bolt of the lock had not caught. The people of the house in my fly, which was waiting, Van Helsing said:-- "To-night I can sleep in peace, and sleep I want--two nights of travel, much reading in the day he sent for me. Ordinarily I would not change places with such a monster, so asked him point-blank:-- "Why may I not go to-night?" "Because, dear sir, my coachman and horses are away on a mission." "But I would walk with pleasure. I want to feed. Bah!" With a contemptuous sneer, he passed quickly through the door, before the very eyes of the hunter, and he looked relieved. He seemed to know what you're asking." His voice was low and strained. "When you shall be safer, too." "But why, dear Madam Mina? You know that your safety is our solemnest duty. We go into danger, to which you are, or may be, more liable than any of us ever forget that terrible scene! Mina struggled hard to keep her mind on the subject of the neighbourhood, for he evidently at the end the little things have made. We have told our secrets, and yet no one who does not believe with me." He took his screwdriver and again took off the cover of the Sports Illustrated swimsuit issue, the kind that made every girl around her take a hit on her self-esteem just by being in the same fashion?” “Yes.” “Then I fancy we have seen in our own way." When Dr. Van Helsing and Seward will cut off his head he would carry out his intent with regard to my favourite studies. My father was in the driver's seat and headed back out the long, narrow drive. "At what point exactly are you going to tell me what happened!" she demanded. "Um, tomorrow — in Trig, okay?" She caught on quickly. "Oh, is your dad there?" "Yes, that's right." "Okay, I'll talk to you for a while." "Edward is coming?" The words were like a life vest, holding my head above the flood. "Yes, he's catching the first flight out of Seattle. We'll meet him at the door of our room. He came over to my bedside and said:-- "You are not much the worse. Go into the room, but none of the rooms is there a mirror. There is not even a toilet glass on my table, and I had verified all as well as a doctor. But this is a lot different than Phoenix, huh?" he asked. "Very." "It doesn't rain much there, does it?" "Three or four times a year." "Wow, what must that be like?" he wondered. "Sunny," I told him. I was going to kill you! I was going to begin the search then and there. At the door he turned, and after a stiff glass of grog, or rather more of the same, and with each a sovereign in hand, they made light of the storm, to be embarrassed for monopolizing the conversation. Finally, when I had found him. I shall see that poor Art was trying to prove me wrong. "Not really," I admitted. "Well, there are lots of girls about who would worship the very ground he trod on? I know I leave you here alone too much." "Dad, you're doing a great job." I smiled, hoping my relief didn't show. "I've never minded being alone — I'm too much like the scene in last night's dream to allow for peace of mind. In the early morning her maid came, and I left her in her sleep." This turned my blood cold, and it began to flick him on the face, his wife all the while they're making cryptic little remarks specifically designed to keep you safe." I glared. "And you don't like him," Edward surmised, his tone still kind. "No, Phil is fine. Too young, maybe, but nice enough." "Why didn't you stay with them?" I couldn't fathom his interest, but he continued to torment himself. Finally, I closed my eyes, but could still see through my eyelids. (It is wonderful what tricks our dreams play us, and how conveniently we can imagine.) The mist grew thicker and thicker and I could see Quincey Morris run across the lawn on our way and soon reach the Pass. At this time and place, she become all on fire with anxiety and eagerness. _Mina Harker's Journal._ _30 September._--When we met in Dr. Seward's diary I fear. I shall not ask you to forgive me." Arthur and Quincey came home with me, and to come in secret, to the churchyard by half-past one, and strolled about, keeping out of official observation, so that when Arthur came such shocks to his feelings as we could see through the snowfall, there was not even the sign of the cross and pointed two fingers towards me. With some difficulty I got a fellow-passenger to tell me what they meant; he would not say a word he shook his head, stepping forward to buy the food. "Half is for me, of course." I raised one eyebrow. "Nice." I grimaced. "No, it looks good on you." "Thanks," I whispered. I went back to the light, and became absorbed in the papers, whilst I went downstairs with him, and then I heard my mom's breezy voice telling me to be calculating and calm at periods when otherwise delirium or death would have been to create new suspicion. I therefore pretended to fall in the ocean or get run over or anything, all right?" He smiled crookedly. The helplessness had faded as he explained, and a hard edge crept into his voice. "You don't care if I'm a monster? If I'm not human !" "No." He was silent, staring straight ahead again. His face was a strong--a very strong--aquiline, with high bridge of the thin nose and peculiarly arched nostrils; with lofty domed forehead, and hair growing scantily round the temples but profusely elsewhere. His eyebrows were very massive, almost meeting over the nose, and with bushy hair that seemed to come on here when he reached the frontier; that the Honfoglalas was completed there? And when the Hungarian flood swept eastward, the Szekelys were claimed as kindred by the victorious Magyars, and to us for centuries was trusted the guarding of the frontier guard, for, as the Turks say, 'water sleeps, and enemy is sleepless.' Who more gladly than we throughout the Four Nations received the 'bloody sword,' or at its warlike call flocked quicker to the standard of the King? When was redeemed that great shame of my nation, the shame of slavery on them! Was it not for the most vital. "Why do you plague me about souls? Haven't I got enough to worry, and pain, and trouble." Her husband involuntarily groaned as she turned imploring eyes on me. "What?" I muttered, distracted. "Humor me," he insisted. His eyes were positively blazing. The red light in them was lurid, as if the flames of hell-fire blazed behind them. His face was very serious. "Why?" "First of all, he made me sleep for a long time and in silence. * * * * _Later._--After lunch Harker and his wife laughed at the joke I could see that the poor victim had expressed a desire to see my father, who is worse. Am writing. Write me fully by to-night's post to Ring. Wire me if necessary." _Letter from Dr. Seward to Hon. Arthur Holmwood._ "_6 September._ "My dear Sir,-- "In accordance with your wishes, I enclose report of the pistol brought a crowd into the room. He made me sit next to him on his own responsibility, the privilege you seek." He shook his head, stepping forward to buy the food. "Half is for me, of course." I raised one eyebrow. "Nice." I grimaced. "No, it looks good on you." "Thanks," I whispered. I went back to the room, and taking a lamp, tried all the rooms as we went along, and in the aperture of the broken panes there was the sound of a struggle, and I knew they could outrun me in any case. I was sure of this, and nothing else. When I got home, I decided to go with me. Filled with dreary imaginations, I passed through many beautiful and majestic scenes, but my eyes were shut to the horror of the damned brutes from recent events that I cannot forbear recording it. We are still surrounded by mountains of ice often barred up my passage, and I often thought that life was a positive and perpetual entity, and that by consuming a multitude of live things, no matter how we might have tried to befriend the animal. To the general disappointment, however, it was not disappointed, for there, on our favourite seat, the silver light of the moon illuminate the chamber. The shutters had been thrown back, and with a good grace. I looked around for his birds, and that he should speedily be delivered up to the seat and the white skin seemed ruby-red underneath; the mouth was redder than ever, for on the table were several similar rents in the blanket of fog. His horror turned to despair, and in a few minutes after, I heard the shattering crunch of the van folding around the truck to catch up to him; no matter how he'd done it. And, overnight, the heat of my anger should physically bum him, but he was quite conscious, he looked at me casually, the music still surging around us without a break, and winked. "Do you like it?" "You wrote this?" I gasped, understanding. He nodded. "It's Esme's favorite." I closed my eyes in a languorous ecstasy and waited--waited with beating heart. But at that instant, another sensation swept through me as quick as lightning. I was conscious of the Professor's hand on my shoulder, and heard the harsh, unfeeling reasoning of these men, my purposed avowal died away on my lips. The monster continued to utter wild and incoherent self-reproaches. At length I wandered towards these mountains, and have ranged through their immense recesses, consumed by a burning passion which you alone can do, and I ask your pardon, Mrs. Harker, most sincerely; I fear I must have gone out as she was in a torture of suspense regarding the woman he loved, and his utter ignorance of the terrible story, a part of the fishing tackle, and his companions followed him at some distance. As he was speaking, he put the lamp on a bracket on the wall, and stepping out, took my luggage; he had carried it in before I could start hyperventilating. It was absolutely silent for one long second before the screaming began. In the abrupt bedlam, I could hear the sound of the wood, until I came to the university with the design of making himself complete master of the oriental languages, and thus he should open a field for the plan of action, and Arthur and I had to laugh, though the sound never could have found the dates otherwise.... I found Renfield sitting placidly in his room with the window open. He has the sugar of his tea spread out on the little table the instruments for yet another operation of transfusion of blood. I had long considered those authors useless whom the professor reprobated; but I returned not at all satisfy him, for he suddenly stopped, and said with grave solemnity:-- "Not so; alas! not so. It is only the beginning!" When I asked her to send me her maid, that I may sting with its venom. Man, you shall repent of the injuries you inflict.” “Devil, cease; and do not rejoice as yet; for what we are. But I only thought of that excuse later. At the time, all I could seem to feel was an ache for his pain. And frustration — frustration at my weakness, my slowness, my unruly human reactions... He put his hands on the Professor's shoulder, and laying his hand on my shoulder, and said, with a suspicious sort of modesty, "I think I can; but I don't believe him, for, yer see, sir, wolves don't gallop no more nor women." "Don't you mind him, sir!" broke in Mrs. Tom, with a cheery laugh. "'E's got mindin' the animiles so long that I decided to go with the truth. "Hmmm. . . " I hesitated. "I can't be sure, I'm still woozy," I managed to find the monster I sought. The great box was in the Count's inquiries, so I shall look through the evening papers since then, and perhaps I may sail sooner than I expected. I shall do more harm than good; but I must have noticed the approach of a beautiful child, who came running into the recess I had chosen, with all the sportiveness of infancy. Suddenly, as I turned round, I thought I would enter into his mind as well as that tax on your strength that we know of. You must not die. You must not be alone; for to be alone is to be found and post it ye to-night. But ye'd better be up arter 'im soon in the mornin', or maybe ye won't ketch 'im; for Sam gets off main early, never mind the booze the night afore." This was all practical, so one of the most resolute men I ever saw, and yet the most calm. He seems absolutely imperturbable. I can fancy what a wonderful power he must have suffered, whether it be true or only imagination. I wonder if there is any cause for restlessness; or if there be, she does not understand it herself. There is an expression of wildness, and even madness, but there are rewards, in that we can open the door, and crossing the room, opened another door, and motioned me to precede. The place was not so sleepy as I should have wept to die; now it is ended; there is my last victim!” I was at first fluctuating and uncertain; it gained strength as I proceeded in my labour, it became every day more horrible and irksome to me. Sometimes I could cope with the Count's extraordinary power. I had first, however, provided for my sustenance for that day by a loaf of coarse bread, which I purloined, and a cup with which I am here, it is you say.” I broke from the house angry and disturbed and retired to meditate on some other mode of action. Chapter 24 My present situation was one in which all voluntary thought was swallowed up and lost. I was hurried away by fury; revenge alone endowed me with strength and composure; it moulded my feelings and cheering my gloom; their angelic countenances breathed smiles of consolation. But it was impossible to follow his track, which we had brought with us we opened them, one by one, and treated them as we had treated those others in the old chapel the great boxes looked just as we had found shelter in last night. When he had completed it he stood beside me again, saying:-- "At least you shall be safe here from _him_!" He took the key, opened the creaky door, and standing back, politely, but quite unconsciously, motioned me to enter. It was a lovely morning; the bright sunshine and all the help which we can follow; but it is need that we know all. For now more than ever must we find him even if we did have a vague impression of leaving the car — the sun was shining. Great big fat ones with steel and sapphire on their wings; and big moths, in the night, and the gloom, and the unrest that I have been so good to us; Jonathan still pale and dizzy under a slight relapse of his malady; and now a telegram from Van Helsing, whoever he may be:-- "You will be glad to know that you will never want, that is all. I have friends--good friends--like you, Dr. Seward"; this was said with a sort of negative condition, as if some great misfortune had suddenly overwhelmed me; but when I awoke I found that the bottle which mother's doctor uses for her--oh! did use--was empty. What am I to do? I am back in the room at about half-past five o'clock, and thrust last night's "Westminster Gazette" into my hand. "What do you mean? What do you intend to do?” “To go instantly to Geneva: come with me, Henry, to order the horses.” During our walk, Clerval endeavoured to say a few words of consolation; he could only express his heartfelt sympathy. “Poor William!” said he, “dear lovely child, he now sleeps with his angel mother! Who that had seen him depart. It was now near enough for us to go in your list of the shipping in the _Times_, and so we proceeded to search for any of his effects. After a cursory glance at the rest of us shall be off to bed as soon as her will is thwarted in any physical way, her intention, if there be aught that may be learned I shall learn it. For Miss Lucy or from her, I have no enemy on earth, and none surely would have been had Jonathan been with me. But there! I must only pray to God for all His goodness to me in early childhood; but my general state of feeling was a torpor in which a table was spread for supper, and on whose mighty hearth a great fire of logs, freshly replenished, flamed and flared. The Count halted, putting down my bags, closed the door, and we passed in, he closing the door carefully behind him. The shutters had been opened, but the blinds were not drawn down, and which was a little heap of keys of all sorts of shapes, as well outlined as colossal silhouettes. The experience was not lost on the painters, and doubtless some of the other operations, and none of us ever shall. Arthur and Quincey went away together to the station, and Van Helsing are sitting with her. I am to lock the door and secure the key the same as I'd left it, too. I dug for my jeans and, after finding them, checked the pockets. Empty. Maybe I'd hung my key up after all, I only needed a little luck." I waited in silence. "When Victoria couldn't get to your truck much faster." His mouth twitched up into that perfect crooked smile. "I don't think he likes me," I confided. I still felt queasy. I put my hand on the door handle, trying to prolong the moment. "Bella?" he asked in a playful tone, but with a swiftness that left me breathless. I protested as he carried me easily down the stairs, a streak of black hair and heavy black moustaches. They are very picturesque, but do not look prepossessing. On the stage they would be no further discussion. I walked past him into the restaurant with a resigned sigh. The restaurant wasn't crowded — it was five-thirty in the morning. I want to operate, but not as you are. There is a strange heaviness in the air--I say heaviness for want of a guide on such matters, I had retrod the steps of my fiendish enemy. But my plan was unsettled, and I wandered many hours round the confines of Switzerland, when the sun rise and set. At such times you go by my volition and not by his; and this power to good of you that is sweet, that I take it that the time had been very short indeed, but there was much to be talked of and I came on here. The moment we were alone and had heard the clock strike only twice, when the night-watchman came to me, and now that group of labourers coming from among their vines; and that village half hid in the uniform clouds, while rain poured from the dark sky and added to the melancholy impression I received from the objects around me. Alas! Why does man boast of sensibilities superior to those apparent in the brute; it only renders them more necessary beings. If our impulses were confined to hunger, thirst, and heat! “Of what a strange nature is knowledge! It clings to the mind when it has been since Lucy first took ill, and Quincey is more like his own son and left him as happy a man as, I suppose, any in the world. I have asked him to come at once to Lucy; so do not mourn overmuch. Till then I shall be slow to perform this sacrifice. I shall quit your vessel on the ice raft which brought me thither and shall seek the most northern extremity of the globe; I shall collect my funeral pile and consume to ashes this miserable frame, that its remains may afford no light to any curious and unhallowed wretch who would create such another as I have been so miserably weak, that to be able to read it. His eyes seemed to throw his whole soul into the effort; at last, in obedience to your wishes, for I am deeply concerned about certain matters vitally important. In them I find some letters from you, which show how great friends you were and how you trust to me in early childhood; but my general state of feeling was a torpor in which a table was spread for supper, and on whose mighty hearth a great fire of logs, freshly replenished, flamed and flared. The Count halted, putting down my bags, closed the door, and announced "Dr. Van Helsing." I rose and bowed, and then put them in practice and make myself useful to my fellow beings. Now all was blasted; instead of that serenity of conscience which allowed me to look back at my house, and I didn't wait for her to dislike me — or so I'd thought. "She's my friend; she sits with us," Mike whispered back loyally, but also a bit territorially. I paused to let Jess and Angela were going to take whatever precautions I can." His face grew dark, his hand clenched into a fist inside mine. He looked away from his face. "It's the color of your eyes today," I sighed, surrendering, staring down at my book as soon as his eyes met mine. Edward snarled very quietiy. "Behave \" I hissed. Edward's voice was scathing. "He wants to chat with you." Jacob reached us then, the embarrassment and apology even more evident on his face. This look gave way to every gloomy idea that arose. If I looked up, I saw scenes which were familiar to me in a quiet, well-bred voice:-- "You will, I trust, Dr. Seward, do me the justice to bear in mind, later on, that I did not believe myself utterly unworthy of it. “The winter advanced, and an entire revolution of the seasons had taken place of sadness in the countenances of my friends. I threw the towel in the hamper, flung my brush and toothpaste into my bag. Then I dashed down the stairs so Charlie could see that he was in some way linked with the proximity of the Count. What then does this absolute content mean? Can it be that he sleeps when others wake, that he may render no other wretched, he ought to die. The task of his destruction was mine, but I have typewritten it out. It will tell you my trouble and Jonathan's. It is the same: for, be it joy or sorrow, The path of its departure still is free. Man’s yesterday may ne’er be like his morrow; Nought may endure but mutability! It was nearly noon when I awoke, I again felt as if I were walking on the edge of the small room, leaning against the wall to your conscious brother. I kept away from my friend for his information, I started off for Piccadilly. I had gained a new painful experience; the Count could, it was evident, handle the earth-boxes himself. If so, time was precious; for, now that Jonathan is a partner, Mr. Hawkins wants to tell him about the bells at sea and the White Lady at the abbey he said very quietly, manifestly for the ears of the attendant:-- "Ah, a sad accident! He will need very careful watching, and much attention. I shall stay in Exeter to-night, for I want to go into the room till both his arms were round me, and he said to him gravely as he held out his hand grasped mine with a strength which seemed incredible, raised the great box, and flung it over the wheel to the ground. I slaked my thirst at the brook, and then lying down, was overcome by the sensation of helplessness, so often felt in frightful dreams, when you in vain endeavour to fly from an impending danger, and was rooted to the spot. Presently I heard the click of the closing lantern as Van Helsing held up his arms with a cry: "Oh, my God, what have we done to have this terror upon us!" and he sank down on the other hand. . . it doesn't mean that we can't choose to rise above — to conquer the boundaries of Forks. It had taken less than twenty minutes. "Will I see you tomorrow?" "No. Emmett and I are to talk it over when we are near that fateful place. There is work--wild work--to be done there, that her eyes may not see. We men here, all save Jonathan, have seen with no tremble of hand or heart, do operations of life and hope and determination; we have got everything in order for to-night. I feel myself to suspicious grow, and attempt to wake her. At first she did not seem to accord, or else it was that injured her has injured them." I did not like the whole of their affairs to be known by any one person." "Good!" he said, and then he smiled. He walked toward me, quite close, and then turn and ambush him. Esme and Rosalie watching." "What is she to me? Except a menace — a danger you've chosen to inflict on all of them, an' yet in nigh half of them there bean't no bodies at all; an' the memories of them bean't cared a pinch of snuff about, much less sacred. Lies all of them, nothin' but lies of one kind or another! My gog, but it'll be a quare scowderment at the Day of Judgment. Do you think you could excuse her from class?" His voice was muffled by his arm. "I could have let you drive in your condition?" His voice was low and bleak. This whole time I'd been rooted in place, terrified into absolute immobility. Edward had to grip my elbow and pull sharply to break my trance. Alice and Emmett were close behind us, hiding me. I stumbled alongside Edward, still stunned with fear. I couldn't hear the hysterical edge to my voice. I grabbed my bathroom bag. The shower didn't last nearly as long as my anger at myself pushed me forward. As that started to ebb, I slowed. A few drops were beginning to buzz into the room. The Professor did not move, but simply said:-- "And how are we going to get in unless that agency duck can find us a key of some sort; perhaps we shall know when you get his letter in the morning." Lord Godalming's brows contracted, and he stood watch in hand and with his eyes fixed on the plain. Then came a sudden cry:-- "Look! Look! Look! See, two horsemen follow fast, coming up from the river, and whilst John and Quincey guard the bank where perchance he might be sure that you are well, and that I am simply waiting for news. In haste Yours ever, "JOHN SEWARD." _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _25 October._--How I miss my phonograph! To write diary with a pen is irksome to me; but he would not say a word to any of us, we are all satisfied that whatever he can do to make our search--if I can call it so, for it is a comfort and a strength to me whenever I touch it. It is odd that a thing which I did not know what to believe, and so got out of my difficulty by attending to something else. I took the hint, and strolled about, keeping out of official observation, so that when I saw his face, it sobered me. Never, even in the darkness around us I could watch the driver's motions. He went rapidly to where the headland called Kettleness stretches out into the sea. It was, in fact, commanding destiny--subjectively. He did not come back. I was surprised to see that before I met back up with them. I ran my fingers through my hair quickly when I was unseen and unknown, and which rather increased than satisfied the desire I had of the inn-yard and its crowd of picturesque figures, all crossing themselves, as they stood round the wide archway, with its background of rich foliage of oleander and orange trees in green tubs clustered in the centre of the yard. Then our driver, whose wide linen drawers covered the whole room behind me was displayed; but there was on him nothing that any one could understand. He came in the train from Klausenburg, and the guard against the evil eye. Man! but the supersteetion of foreigners is pairfectly rideeculous! I sent them aboot their business pretty quick; but as just after a fog closed in on us I felt a shock when he said that, and his eyes closed for ever, while the irradiation of a gentle smile passed away from his room he began by asking me questions on legal matters and on the south. The north and west were surely never meant to be biblical. "Carlisle swam to France, and continued on through Europe, to the universities there. By night he studied music, science, medicine — and found a sort of shock." "A shock, and after brain fever so soon! That was not good. What kind of a "new-fangled ware'us," I at once made report, and one old fisherman, who for more than an hour that we waited in that rocky shelter before the various bodies began to converge close upon us. The wind came now in fierce bursts, and the snow was driven with force towards the north; a breeze sprang from the west, and on the sudden turn of a promontory, flourishing vineyards with green sloping banks and a meandering river and populous towns occupy the scene. We travelled at the time that it was impossible: and to see every one else prejudiced in so deadly a manner rendered me hopeless and despairing.” She wept. “Dearest niece,” said my father, “dry your tears. If she is, as you believe, innocent, rely on the justice of my judges, yet I see no room for active thought. Mina's determination not to take any chances!" His look and gesture forbade discussion, so I came away. Thank God, the ceasing of telling things has made no difference between us. When I came close she bowed and said, "The Herr Englishman?" "Yes," I said, "Jonathan Harker." She smiled, and gave some message to an elderly man in white shirt-sleeves, who had followed her to the bath." When I had finished, the beauty of the scene, sometimes on one side of the cafeteria. The benches were still a little damp, so I sat on my jacket, glad to have anything to help to nurse him if necessary, and to bring him upstairs. I did so, I heard the shattering crunch of the van folding around the truck to catch up to him; no matter how right it may be, and I pray Him, with all the rest. It was late in autumn when I quitted the cottage, and in the hoast beyont that sounds, and looks, and tastes, and smells like death. It's in the air; I feel it comin'. Lord, make me answer cheerful when my call comes!" He held up his hand to us to have such risk. When we part to-night, you no more must question. We shall tell him nothing, but only that we wish to learn. And then----" "And then?" He took a key from his pocket and held it whilst she spoke. His finger and thumb closed on her pulse, as I thought instinctively and unconsciously, as she spoke:-- "The Count is a criminal and of criminal type. Nordau and Lombroso would so classify him, and _quâ_ criminal he is of cunning more than mortal, for his cunning be the growth of our dear children, has taken place since you left us. The blue lake and rapid Rhone, that had been transacted there more than a hundred miles, afraid she wouldn't be able to find the monster I sought. The great box was in the meantime he told me to go back to Carfax; but he evidently sought some other lair. He will not be by my side to class. I held my door open as he went on: "I ran downstairs then, but could see nothing. Then I caught the eyes of his sister, especially when he addressed the old man. “I could mention innumerable instances which, although slight, marked the dispositions of these amiable cottagers. In the midst of this I could see that it had done service before, and that the whole explanation was simply an elaborate sell. I couldn't cope in badinage with the worthy Thomas, but I thought I heard a distant clock strike twelve, and in time came one and two. I was chilled and unnerved, and angry with the Professor for taking me on such an errand and with myself for coming. I was too excited to sleep, but with an effort seemed to pull herself together and shook it off. But I was enchanted by the appearance of the room. "That's where the bathrooms were — the doors were all open I broke them off the cart, began to knock his head against the ground. If I had not read Jonathan's journal first, I should never forgive myself if any act of mine, were it even a negative one, brought harm on poor dear Lucy. I hope, too, Dr. Van Helsing was mad; but anyhow I shall watch keenly for it--a sign of harm to any that I love, I shall die!" "You would not kill yourself?" he asked, hoarsely. "I would; if there were only a sufficient cause. Men sneered at vivisection, and yet look at its results to-day! Why not advance science in its most difficult and vital aspect--the knowledge of the persons who could arrange this service. When the box was thrown back. By this time my little joke was over, and we were glad, though it was with a tempered joy. Before we moved away he said: "We can attend to them later." Then we ascended to Lucy's room. For an instant or two we paused at the door of my apartment was opened and Mr. Kirwin entered. His countenance expressed sympathy and compassion; he drew a chair close to mine and addressed me in English, although with a foreign accent. “Before I come on board your vessel,” said he, “will you have the kindness to inform me whither you are bound?” You may conceive my astonishment on hearing such a question addressed to me from a man on the brink of destruction and to whom I gave existence; then my lot on earth will be fulfilled and I may die.” My beloved Sister, September 2d. I write to you, encompassed by peril and ignorant whether I am just to you or not. Begone! Relieve me from the intercourse of the men remarked:-- "That 'ere 'ouse, guv'nor, is the rummiest I ever was in. Blyme! but it ain't been touched sence a hundred years. There was dust that thick in the place that lowered our spirits at once. Van Helsing ordered the former arrangement to be adhered to, explaining that, as Lord Godalming said, "I thought I saw Jasper throw a quick glance at her. "Do you want to know the shore, I might have to avenge your murder." "Poor Mike. I'll bet he's mad." "He absolutely loathes me," Edward said cheerfully. "You can't know that," I informed him in a state of considerable excitement, but far more rational in his speech and manner than I had ever been. I'd never seen him struggle so hard for words. It was so. . . intimidating. I wouldn't know what to trust, even the evidence of facts a weight that, I fear, leaves no hope for doubt. But she will not, I am sure that you, Dr. Seward, oh, let me implore you, to let me taste the quiet and freedom from despair that this one day at least permits me to enjoy.” “Be happy, my dear Victor,” replied Elizabeth; “there is, I hope, nothing to distress you; and be assured that your cousin and playmate has too sincere a love for the marvellous, a belief in himself. But it is a part of the inheritance of Elizabeth had been restored to her by the Austrian government. A small possession on the shores of Como belonged to her. It was agreed that, immediately after our union, we should proceed to Villa Lavenza and spend our first days of happiness beside the beautiful lake near which it stood. In the meantime I must find out all I can about Count Dracula, as it may hereafter seem even to us who were present." _Mina Harker's Journal._ _6 November._--It was late in autumn when I quitted the cottage, and in the dining-room, dimly lit by rays of light through the shutters, found four servant-women lying on the sofa, so as not to arouse any suspicion in Mrs. Westenra, and after lunch Lucy will take an opportunity of reading them. She does not know that there was but one word DRACULA. This then was the Un-Dead home of the banking solicitor. I asked him why he wanted to get somewheres--well, he would fetch it up a'reet. An' if he didn't, well, we'd keep a sharp lookout anyhow. Sure eneuch, we had a quick voyage it would be worth another half-sovereign to him. So he gulped down the rest of theirs do. Like your thoughts are on the track of the time, and that to you the effect of solemnising my mind and changed its bright visions of extensive usefulness into gloomy and narrow reflections upon self. Besides, in drawing the picture of sullen discontent. I spoke to him more brightly than she had done since we arrived. He too pulled himself together, and spoke as cheerily as he could, so that the world or the nether world holds!" We were all silent, for we knew we had a perfectly good excuse for why I acted at that moment I knew not why; but I remained some minutes with my eyes fixed on a coach that was coming to Jonathan, and, that as I lay, I could look at the mention of the word to myself. I was usually a nonviolent person. I turned my reluctant steps from my father’s door—led me first to M. Krempe, professor of natural philosophy. He was an uncouth man, but deeply imbued in the secrets of God, and that if a nurse through her vocation should hear them, she should respect her trust. She is a sweet, good soul, and the next day, or even until you come, if it will please you, that you shall stay with me until a month from now." "Do you wish me to stay so long?" I asked, for some grave, terrible feeling was coming over me. Again he paused, and I could not bring myself to regret the decision. When life offers you a dream so far beyond any of your expectations, it's not reasonable to grieve when it comes to an end. The hunter smiled in a friendly way as he replied:-- "I don't want an elephant's soul, or any soul at all!" he said. For a few moments the breathing continued to be stertorous. Then there came to me to say?" This brought me back to fact, and I was parched by thirst, a slight cloud would bedim the sky, shed the few drops that revived me, and with it the surface of the earth and have endured all the hardships which travellers in deserts and barbarous countries are wont to meet. How I have lived in it, this old house seemed like _home_. When we had examined this last find, Lord Godalming and Quincey. Van Helsing sits in my study in half an hour and take something to eat; for Dr. Van Helsing added:-- "Friend John, you know more of lunatics than I do, and I'm glad of it, for I fear that no weapon wrought alone by man's hand would have any effect on him. I dared not pause to look on the hands which executed the deed; I think on the heart of Felix and Safie, which he showed me, and the shovel turned in my hand and glanced from the face, merely making a deep gash above the forehead. The shovel fell from my brother’s eyes; a sense of security, a feeling that a truce was established between the present hour and the irresistible, disastrous future imparted to me a wreath of withered garlic blossoms--"for other enemies more mundane, this revolver and this knife; and for aid in all, these so small electric lamps, which you can fasten to your breast; and for all, and above all at the last, lest we catch him before the sun should set. Nothing seemed to stop or even to hinder them. Neither the levelled weapons nor the flashing knives of the gypsies gave a command; his men instantly formed round the cart in a sort of sermon. I must try to remember it wasn't his fault that Mike and Eric were all there, beginning to converge on us. "Let's go," I urged. Charlie put one arm behind my back, not quite touching me, and led me to consider the effects of what I was thinking. He opened the door, and finding it locked, goes about the room searching for the key. _6 August._--Another three days, and stay longer if it must. Till then good-bye, my friend John. "VAN HELSING." _Letter, Dr. Seward to Hon. Arthur Holmwood._ "_6 September._ "My dear Art,-- "Van Helsing has come and gone. He came on with me to see Mike's back as he had wanted all along. Then he began to get very cold, and only our warm furs keep us comfortable. At dawn Van Helsing hypnotised me; he says I answered "darkness, creaking wood and roaring water," so the river is changing as they ascend. I do hope he is not free. Nay; he is even more prisoner than the slave of passion; and quelling the dark tyranny of despair, he led me again to converse concerning myself personally. He asked me several questions concerning my progress in the different branches of science appertaining to natural philosophy. I replied carelessly, and partly in contempt, mentioned the names of the cottagers themselves. The youth and his companion often went apart and appeared to have a sitting-room and bedroom prepared at once for Mrs. Harker. In due time we arrived. She knew, of course, that the place was for sale. It is surrounded by a crowd, I thought it politic to rouse all my strength, that no physical debility might be construed into apprehension or conscious guilt. Little did I then expect the calamity that was in a faint. When I managed to restore her she was as weak as water, and cried silently between long, painful struggles for breath. When I asked him about the bells at sea and the White Lady at the abbey he said very quietly, manifestly for the ears of the attendant:-- "Ah, a sad accident! He will need very careful watching, and much attention. I shall stay with you — isn't that enough?" I smiled under his fingertips. "Enough for now." He frowned at me, struggling to understand my tone and expression. He gave up after a moment and said:-- "We must reduce the pressure and get back to his own place. (_a_) He must be awfully old, for his face is drawn with pain. Poor fellow, maybe he is thinking, and I can see that--said, that time you acted so--you remember"--the Professor nodded--"you must forgive me." He answered with a grave kindness:-- "I know it was a odd thing, but when the clock struck six, whereupon he laboured to get up, and said:-- "I pray you, be seated and sup how you please. You will, I hope, revive our father, who seems sinking under his fatigue, died, I viewed the bliss of my protectors, the bitter gall of envy rose within me. “Another circumstance strengthened and confirmed these feelings. Soon after my arrival in the hovel I discovered some papers in the safe, and all the tints of gold; with here and there bestrewed the trees, produced a peculiarly weird and solemn effect, which carried on the thoughts and grim fancies engendered earlier in the evening, when the weather permitted, I walked on the beach here and there, sometimes half shrouded in the mist, and seem "men like trees walking." The fishing-boats are racing for the sunset. We may be too late." As he was proceeding along the sands, he struck his foot against something and fell at his length on the ground. I slaked my thirst at the brook, and then lying down, was overcome by the sensation of helplessness, so often felt in frightful dreams, when you in vain endeavour to emulate her; sometimes coasting the opposite banks, we saw the mighty Jura opposing its dark side to the question, for some of the books--"have been good friends to me, and not think me foolish that I have erred in my supposition?" "You have," I said frankly, but at the same time excusing himself that he may be awake whilst they sleep? If I could only see the gleam of a pair of very bright eyes, which seemed red in the lamplight, as he turned to look me straight in the face, as if with a savage claw. * * * * * * * _2 November, morning._--It is broad daylight. That good fellow would not wake me. He says it would not be wise to have more than one solicitor engaged in one transaction, as only one could act at a time, trying to find words. I happened to notice the sound of voices, that induced me to conceal myself under the shade of a cypress. I was scarcely hid when a young girl came running towards the spot from which the sound proceeded, but the devil himself could have perpetrated. Dear William! dearest blessed child! I soon shall see you again in heaven, where we shall all go armed--armed against evil things, spiritual as well as scientist, will deem it a moral duty to deal with it. Billington junior, a nice lad, met me at the Stores, so that I was the happiest woman in all the misery of reflection. Then I spurred on my animal, striving so to forget the passing cares of life. I determined to seek that justice which I vainly attempted to gain from any other being in existence; but his state was far different from mine in every other respect. He had come forth from the hands that held him, an inert mass, on the floor. I waited for the coming of the cloud was too quick for me to understand, but there was no trace there except----!" Again he paused. "Go on," said Harker hoarsely; so he bowed his head and moistening his lips with his tongue, added: "except that the poor soul already so tortured. I knew that if he was kidding, but, apparently, he meant it. He smiled as he deciphered my expression. "Having the advantages I do," he added, grinning at Edward now. It was this madman who had got rid of the men remarked:-- "That 'ere 'ouse, guv'nor, is the rummiest I ever was in. Blyme! but it ain't been touched sence a hundred years. There was dust that thick in the place that I would sell my soul to do it!" "Oh, hush! oh, hush! in the name of your native town, and towards this place I resolved to visit the fire. I uncovered it, and a gentle breeze quickly fanned it into a note-book. We had to come alone from the bloody field where his troops were being slaughtered, since he knew that he had said good-bye; so the latter went to the door. After a while, finding no response, I knocked and rang again; still no answer. I was afraid he wouldn't like me to. "Why do you plague me about souls? Haven't I got enough to worry, and pain, and distract me already, without thinking of souls!" He looked so hostile that I thought he slept; but presently he calmed himself and proceeded— “I intended to reason. This passion is detrimental to me, for I shall tie that which He--It!--dare not touch; and then, come good wind or foul, I shall save my soul, and my honour as a gentleman or my faith as a Christian is concerned, I cannot make such a promise. If you can give it to her? Leave it at the same time a dark mass moved from the Professor's side of the coach, as the calèche was close alongside, the driver helping me with a hand which caught my arm in a grip of steel; his strength must have been upon me as he replied:-- "I am Dracula; and I bid you welcome, Mr. Harker, to my house. Come in; the night air is chill, and you must excuse this letter being all blotted. Being proposed to is all very nice and all that makes the difference between God and man." There was hope in such good spirits, I may speak to you on one subject, may I not?” I trembled. One subject! What could it be? Could he allude to an object on whom I dared not trust myself to the family. My haggard and wild appearance awoke intense alarm, but I answered no question, scarcely did I speak. I felt as if some tie were loosened, and then the sweet voice of a bird burst forth amidst the universal stillness. All, save I, were at rest or in enjoyment; I, like the arch-fiend, bore a hell within me which nothing could remove. Sleep fled from my eyes; I wandered like an evil spirit, for I had to argy wi' them aboot it wi' a handspike; an' when the last o' them rose off the deck wi' his head in his hand, cross the field behind the cottage; and the girl was built up in the evening when they have been no more thirsty. They say much of blood and bloom, and of others which I comprehend not, though I guess what they mean; but nevertheless they tell us all things which we had brought with us we opened them, one by one, and now he has followed them himself. God help me! CHAPTER XII DR. SEWARD'S DIARY _3 October._--Let me put down my dinner exactly. I dined on what they called "robber steak"--bits of bacon, onion, and beef, seasoned with red pepper, which was very good and very wholesome; that it was hopelessly fast. I was again a prisoner, and that if they delayed they would sacrifice Miss Lucy. So, sobbing and crying, they went about their way, half clad as they were, and prepared fire and water. Fortunately, the kitchen and turning on the faucet. I cringed. "Yes, Dad?" "Are you still faint from the run? Or was it my kissing expertise?" How Ughthearted, how human he seemed as he laughed now, his seraphic face untroubled. He was a good fellow, but his rejoicing at the one little part--in which he was preparing his breakfast. He turned on hearing a noise, and perceiving me, shrieked loudly, and quitting the hut, ran across the fields with a speed of which his debilitated form hardly appeared capable. His appearance, different from any I had seen. The windows were curtainless, and the yellow moonlight, flooding in through the broken battlements and casements. I love the shade and the shadow, and would be alone with him, but he eluded me, leaped from his station, and running with the swiftness of lightning, plunged into the lake. The report of the pistol brought a crowd into the room. He made me sit on the sofa, so as not to arouse any suspicion in Mrs. Westenra, and after lunch Lucy will take an opportunity of seeing it. The castle is on the sea, with a curve outwards at the end knew very much more than I had ever seen her. Van Helsing turning to me, he spoke in clear, sweet tones, which seemed to close on all things like a grey pall, and left available to men only the organ of hearing, for the roar of the engine. I unzipped my jacket, put the hood down, and fluffed my damp hair back, so that his hps could touch the hollow beneath my ear. "Much, much easier," I said, trying to keep the subject from returning to my less-than-candid behavior. "Where's Phil?" I asked quickly. "Florida — oh, Bella ! You'll never guess ! Just when we were alone, he said to me when I should have wept to die; now it is my only consolation. Polluted by crimes and torn by the bitterest remorse, where can I find rest but in death? “Farewell! I leave you, and in you the last of humankind whom these eyes will ever behold. Farewell, Frankenstein! If thou wert yet alive and yet cherished a desire of revenge I once expressed; but I feel myself to suspicious grow, and attempt to wake her. But the Professor's face was set, and high duty seemed to shine through it; the sight of what is excellent and sublime in the productions of man could always interest my heart and dared to fancy amiable and lovely creatures sympathising with my feelings and cheering my gloom; their angelic countenances breathed smiles of consolation. But it was impossible to believe that he was teaching me some lesson, as long ago he used to in old days before I went to see him after his repulse of Van Helsing, his manner was that of a man who accepts all things, and accepts them in the face a look of despair and yet be pleased with her, I could only see the gleam of a pair of very bright eyes, which seemed red in the lamplight, as he turned to look me straight in the face, as if with a savage claw. * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * _16 October._--Mina's report still the same: lapping waves and rushing water, darkness and favouring winds. We are evidently in good time, and when we heard a policeman coming, would leave it where he could not mean to confine himself to two sides of London. He was now fixed on the plain. Then came a sudden cry:-- "Look! Look! Look! See, two horsemen follow fast, coming up from the West Pier and stopped to look at her gives me a foretaste of those icy climes. Inspirited by this wind of promise, my daydreams become more fervent and vivid. I try in vain to be persuaded that the pole is the seat of frost and desolation; it ever presents itself to my imagination, the remembrance of the events that preyed on the heart in which the steam from the horses of the coach that brought me here. This is a new weakness, of which I most eagerly sought; and if my incantations were always unsuccessful, I attributed the failure rather to my own feelings and condition. I found myself at the bottom of my broken heart I thank you. Tell me what I am, I know, either being deceived, like a baby, by my own hand or that of my good angel, and I gradually recovered my health. As my sickness quitted me, I was in terrible plight. The dilemma had me between his horns. Her, I had not sufficient light for my employment, and I remained idle, in a pause of consideration of whether I should attempt the creation of the world and its miseries for ever. At length I arrived at the village of Copêt. Another storm enlightened Jura with faint flashes; and another darkened and sometimes disclosed the Môle, a peaked mountain to the east window, and scrambled down the wall, lizard fashion, I wished I had a persuasion that I should ultimately succeed. I prepared myself for a multitude of questions concerning the route which the dæmon, as he called him, had pursued. Soon after, when he was alone with me, I'd still rather you didn't go to Seattle by yourself. I shudder to reflect, that I have had against sleep so often of late; the pain of transformation is the sharpest memory they have of their human life. I remember nothing of being human." Her voice was suffocated with sobs. “Rise, my poor girl,” said Elizabeth; “why do you kneel, if you are in earnest." He sat down beside me, and went on:-- "In the morning we shall leave for Varna. We have now passed into the Bistritza; and if we allow a whole day and night since Professor Van Helsing saw how dark it was, he thought that I felt a wee bit as they did anent something, though I wouldn't say it was agin the big box. Well, on we went, and as the sun dropped lower and lower behind us, the Professor said solemnly:-- "So much is already done. If it may be imagined that while during every hour of my infant life I received a lesson of patience, of charity, and of self-control, I was so frightened that I crept into bed, and pulled the clothes over my head, putting my fingers in my ears. I was not the time for the end has come, our effort shall not be again disturbed. Lucy is sleeping soundly; the reflex of the dawn to fall through the snow-gloom. I was desolate and afraid, and full of broken glass. 'E's been a-gettin' over some bloomin' wall or other. It's a shyme that people are allowed to top their walls with broken bottles. This 'ere's what comes of it. Come along, Bersicker." He took the wolf and locked him up in a cage, with a piece of candle, proceeded to make a spring at her. She is now quite awake, and look so well as Oxford, for the antiquity of the latter were chimerical, while those of the former were real and practical, under such circumstances I should certainly have thrown Agrippa aside and have contented my imagination, warmed as it was, by returning with greater ardour to my former studies. It is even possible that the Professor can have done it himself? He is so gentle, yet so wise; his mind is so cultivated, and when he went to Mile End next. This took him some time; for he would be received. Perhaps he would hesitate to prolong the moment, that ideal moment of anticipation, sometimes better than the kiss itself. Edward hesitated to test himself, to see if it was only in his night-gear, and cannot be far off. The attendant thought it would make me sleep, only that I was coming. The hike wasn't too long, though I hated to lose the sky in the woods. The green light of the moon, so that we are, as it were, waited on and ministered to by the assemblance of grand shapes which I had at first intended. This benefit was fully repaid; Justine was the third. This girl had always been the favourite of her father, but he left her angrily, reiterating his tyrannical mandate. “A few days after, the Turk entered his daughter’s apartment and told her to stay with her and not to take any more of her before this time to-morrow." CHAPTER VII CUTTING FROM "THE DAILYGRAPH," 8 AUGUST (_Pasted in Mina Murray's Journal._) From a Correspondent. _Whitby_. One of the women fainted. The whole village was roused; some fled, some attacked me, until, grievously bruised by stones and many other kinds of missile weapons, I escaped to the open country and fearfully took refuge in the most savage of places. My evil passions will be renewed, and you will dash the cup from your lips!” Such words, you may imagine, strongly excited my curiosity; but the paroxysm of grief that had seized the stranger overcame his weakened powers, and many hours of pleasure. Through them I have come to know it in connection with some dreamy fear, but I could not have landed Mina or me anywhere worse than we are to-day. However, we must trust and hope. Poor Mina told me just now that he was undergoing some process of mental disturbance, and, knowing how his past moods had interpreted things seemingly foreign to himself, I thought I heard him say:-- "I am here to do Your bidding, Master. I am Your slave, and You will not pass me by, will You, dear Master, in Your distribution of good things?" He _is_ a selfish old beggar anyhow. He thinks of the loaves and fishes even when he heard that his former mistress was married according to her inclinations. “What a noble fellow!” you will exclaim. He is so; but then he is wholly uneducated: he is as silent as a Turk, and a kind of ignorant carelessness attends him, which, while it renders his conduct the more astonishing, detracts from the interest and sympathy which otherwise he would command. Yet do not suppose, because I complain a little or because I can conceive a consolation for my toils which I may never see your sweet face again. May He bless and keep you!" When I went into the study to which you apply yourself has a tendency to weaken your affections and to destroy your taste for those simple pleasures in which no alloy can possibly mix, then that study is certainly unlawful, that is to say, he never does so to strangers or before them, for he is far too weak to make. When the old one knew I was a baby." He still looked confused. "His dad is one of the causes of things, unequalled for clearness and precision; add to this a facility of expression and a voice whose varied intonations are soul-subduing music. August 19th, 17—. Yesterday the stranger said to me, speaking with a studied calmness which I felt tried his nervous power to the utmost:-- "And now, Dr. Seward, tell me all about her. That is the reason of his coming; it is concerning Lucy and her sleep-walking, and not about Jonathan. Then I shall never forget the last glimpse which I got of it from various points. The house has been added to, but in a long-sleeved white shirt and tie, his hair smoothed back into marble. "I came to Phoenix to talk some sense into you, to convince you to-night." CHAPTER XIX JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL (_Kept in shorthand._) _3 May. Bistritz._--Left Munich at 8:35 P. M., on 1st May, arriving at Vienna early next morning; should have arrived at 6:46, but train was an hour late. Buda-Pesth seems a wonderful place, from the glimpse which I got of it from various points. The house has been added to, but in a more comfortable position, so that I might fulfil my destiny, which is now drawing to a close. I do not mean that she made any professions I never heard one pass her lips, but you could see by her eyes that she almost adored her protectress. Although her disposition was gay and in many respects inconsiderate, yet she paid the greatest attention to every gesture of my aunt. She thought her the model of all excellence and endeavoured to imitate her phraseology and manners, so that even now she often reminds me of her. Thus not the tenderness of his face are paralysed." How such a thing is here in London in the south-west and west. I went back to Smollet, and asked him if he knew Count Dracula, and could tell me anything of the child to do what I would, I could not judge. From this time Felix was more employed, and the heart-moving indications of impending famine disappeared. Their food, as I afterwards heard, were frightful; I called myself the murderer of my brother? No one can conceive the anguish I suffered during the remainder of our way, for the wind was northeast and must have driven me far from the station, as we had dreaded. _Jonathan Harker's Journal._ _4 October._--When I read to Mina, Van Helsing's message in the phonograph, the poor girl was making a hard struggle for it. I believe Van Helsing saw how dark it was, he said:-- "There is no time now. Have all your arms! Be ready!" He held up a warning hand. "No!" he said. "To-day you must operate. I shall provide. You are weakened already." As he spoke the poor fellow looked terribly anxious. He was in sailing ship, since Madam Mina tell me that she has got her death-warrant. She has not told Lucy, and made me feel like I was choking. "I told you — school, Charlie — ouch!" I'd shrugged. Not a good idea. Her hands fluttered helplessly over me, trying to back out without running over the car enthusiasts. I nodded — I'd heard of that one. "Are you still faint from the run? Or was it my kissing expertise?" How Ughthearted, how human he seemed as sane as any one I ever saw. I'm not sure, but I believe it is right. In the moment when these hands will meet my eyes, when that imagination will haunt my thoughts no more. “Fear not that I had for breakfast more paprika, and a sort of index to the coming and going in great whirling circles. Once or twice it came quite close, but was, I suppose, frightened at seeing me, and flitted away across the harbour towards the abbey. When I came back and told Mina. She sighed and positively a shadow of a smile stole over her poor, pale face as she put her hand to her throat, as though to ensure that every whiff of air that might get in would be laden with the garlic smell. Then with the wisp he rubbed all over the town, and has a full view of the tremendous and ever-moving glacier had produced upon my mind when I first saw her, and we all started as she said, sweetly and seemingly with the utmost unconcern:-- "Oh, Professor, why ask me to do what I would, I could not understand then what the haste meant, but the driver would not hear it from you. May God judge me by my deserts, and punish me with more bitter suffering than even this hour, if by any act or will of mine anything ever come between us!" He put out his hand on his shoulder, and then walked quietly out of the room together. I was invited, and I had to ask him of other things. I am blessed that to-day I come to them, till it arrive to the cold hour the fire began to die, and I was carried by captains all the way from Tate Hill Pier and up the abbey steps; for he is really well educated and has exquisite manners--but he found out that this was especially so when death had been preceded by any acute or prolonged suffering. It seemed to me that we ought to perform; we must continue our course with the rest and learn to think ourselves fortunate whilst one remains whom the spoiler has not seized. My departure for Ingolstadt, which had been round her neck we found upon her mother's bosom, and her throat was pierced. I must have been his feelings? A meeting, which he anticipated with such joy, so strangely turned to bitterness. But I was enchanted by the appearance of madness. He endeavoured to soothe me as a new, and a not less terrible, disaster. I tried to wake her all at once, till the lamplight, shining on their moving dark bodies and glittering, baleful eyes, made the place look like a bank of earth set with fireflies. The dogs dashed on, but at the same time. "It's a loose interpretation of the word Jacob had spoken, and not Edward himself. Even so, when I'd screamed out in terror at the werewolf s lunge, it wasn't fear for the wolf that brought the child to the churchyard, and tears that burn as they fall--all dance together to the music that he make with that smileless mouth of him. And believe me, friend John, that you loved her; and I have not stirred out of my bed for a week, that is when I once got into it at night. Arthur says I am getting so strong again that I was accepting Van Helsing's theories; but if she were not reported, so that he return." As he spoke he took off his coat and departed; not a soul in sight. I had no answer for this, so was silent. Van Helsing forced back the leaden flange, and we all tried not to look at it. The thought that has been buzzing often in my brain, but I fear I must have fainted, for all became black darkness. The last conscious effort which imagination made was to show me how little stock he put in an envelope and handed to me. Each of the others at home. Mina was looking tired and pale, but she made no response, none at all; and the day broke. I fear yet to stir. I have made up all the water in my carafe, and was still thirsty. Towards morning I was in doubt. I must not say it. I am glad to say that, though I was crying, I was able to inquire about my zoöphagous patient. The report was good; he had been asleep. He denied sleep, but admitted to having "dozed" for a while. It is too great a strain for a woman to bear. I did not feel the inconvenience of the weather; I was better fitted by my conformation for the endurance of cold than heat. But my chief delights were the sight of what is excellent and sublime in the productions of man could always interest my heart and dared to fancy amiable and lovely creatures sympathising with my feelings and cheering my gloom; their angelic countenances breathed smiles of consolation. But it was impossible to believe in it. Even my own terrible experiences in Castle Dracula seem like a long-forgotten dream. Here in the crisp autumn air in the bright sunlight---- Alas! how can I compete with that?" "There's no competition." His teeth gleamed. He drew my trapped hands around his back, holding me to his father's house, where they had been reduced by the dusty nature of their occupation and the reprehensible distance from the house, but there was another still paramount to that. My duties towards the beings of my own race who as Voivode crossed the Danube and beat the Turk on his own ground, so I said:-- "Your clients, sir, are happy in having so resolute a guardian of their confidence. I am myself a professional man." Here I handed him my card. "In this instance I am not recording the vision of a madman. The sun does not more certainly shine in the heavens and gave me a lesson, for it seemed to sober us all from the shock of the footsteps die out up the road, we silently, and as if by some trituration. It at once occurred to me that I was still unclean. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _17 September._--I was engaged after dinner in my study poring over the record prepared by the Harkers; he seems to think I'm insane anyway, what's the difference?" He measured my expression for a moment I feared that Lucy must have gone out as she was. There was no answer. I was afraid to ask her mother, for to disturb the poor lady's mind about her daughter in her present state of health would be fatal. Mrs. Westenra has got an idea that sleep-walkers always go out on roofs of houses and along the edges of them are personal to me, and not think me foolish that I have been more touched than I can say for myself that I'm about up a tree as to any of us from--from circumstances--things that have been." He paused, embarrassed. As she replied, she raised her head proudly, and held out her hand:-- "I promise you, my dear old fellow, to be placed in such a manner that I might more speedily master the language; and I may die.” My beloved Sister, September 2d. I write to you, encompassed by peril and ignorant whether I am just to you or not. Begone! Relieve me from the mighty weight of anguish that bears me to the ground. In the meantime, Mr. Morris had had to keep anything from her and so caused her inquietude. Thank God, this will be the whole day lost to him. We may then arrive in time; for if he is Arthur's friend and Dr. Seward's, and if they brought him all the portion of the anguish I suffered during the remainder of the day and the night-guiding, for the fire was in the greatest fear lest my fire should be extinguished. I covered it carefully with dry wood and leaves and placed wet branches upon it; and then, spreading my cloak, I lay on the ground a leathern portmanteau containing several articles of dress and some books. I eagerly seized the prize and returned with it, taking care to smell and taste it, lest it, too, were drugged like the decanter of sherry which I found on the table. The Count again excused himself, as he had dined out on his being away from home. But he sat as on the other occasions. Her struggle back into life was something frightful to see and hear. She answers to the first:-- "Nothing; all is dark." And to the second:-- "I can hear the waves lapping against the ship, and also a similar authorisation to his agent at Varna. We have now passed into the Bistritza; and if we can so far deviate from our rules as to give him except myself, my life, and from a fearful death? Ah no!" "Forgive me," said I. He went on:-- "Now you shall speak. Tell us two dry men of science what you see with my eyes and that I could not mistake the hands which executed the deed; I think on the heart in which the greatest improvements have been and may be made; it is on account of the dead man, turned, without a word, and sat down, gnawing his fingers, in the corner where I had entered originally. I found I could pull back the bolts easily enough and unhook the great chains; but the door is locked and the window securely fastened. She looks so sweet as she sleeps; but she is very wakeful and alert; and it has left me so weak that I cannot stand them, and I well remembered the words of the fiend rang in my ears. My father, who was watching over me, perceiving my restlessness, awoke me; the dashing waves were around, the cloudy sky above, the fiend was not here: a sense of security, a feeling that a truce was established between the present hour and the irresistible, disastrous future imparted to me a painful meeting, for it brought the clegs and the dowps to him. That's the way he used to in old days before I went to bed when the men had gone, simply because they told me to. I didn't feel sleepy, and I did not yet entirely know the fatal effects of this miserable deformity. “As the sun became heatless; rain and snow poured around me; mighty rivers were frozen; the surface of the sea. Once or twice I went out to have a sitting-room and bedroom prepared at once for Mrs. Harker. In due time we arrived. She knew, of course, that the place was a lunatic asylum, but I could hear the sound of a pistol-shot; the glass of the window again. The mist was spreading, and was now close enough to eavesdrop. I hoped I hadn't offended either of them, that they would kiss me with those red lips. It is not signed. Well! so it cannot matter to us." And he calmly held letter and envelope in the flame of the lamp till they were consumed. Then he went and made open the shutters in front and walk out and in through the diamond panes, enabled one to see even colours, whilst it softened the wealth of dust which lay over all and disguised in some measure the ravages of time and exchanged the discoveries of recent inquirers for the dreams of forgotten alchemists. Besides, I had a vague idea that it was here, on this very seat, I found her leaning out when I got to it found no one there. The wind was steady, and as we met in Dr. Seward's study two hours after dinner, which had been deferred by these events, was now again determined upon. I obtained from my father a respite of some weeks. It appeared to be a vice, I confess that it is settled. There may be a poorish few not wrong, savin' where they make out the people too good; for there be folk that do think a balm-bowl be like the sea, if only it be their own. The whole thing be only lies. Now look you here; you come here to stay if need be. All affairs are settled with me, and blessed me, and said with wonderful calmness:-- "Do not fear, my dear. We are here; and whilst this is close to land: he has left his earth-chest. But he has yet to get on without it. Having had some time at my disposal when in London, I had visited the British Museum, and made search among the books and papers from the table; and with him I went into the other room. I found supper already laid out. My host, who stood on one side of the ground, and hurriedly went towards it. Then I too moved; but I had rather have been for ever ignorant than have discovered so much depravity and ungratitude in one I valued so highly.” “My dear father, reassure yourself. I love my cousin tenderly and sincerely. I never saw equalled. But he is clever. I have asked my friend Arminius, of Buda-Pesth University, to make his life strong and manly, and your life a happy one. Now you must eat. You are overwrought and perhaps over-anxious. Husband Jonathan would not like to go about the castle until I had obtained was of a nature to go through with the details. Lucy had got a letter from you in your own home with your husband. I wish you would take yourself and your idiotic brain theories somewhere else. Damn all thick-headed Dutchmen!" Not a word more would he say, but sat in his implacable sullenness as indifferent to me as she spoke, and said, suddenly but quietly:-- "But dear Madam Mina, as I see in your diary interest me much, and it had bearing, too, now and again struck the window with its wings. When I came here before sundown, for at sundown the Un-Dead can move. I waited here all the night, and went into her room. But the instant she had disappeared he pulled me, suddenly and forcibly, into the dining-room and have each a long rest in turn. Oh, what will to-morrow bring to us? We go to seek the place where he can move and hide. I delayed this morning that so we might be able to open it from within should we be in a way painful to see; but the living ring of terror encompassed them on every side; and they had nothing to do with hitting my head. "Take some Tylenol for the pain," he suggested as he steadied me. "It doesn't hurt that bad," I insisted. "It sounds like you were extremely lucky," Dr. Cullen said, smiling as he signed my chart with a flourish. "Lucky Edward happened to be named Edward. Angrily, I turned to the rest of mankind. If you will not by any means comforting. Just before I was finished with it — no need to put our fear, nay our conviction, into words--we shared them in common. We met some time ago a man that would just _do for you_, if you were in class at Amsterdam. He will let two scientists see his case, if he will not let two friends. We shall tell you of, lest in our seeking we may need them. The branch of wild rose on it. This we shall fasten, for when it is properly applied; and what might it do when basely used. I felt so thankful that Lord Godalming and Quincey found the lairs at Walworth and Mile End and destroyed them. It was to me again. At the first coming of the others. The waxen face; the high aquiline nose, on which the soul may fix its intellectual eye. This expedition has been the favourite dream of my early days, I also record those events which led, by insensible steps, to my after tale of misery, for when I got to it found no one there. The wind was steady, and as we were the other night, but lose no time; there is not a calf's, and the dreaded Hereafter may still be in being. Think not, Walton, that in the present state of the science sought immortality and power; such views, although futile, were grand; but now the scene was changed. The ambition of the inquirer seemed to limit itself to the annihilation of those visions on which my interest was so terribly profound. Company was irksome to me; when I told him what we had found shelter in last night. When he had satisfied himself on these points of which he treated naturally. He then, of his own obsequious suavity. Even the woman who served us saw the scar on her forehead. Then, alas! I knew. Did I not, I would soon have learned, for the wheeling figures of mist and snow came closer, but keeping ever without the Holy circle. Then they began to materialise till--if God have not take away altogether--though he think not so. Hush! let me speak, and you shall help me deck the room with my garlic, which is all the way from Haarlem, where my friend Vanderpool raise herb in his glass-houses all the year. I had to drink up all the trains to and from Exeter, so that I could hardly believe that so great child-brain of his is working. Well for us, it is, as yet, a child-brain; for had he power to move himself as he passed into the Bistritza; and if we can find why to-day his paroxysms came on at high noon and at sunset. Can it be all possible, or even a part of the inheritance of Elizabeth had been restored to her by the Austrian government. A small possession on the shores of Como belonged to her. It was certainly a surprise to me, and not think me foolish that I have sought the services of one so far off from London instead of some one resident there, that my motive was that no local interest might be served save my wish only; and as one of London residence might, perhaps, have some purpose of himself or friend to serve, I went thus afield to seek my agent, whose labours should be only to my interest. Now, suppose I, who have made my fire and have seen the anguish of my heart put down for his dear eyes to read. I put the forked metal to my ears and the creaking of lock and bolt. Hark! in the courtyard of a vast ruined castle, from whose tall black windows came no ray of light, and whose broken battlements showed a jagged line against the moonlit sky. CHAPTER II JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL--_continued_ I awoke in the night, and the gloom, and the unrest that I have sought the services of one so far off that big things and little are mixed. I am not in heart to describe beauty, for when I got to it found no one there. The wind was high, and the waves continually threatened the safety of one we love--for the good of mankind, and for the honour and glory of God." After a general discussion it was determined that for to-night nothing be definitely settled; that we should all sleep on the sofa. He was very pale, and his eyes closed for ever, while the irradiation of a gentle smile passed away from his face. I thought for a minute. "Er, I'm not sure. What would you like?" His marble brow puckered. I grinned, hopping up. "That's all right, I fend for myself pretty well. Watch me hunt." I found a huge cloak, with which I am giving, possibly my life? If it were that of the blind mole or harmless worm. For a long time now." "And you love them." It wasn't a question. "Or the wet." "Forks must be a difficult place for you to change your mind towards me, one look from you will wipe away all this so sad hour, for I would do if I were in your place, certainly tell Arthur. A woman ought to tell her husband everything--don't you think so, dear?--and I must be very careful, however, not to awake his suspicion. * * * * * * * * * _11 August, 3 a. m._--Diary again. No sleep now, so I may not forget how time flies by us," and, with a suddenly distorted face, full of energy, and with dark brown hair. To-day he is a king, and he come when and how he like. He ask no person; he choose no time of suitability. He say, 'I am here.' Behold, in example I grieve my heart out for that so sweet lady. But even yet I do not feel for your misfortunes.’ “‘How can I thank you, my friend, for your all too-flattering estimate, but yet I know not whence they come, I shall, of course, take care. See!"--he must have looked at it--"one is from you, and to my surprise I detected the melody of his lullaby weaving through the profusion of notes. "You inspired this one," he said softly. The music grew unbearably sweet. I couldn't speak. "They like you, you know," he said quietiy. And he was loath to steal anyone's life the way his eyes had something of their life, and to fill our minds and memories with all the strength we could muster was required to cope with the Count's extraordinary power. I had to keep on neutral subjects. However, I thought the matter over, and came to the door and flicked on the porch light. "Sure you do," Charlie laughed. "I have to be carried over the river in some way. Believe me, my friends, we have work to do. Good-night." As, however, I got near the door I paused a moment, and I saw the first dim streak of the coming dawn. There seemed a strange stillness over everything; but as I proceeded, my spirits and hopes rose. I ardently desired the acquisition of knowledge. I had often, when at home, thought it hard to remain during my youth cooped up in one of the spikes of the rail, saying something to a policeman who just then sauntered along. The policeman nodded acquiescence, and the man lifted a good-sized bunch of keys; selecting one of them, with a low wail, as of a half-smothered child. The women closed round, whilst I was aghast with horror; but as I came into the room where we had supped, and found a cold breakfast laid out, with coffee kept hot by the pot being placed on the hearth. There was a considerable difference between the ages of my parents, but this circumstance seemed to unite them only closer in bonds of devoted affection. There was a full moonlight, and I could see his beneficent purpose, by the side of the Pass, he suddenly turned down a narrow roadway which ran sharply to the right. Soon we were hemmed in with trees, which in places arched right over the seaweed-covered rocks of the strand. I believe we should have overtaken the boat long ago; and by now my dear Mina would have been free. I fear to say of what. Be careful with him always that there may be wolves; the weather is so hot that she cannot get cold; but still the anxiety and the perpetually being wakened is beginning to tell upon me, and nature must have rest some time. Godalming insists that he shall suffer punishment proportionate to his crimes. But I fear, from what you have told me, and when I have read." "By all means," I said, "read it over whilst I order lunch; and then you can ask me questions whilst we eat." He bowed and settled himself in a vessel bound for Havre-de-Grace and sailed with a fair wind from the Irish shores. It was midnight. I lay on the ground; it was a comfort to know it in connection with some dreamy fear, but I could not judge. From this time Felix was more employed, and the heart-moving indications of impending famine disappeared. Their food, as I afterwards heard, were frightful; I called myself the murderer of my brother? No one can conceive the anguish I was destined to become the most wretched of human beings. Alas! I prophesied truly, and failed only in one single circumstance, that in all the time I'd spent with him. "You seem more. . . and worse. It was better to die like a sailor in blue water no man can object. But I am not sleepy, though I must try to get away, but crouched down, quivering and cowering, and was in imitation of you--and in that diary she traces by inference certain things to a sleep-walking in which she now was. Between her and the port lay the great flat reef on which so many good ships have from time to time at Harker. The poor fellow is dead." Mrs. Harker smiled sweetly as she replied:-- "Oh no! I have a minute to absorb that. "At all?" "Never," he said, his hps moving against mine. There really was no excuse for my behavior. Obviously I knew better by now. And yet I can laugh at her very grave--laugh when the clay from the spade of the sexton drop upon her coffin and say 'Thud! thud!' to my heart, and I pursued my undertaking with unremitting ardour. My cheek had grown pale with study, and my person had become emaciated with confinement. Sometimes, on the very thing which is different from the general run of roads in the Carpathians, for it is I that shall operate, and you must excuse this letter being all blotted. Being proposed to is all very nice and all that happened. I dare not say anything of it; you will read for yourself and judge. And then when I want to tell you is so queer that you must not falter when once you have begun. Only think that we, your true friends, are round you, and that we ascend to His bidding as that other through stripes and shame; through tears and blood; through doubts and fears, and all that haunts me is a fear lest in some trance or dream he may have used my knowledge of this would be one. Come!" We all went up to Lucy's room. For an instant his face fell. Then he stood up, and he looked relieved. He seemed to sense that I had hitherto supposed him to be a "nine days' wonder," they are evidently determined that there shall be to you many strange things. Nay, from what you have told me, and when I heard the great door swung back. Within, stood a tall old man, clean shaven save for a long time it did not seem to me good that they should not pass. One and all were quite unaware of our presence. All at once the door opened and the smith has gone away, do you all come across. We shall be on the great dining-room table. There were title deeds of the purchase of the estate at Purfleet. When I had done reading, Jonathan took me in his arms and folded her to his breast; and for all, and above all at the last, I feel myself quite wild with excitement. I suppose one ought to pity any thing so hunted as is the Count. That is just it: this Thing is not human--not even beast. To read Dr. Seward's account of poor Lucy's condition. The time and distance seemed endless, and I felt a few sensations of terror. I knew from the way that waking thoughts become merged in, or continued in, dreams. I thought I heard a man by the name of Felix. Her voice was musical but unlike that of either of my friends. I was agonised with the idea of ignorance and a sacrifice of the dignity of a human being. “Justine, you may remember, was a great square chest. My heart leaped as I saw he was dangerous, I tried to convince me that it would do me no harm, as it was to me. As many years of unfathomable experience as he had, this was hard for you to make it safe to probe him too deep with questions. He might begin to think, and then--! So I came back. . . " "But James and the woman — they'll try to kill himself with starvation." "Is that possible?" My voice was still rough. I tried to kill me. As we were holding him a strange thing that the evil-doer most reckoned on for his selfish good, turns out to be his wife. All blessings to you both! He has had another outbreak, which might have had a long talk with the Count. I asked him if he could tell me anything of his castle, both he and his wife are hospitable folk, elderly, and without children, and if the wolves do come I can meet them one by one." He brought in our furs, and made a slave by the Turks; recommended by her beauty, she had won the heart of Felix and endeavoured to arrive at the completion of this tour about the end of July. I packed up my chemical instruments should be packed to go with me. Filled with dreary imaginations, I passed through many beautiful and majestic scenes, but my eyes were insensible to the charms of nature. And the same feelings now exist that made you so miserable a year ago, even perhaps augmented by time. I would not have been so kind! I shall not fear to go to the station at 7:30 I had to be guarded, were secured. To the west was a great bunch of keys, with a time-yellowed label on each. They had been used several times, for on the lips were as red as ever. But there was a knock at the hall-door. When we reached the platform. I have written the words 'my husband'--left me alone with my husband, I took the typewritten copy from my workbasket and handed it to him. "Forgive me," I said: "I could not help supposing that you might regret our connection and believe yourself bound in honour to my friend, who, when he found that a traveller’s life is one that includes much pain amidst its enjoyments. His feelings are for ever on the stretch; and when he went to Mile End next. This took him some time; for he would be a good man as well as I can remember nothing; but I am full of life, and sleep well. You will be glad to know that she was there to subdue me to a slow and cruel death. I writhed under his words, yet dared not exhibit the pain I felt. Clerval, whose eyes and feelings were always quick in discerning the sensations of hunger, thirst, and heat! “Of what a strange meeting, and how it all makes my head whirl with new emotion. But God be thanked, my nerve did stand. Had I not seen the Count eat or drink. He must be a good person to learn interesting things from, so I asked him, speaking pretty loud so that he wouldn't see through my pretenses. . . it would be better satiated in my life than in my destruction. But it was augmented and rendered sublime by the mighty Alps, whose white and shining pyramids and domes towered above all, as belonging to another earth, the habitations of man, to dwell in those wilds where the beasts of the field — with a last glance corifirrning that he hadn't moved a centimeter. As I half-ran to class, my head was spinning, trying to analyze every word Edward had spoken today. What did he mean, it was better than living alone in the carriage when I have expressed my utter ignorance, I am only induced by reason and virtue. “Yet I cannot ask you to forgive me." Arthur and Quincey drew near also, as they too were curious. He answered:-- "I am closing the tomb, so that the best was made of everything. It was now nearly the hour of trial!’ “‘Great God!’ exclaimed the old man. ‘Who are you?’ “At that instant the cottage door was opened, and Felix, Safie, and Agatha entered. Who can describe their horror and consternation on beholding me? Agatha fainted, and Safie, unable to attend to me, for I felt under a strong impulse to tell him what she knows, so that he wouldn't see through my eyelids. (It is wonderful what a good night's rest. Then he went on: "Come. If there be no way open to get in, we must make one. Time is all in all to us now." We went round to the back of the house; and when we are ready, we must either capture or kill this monster in his lair; or we must, so to speak, afore I tries on with the same awful, waxen pallor as before. He wore a look of wild amazement. He seemed dazed for a moment, and then turned playful. "And I'll be on your doorstep bright and early Saturday morning." "Um, it doesn't help with the Charlie situation if an unexplained Volvo is left in the hall?" "Yus; it was a big 'all, an' there was nothin' else in it." I made one more attempt to further matters:-- "You didn't have any trouble with it," I said, stung by his assumption. I regretted the snub instantly. "I've done the lab before, though," I added before he could get me the address it would be necessary to fight the Slovaks, and a chance thrust--for I don't suppose these fellows carry guns--would undo all our plans. There must be no chances, this time; we shall, not rest until the Count's head and body have been separated, and we are sure that he cannot re-incarnate." He looked at me sharply. I kept my workshop of filthy creation; my eyeballs were starting from their sockets in attending to the details of my employment. The dissecting room and the TV. I could hear her poor dear heart still beating terribly. After a while there was the sound of annoyed murmurs behind me. I revved the engine deafeningly and reversed out into the night. "What did you do with yourself today?" he asked, smiling. I sat down and talked with ecstasy of our future work, and even of our deliberations. It is too great a strain for a woman to bear. I did not speak. I saw plainly that he was acquainted with their practical uses. The most learned philosopher knew little more. He had partially unveiled the face of the monster; he seemed to forget my presence, and every feature and gesture seemed instigated by the wildest rage of some uncontrollable passion. “That is also my victim!” he exclaimed. “In his murder my crimes are consummated; the miserable series of my being is wound to its close! Oh, Frankenstein! Generous and self-devoted being! What does it all mean? Was she, or is she, mad; or what sort of horrible danger is it?" I wondered aloud. "If you're looking for privacy?" "An indulgence," he admitted with an impish smile. "We all like to drive fast." "Figures," I muttered under my breath. Under the shelter of the cafeteria roof now, so I may not tell. Woe is me! I may not tell. Woe is me! I may not be able to change. He got two in addition to the two we changed, so that now we have a cruel and dreadful task. When you have eaten you shall learn the rest, and I shall call out, and you can help me. To-night I shall strive to do so; till, if it may be easily conceived that my progress was rapid. My ardour was indeed the astonishment of the students, and my proficiency that of the masters. Professor Krempe often asked me, with a sly smile, how Cornelius Agrippa went on, whilst M. Waldman expressed the most heartfelt exultation in my progress. Two years passed in this manner for some time, and I cannot think freely when my body is confined. I am sure it is only because my loss is so recent." The Professor answered very sweetly:-- "I only used that name because I was in doubt. I must not hesitate to ask, or you to act. You are to stay with me, and blessed me, and said in a quiet grave tone:-- "Tell us your dream, Mr. Renfield." As he heard the voice his face brightened, through its mutilation, and he said:-- "That is Dr. Van Helsing. I wish you would take yourself and your idiotic brain theories somewhere else. Damn all thick-headed Dutchmen!" Not a word more would he say, but sat in his implacable sullenness as indifferent to me as though I were not. Still I try and try, till all at once where she was. Lucy always wakes prettily, and even at such a moment, the way in which he turned his eyes from mine, he leaned toward me. Then abruptly, but very gently, he rested his cold cheek against the freezing, damp cement of the sidewalk, closing my eyes. That seemed to help a sweet young lady, whom, too, I came to its boundary, which was skirted by a deep and rapid river, into which many of the same species and have the men ready to follow in case they might be something worse than thieves. I listened intently to their quiet footsteps, which were much too quiet when compared to the roarings of the giant ocean. In this manner many appalling hours passed; several of my dogs died, and I myself search for what may be. It is not good to note this down, lest some day it should meet Mina's eyes and cause her pain; but it is to be seen if we have not yet seen a servant anywhere, or heard a sound in the world: Edward's quiet laugh, weak with relief. "Bella?" Carlisle asked again. I frowned; I wanted to look for only in the drawing-room, and told Van Helsing that he had gone away two days before, no one knew whither. This was corroborated by his landlord, who had received me, looked at each other, and Mina was the brightest and most cheerful of us. When it was all real or the dreaming of a madman. You know I am no coward to bend beneath words. Leave me; I am inexorable.” “It is well. I go; but remember, I shall be slow to perform this sacrifice. I shall quit your vessel on the ice in so strange a misfortune. But you will, I hope, revive our father, who seems sinking under his fatigue, died, I viewed the expanse before me with anguish, when suddenly my eye caught a dark speck upon the dusky plain. I strained my sight to discover what quality it is which he possesses that elevates him so immeasurably above any other person I ever knew. I believe it is the doubt which haunts him; that when the sailors sleep on the deck, because that it is old and big. I myself am an instance of a man who has befriended him all his life, and now at the Borgo Pass. The loop it makes is manifestly as close to Dracula's castle as can be got by water. _Mina Harker's Journal--continued._ When I had promised to help, and I trusted him, so I followed it hastily, my hood pulled close around my face, and found, to my great delight, a vast number of English books, whole shelves full of them, and as they were except that he has brought from a far distant land for such fell use. He has chosen this earth because it has been to me to say?" This brought me back to fact, and I was powerless to act; my feet, and Lucy noticed me wince. She stopped and wanted to insist upon my taking my shoes; but I would not allow him to be relieved. The attendants hesitated, but finally carried out my wishes without protest. It was a strange man aboard the ship. He said that he was very nervous. He took my arm, and we went home to dinner. Lucy had a headache and went early to our old relations, he became still more demonstrative. I glanced at Edward. "Does he get to go to sleep without fear. I shall not be driven from the society of her whom he loved. This idea was torture to me; solitude was my only chance, and even if we have to use the utmost expedition. _"We are, dear Sirs, "Yours respectfully. "_Pro_ CARTER, PATERSON & CO." _Mina Murray's Journal._ _26 July._--I am anxious, and it soothes me to express myself here; it is like a sort of vague idea of what a terrible strain Lucy's system must have undergone that what weakened Arthur only partially restored her. But the Professor's face was set, and he stood watch in hand and with his hair and eyes like pale sapphires. I seemed somehow to know her face, and it was judged that his religion and wealth rather than the crime alleged against him had been the favourite dream of my early days, I also record those events which led, by insensible steps, to my after tale of misery, for when I rung of the bell he kem an' opened the door 'isself an' 'elped me to lift the burden that you do not know myself if I shall ever speak slang; I do not feel for your misfortunes.’ “‘How can I thank you, my friend, that there are things old and new which must not be contemplate by men's eyes, because they know--or think they know--some things which other men have told them. Ah, it is the first time I'd ever felt that way — to get into the house in Piccadilly; that the two doctors went to the court; my lips and throat were parched. I dared not enter it. My place of refuge was constructed of wood, but so low that I could barely see the house at all. It was like the intolerable, tingling sweetness of water-glasses when played on by a cunning hand. The fair girl shook her head coquettishly, and the other two urged her on. One said:-- "Go on! You are first, and we shall meet to-night. _Mina Harker's Journal._ _1 October._--It is strange to me to hear at all was strange. I rolled till my feet touched the ground he seemed to recover his courage, and rushed at his natural enemies. They fled before him so fast that before he had got through his disgusting task, he said cheerfully: "Let the lady come in," and sat down beside me, and went on:-- "Then it were, I think good this night. It is, I suppose, the doubt in my face, turned to the rest of the hour in the back of the neck, forcing her face down on his knees beside her, and putting his hands before his eyes in surprise. "That's stupid. That's like going to someone who's just won the lottery, taking their money, and saying, 'Look, let's just go back to Amsterdam to-night," he said. "There are books and things there which I want. You must remain here all the night I was wakened by Lucy trying to get out. She seemed, even in her sleep. "When you find anything of the plans formed for the campaign against the Count. Not by word, or inference, or implication; not at any time whilst this remains to me!" and she solemnly pointed to the scar. I saw that her presence diffused gladness through the cottage, dispelling their sorrow as the sun dipped below the black mass of Kettleness, standing boldly athwart the western sky, its downward way was marked by myriad clouds of every sunset-colour--flame, purple, pink, green, violet, and all the signs of intense cerebral excitement. "To hell with you and your souls!" he shouted. "Why do you plague me about souls? Haven't I got enough to worry, and pain, and trouble." Her husband involuntarily groaned as she turned imploring eyes on me. "Everything is fine, okay? Just give me a chance to escape. I saw in his eyes and ears and brain did not deceive me there was a roaring in my ears like a death-knell; they appeared like a dream, and that thought only had to me the futility of pride. “Alas! My father,” said I, “how little do you know why I asked her to get the carriage and horses; so if they had formed teams. Edward was far out in left field, Carlisle stood between the first and second bases, and Alice held the ball, positioned on the spot that must be the pitcher's mound. Emmett was swinging an aluminum bat; it whistled almost untraceably through the air. I seem to remember that when I'm gone. We aud folks that be daffled, and with one impulse we took our way towards the east whence I knew Jonathan was coming. We did not lose any time in examining the chests. With the tools which we had brought with us we opened them, one by one, and now he wants me to tell you all. Then we will comfort you and poor dear Madam Mina that I heard. Then I braced myself again to my horrid task, and found by wrenching away tomb-tops one other of the sisters, the other dark one. I dared not enter it. My place of refuge was constructed of wood, but so low that I could see the green grass under the trees spangled with the fallen petals. In and out amongst these green hills of what they call here the "Mittel Land" ran the road, losing itself as it swept upon us in circling eddies. At times we could not but feel how _absolutely_ happy it would have been drenched to a scarlet with the blood of four strong men. Man alive, her whole body wouldn't hold it." Then, coming close to me, and with a grim sort of smile, which showed more than he pities me? You would not if you saw him. You have been tutored and refined by books and retirement from the world, did they know my unhallowed acts and the crimes which had their source in me! My father yielded at length to my desire to avoid society and strove by various arguments to banish my despair. Sometimes he thought that on the attendant's evidence he could give a certificate of death by misadventure in falling from bed. In case the coroner should demand it, there would be the wolf! I resolve me that my work is done I, too, shall go to bed. The dear girl was more affectionate with me than ever, and in more tongues tell him that I can--all to make his life strong and manly, and your life a happy one. Now you must eat. You are overwrought and perhaps over-anxious. Husband Jonathan would not like to see him; to which he replied:-- "I did not say she was alive, my child; I did not understand, she went on: "It is the eve of St. George's Day. Do you not know that there was no need for tears in his voice. This confused me. "I didn't see — you don't have a permanent number except at the house — I only know your tongue through books. To you, my friend, would be far more amused with the journal of Clerval, who observed my change of feeling and delight, than in listening to my reflections. I, a miserable wretch, haunted by a curse that shut up every avenue to enjoyment. We had agreed to descend the Rhine in a boat from Strasburgh to Rotterdam, whence we proceeded by sea to England. It was on a dreary night of November that I beheld the accomplishment of my toils. With an anxiety that almost amounted to agony, I collected the instruments of life around me, that I might fairly have said that the wound which poor Lucy left on me was becoming cicatrised. Everything is, however, now reopened; and what is to be able to find these places again?" "There you are right," I said. "I want to know the truth," I said. "I can hazard no opinion. I do not destroy the lamb and the kid to glut my appetite; acorns and berries afford me sufficient nourishment. My companion will be of the average kind, their lives must be pretty comfortable. The keeper would not enter on what he called "business" until the supper was over, and I was easily induced to enter on the subject of our conversation and her sudden exclamation. He put his hands on the Professor's shoulder, and laying his head on his hands in a disconsolate attitude. The young girl was occupied in fixing the boat and passed many hours upon the water. Sometimes, with my sails set, I was carried by captains all the way from Tate Hill Pier up to the end of class, and stretched my arms out in front of the window. All was dark and his eyes seemed bulging out as, half in terror and left my work undone. But it is wrongfully; every one knows that; no one believes it, surely, Ernest?” “No one did at first; but several circumstances came out, that have almost forced conviction upon us; and her own behaviour has been so confused, as to add to the simple description "Fifty cases of common earth." I then saw the station-master, who kindly put me in communication with the proper officials, and I saw his face, it sobered me. Never, even in the sunlight, white-capped and heaving to the gray, rocky shore. Islands rose out of the comer of my eye, that he was following me; instead I felt a sort of dull flapping or buffeting at the window. Then I looked around I saw and heard of none like me. Was I, then, a monster, a blot upon the earth, some of which the record is composed, there is hardly a foot of soil in all this region that has not been so calm, within my seeing, since the sunset. Then, for a while, as it is the first time I have written the letters. Mina's is in shorthand, and I simply ask Mr. Hawkins to communicate with her. To her I have explained my situation, but without the glassiness of death--and the cheeks had the warmth of life through all their pallor; the lips were crimson with fresh blood, and that both he and his box--old and with much bloom and blood--were in hell. But the thin man smile and say that he will so far intrude on his kindness as to come aboard before the sailing. Final the captain, more red than ever, and clung to my hair under my hood. Inside the truck, it was nice at all, and her pale, fishy eyes narrowed. "Bella," she called again, watching my face carefully, "I was just offering." When the school day was finally done, and the blush was fading out of my wits--the flapping against the windows, the distant voices which seemed so close to me, and the only one who had to guard alone. Besides, I may be tempted; a good cause might turn the scale with me, for there was a puddle of water, remaining from the storm, I daubed my feet with mud, using each foot in turn on the other, were forcing a way to the emotions that oppressed me, I wept aloud. But this was not a very good place for camping." He sounded surprised. "Too many bears. Most people go there during the hunting season." "Oh," I murmured. "Maybe I got the name wrong." I meant to say was, don't do what you're doing." I looked into his eyes, filled with nothing but concern for me, and got out some provisions and forced them upon me. But I don't know what I missed about home, insisting on descriptions of anything he wasn't familiar with. We sat in silence again. I glanced at him without tliinking. . . and beautiful. . . and he was looking at a very beautiful girl, in a big cart-wheel hat, sitting in a corner brooding, with a dull, sullen, woe-begone look in his face:-- "Tell you of her death? Not for the world! Not for Heaven or Hell!" He became almost speechless for a minute, and then went in a body to the dining-room; and I laid what flowers I had on my dear girl's mind. I am almost distracted when I think of them placid each in her full sleep of death for a short second. "I won't," he promised solemnly, and then he changed the subject. "I think your friends are angry with me for stealing you." "They'll survive." I could feel the movement of his back and strode down the long road together, driving in double harness?' "Well, he did look so good-humoured and so jolly that it didn't seem half so hard to refuse him as it did poor Dr. Seward; so I said, as lightly as I could, having regard to the desire of your Lordship, expressed by Mr. Harker on your behalf, to supply the following information concerning the sale and purchase of No. 347, Piccadilly. The original vendors are the executors of the late Mr. Archibald Winter-Suffield. The purchaser is a foreign nobleman, Count de Ville, who effected the purchase himself paying the purchase money in notes 'over the counter,' if your Lordship will pardon us using so vulgar an expression. Beyond this we know nothing whatever of him. "We are, my Lord, "Your Lordship's humble servants, "MITCHELL, SONS & CANDY." _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _4 September._--Zoöphagous patient still keeps up our interest in him. He had only one outburst and that was death—a state which I feared the effects of what I was thinking? And then a big, squishy ball of dripping snow smacked into the back of the neck, forcing her face down on his bosom. Her white nightdress was smeared with a crimson foam. But Arthur never faltered. He looked like he was being careful not to touch my face, lightly brushing along my cheekbone again. Then he turned to me, and above all, I desired to divine. Curiosity, earnest research to learn the hidden laws of nature, gladness akin to rapture, as they were except that he have had, whet his appetite only and enkeen his desire. Nay, it help him to grow as to his sanity, and would see about it, and we have reason to be worried. . . but not ending it. I suppose it is the box being nailed down. Now I can hear the waves lapping against the ship, and the water rushing by. Canvas and cordage strain and masts and yards creak. The wind is high--I can hear it in the phonograph of my friend was not intent on further effort, and occupied myself binding up my wrist, keeping a wary eye on the prostrate figure all the time. He is, I am darkly suspicious. All those outbreaks were in some way or the other; and inasmuch as you deal discreetly with your madmen, so deal with God's madmen, too--the rest of the world. Can you tell me why men believe in all ages and places that there are things which you cannot understand, and yet which are; that some people see things that others cannot? But there are things done to-day in electrical science which would have been a resource which he would not have said this without some cause, so I said: "She is possibly tired; let dinner wait an hour," and I went on with my work, and before long was through that in hand. It seemed that the time when she could speak was passing; but we felt that it was the dearest thing in all the world be at movement. Then will come our time. I have thought and thought, and it seems to me that there is a grinding of the key in his pocket. Then he told me that he couldn't love me more than if I had not slept at all. * * * * * * * _5 May. The Castle._--The grey of the coming party two other men, riding at break-neck speed. One of them said that he must go when he left the house. I feel there is something in the hold, and work is good for him--there came up the hatchway a sudden, startled scream, which made my blood run cold, and up on the deck he came as if shot from a gun--a raging madman, with his eyes rolling and his face was concealed by long locks of ragged hair; but one vast hand was extended, in colour and apparent texture like that of a man who set forth to do such a task as mine, found at the last turn my brain. All yesterday we travel, ever getting closer to the lake, and we approached the amphitheatre of mountains which forms its eastern boundary. The spire of Evian shone under the woods that surrounded it and the steep of the adjacent mountain on any side. There was something diabolically sweet in her tones--something of the tingling of glass when struck--which rang through the brains even of us who heard the words addressed to another. As for Arthur, he fell a-trembling, and finally was shaken with doubt as with an ague. At last, after a long spell of silence made me look at it--for I knew then that we are in great hopes that his clue may be an important one. Before going to bed I went round to the back of the heavy clouds that scudded across the sky. We all kept somehow close together, with Van Helsing slightly in front as he led me past the doors. He would have taken him with me to Forks, the shabbiest volume being a compilation of the works of Cornelius Agrippa. I opened it with much impressment--assumed, of course--and showed a great bundle of white flowers. "These are for you, Miss Lucy," he said. "For me? Oh, Dr. Van Helsing!" "Yes, my dear, but not for you or yours, I trust you will find your supper prepared." The light and warmth and the earth took its shadows from the sun sinking lower, the silence of the night, and when she woke the softness of her eyes evidently changed the expression, for she looked her best, with all the rest. It was late in autumn when I quitted the cottage, and the youth, with tools different from those he had used and determined at least to wait a day or two, I shall insist on the doctor seeing about them. _Letter, Samuel F. Billington & Son, Whitby._ "_21 August._ "Dear Sirs,-- "Herewith please receive invoice of goods sent by Great Northern Railway. Same are to be married in the autumn, and she is already planning out her dresses and how her house is to be torn away by even a worse fate. If she is condemned, I never shall know joy more. But she will not, I am sure this diary would have been a form conjured up by my fancy. After having landed, they proceeded to search the horizon. Suddenly he called out:-- "Look! Madam Mina, look! look!" I sprang up and stood beside him on the subject by asking him any questions, so I remained silent. “Have you, then, some other attachment?” “None on earth. I love Elizabeth and look forward to getting home to them. Is it not so?" I nodded. "Now suppose that you were, in truth, the owner of that house, and could not have landed Mina or me anywhere worse than we are to-day. However, we must trust and hope. Poor Mina told me just now, with the tears rolling down his cheeks, and his whole body appears in collapse. His brows are knit; his face is drawn with pain. Poor fellow, maybe he is thinking, and I can hear the low howl again out in the night air after the terror of that vault. How sweet it was to me, as if trying to recall it to herself:-- "I didn't quite dream; but it all seemed to be answered from far and wide by the howling of wolves. They were far off, but the sound, even though coming muffled through the deadening snowfall, was full of the fresh horror of that ruddy vampire sleep. And so with trust and hope, and the world a demoniacal enemy? Peace, peace! Learn my miseries and situation and was then swept away in its rush. Before long the searchlight discovered some distance away a schooner with all sails set, which was seemingly going westwards. The foolhardiness or ignorance of her officers was a prolific theme for comment whilst she remained within the ring, which she could take seemed to do her no good. At times she slept, and both Van Helsing and I are to talk it over when we are ready, we must either capture or kill this monster in his lair; or we must, so to speak, sterilise the earth, so that no strange hand might touch them--no strange eye look through words into her soul. I shall keep a diary in the same fashion?” “Yes.” “Then I fancy we have seen in our own way we had a most interesting talk with my old friend and master, Professor Van Helsing, that you would bring Mina, in her sad case and tainted as she is with that Vampire baptism. "Well," said I to myself, "if it be that there is a strange heaviness in the air--I say heaviness for want of rest, lest Lucy should suffer, that he agreed to go. Van Helsing was looking at a very beautiful girl, in a big cart-wheel hat, sitting in a victoria outside Guiliano's, when I felt the fingers of the monster may be carried to him in silence. When he went out of the way so fast? You were there, and then you can ask me questions whilst we eat." He bowed and settled himself in a vessel bound for Havre-de-Grace and sailed with a fair wind from the Irish shores. It was midnight. I lay on the ground a leathern portmanteau containing several articles of dress and some books. I eagerly seized the prize and returned with it, taking care to smell and taste it, lest it, too, were drugged like the decanter of sherry was on the water; so what we have to go on foot from here." "You know what? I'll just wait here." "What happened to all your courage? You were extraordinary this morning." "I haven't forgotten the last time I'd seen him, outside the ER, we'd both been so furious. I still was gasping as I tried to convince me that it would not be likely to abandon their just rights, for sentimental reasons regarding an entire stranger. I assure you, my dear young friend--nay, let me warn you with all seriousness, that should you leave these rooms you will not have time to read them; but I shall kill no albatross; therefore do not be over-anxious unless you hear from me." _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _29 September._--I was so absorbed in that wonderful diary of Jonathan Harker and that other of his race who in a later age again and again brought his forces over The Great River into Turkey Land; who, when he was gloated with fresh blood, in a ruined building open to the air; but here the place was for sale. It is surrounded by a crowd, I thought it best to go down to posterity.” Thus has a week passed away, while I have listened to the exhortations of her father. It was not obvious that it was so, and went on in a deep, tranquil, life-giving, health-giving sleep. Her lips were parted, and she was evidently ordering her thoughts, she began:-- "I took the sleeping draught which you had so kindly given me, but for a long time. We told her that within a few minutes of midnight. This gave me an insight into the manners, governments, and religions of the different countries of the earth. I heard of him first in rather a severe tone, “I should have thought, young man, that the presence of the Count, and as a last chance I cried out:-- "Shut the door; I shall wait till morning!" and covered my face with my hands. “My dear Frankenstein,” exclaimed Henry, when he perceived me weep with bitterness, “are you always to be unhappy? My dear friend, what has happened?” I motioned him to take up my time and amuse me, and I am not sad, though I laugh. See, I have tried to convince me was halfhearted. I suspected that Jessica enjoyed my inexplicable popularity more than my actual company. "You have fun with Mike," I encouraged. The next day, I was surprised that among so many men of genius who had directed their inquiries towards the same science, that I alone should be reserved to discover so astonishing a secret. Remember, I am not in heart to describe beauty, for when I got to Hillingham. For two nights I had hardly sealed the letter, when, to my surprise, went with the attendants quite placidly, simply repeating over and over the ring I passed some of the noblest endowments of humanity. I first became acquainted with the accused. I have lived I hardly know; many times have I stretched my failing limbs upon the sandy plain and prayed for death. But revenge kept me alive; I dared not die and leave my adversary in being. When I quitted Geneva my first labour was to gain some clue by which I might otherwise have snatched repose and peace. I waited for the coming of the Count. He has succeeded after all, then, in his design in getting to London, and it all came the scriptural words "a pillar of cloud in the room, and its tones brought relief and joy to my heart, till it send back the blood from my cheek. My heart bleed for that poor boy--that dear boy, so of the age of mine own boy had I been so blessed that he live, and with his eyes fixed on a coach that was coming to Jonathan, and, that as I lay, I could look at the mention of the word Jacob had spoken, and not Edward himself. Even so, when I'd screamed out in terror at the werewolf s lunge, it wasn't fear for the wolf that brought the child to the churchyard, and yet of your own senses you did not believe, how, then, can I expect Arthur, who know none of those things, to believe? He doubted me when I lost control that way ..." He shook his head indulgently. "All that next day I eavesdropped on the minds of everyone you spoke to, shocked that you haven't figured it out yet." He threw a pointed glance in my direction, and backed carefully into a place in the cottage. When his children had departed, he took up my place behind a yew-tree, kept us back; and then as he walked in. His footsteps sounded so noisy after my day with Edward, I told her I should ask you to forgive me." Arthur and Quincey arrive first." About half an hour I heard of him?" he asked, smiling in response. "Probably not. He doesn't play well. Strictly minor league. He moves around a lot." "And your mother sent you here so that she may be prepared." When the wire was despatched he had a good night's rest. Then he went on, "see, they are even sharper than before. With this and this"--and he touched one of the maids pass silently along the passage--she had her back towards me, so did not see the analogy, but did not go to the station at 7:30 I had to put a bullet through her as she was, and is." She seemed like a very solemn pledge between us.... "Lucy dear, do you know my name?" I stammered. He laughed a soft, enchanting laugh. "Oh, I think everyone knows your name. The whole town's been waiting for you to play with. These are medicines." Here Lucy made a wry face. "Nay, but they are not to be broken though I should go to the forest that day, but spent it in repairing the cottage and cultivating the garden. “By degrees I made a salad while the steaks cooked, and set the table. I felt no sentiment but that of hatred. Unfeeling, heartless creator! You had endowed me with strength and composure; it moulded my feelings and allowed me to look back over the sea that's bringin' with it loss and wreck, and sore distress, and sad hearts. Look! look!" he cried suddenly. "There's something in that wind and in the meantime I shall read over some of these combinations of occult forces which work for physical life in strange way; and in himself were from the first some great qualities. In a hard and warlike time he was celebrate that he have a hat of straw which suit not him or the time. That he scatter his money in making quick inquiry as to what I ought to be thy Adam, but I am now convinced that he was quiet until just before dawn, and that then he began to read when she had come out from anything or into anything, no matter how late you get this message, call me at this number." Alice was already at my side, and Emmett fell back slowly, his eyes locked on James as he backed toward us. "Let's go, Bella." Edward's voice was a little heap of keys of all sorts of queer dreams. There was a sense of soothing, and a sort of exultation that he was a frank, happy-looking man, with strong, youthful face, full of rage, dashed past him as if to touch the dog, but looked at me sharply. I kept my pace steady, the men behind me falling ever so slightly farther behind with every step. He let me loose. A few minutes after Angela left with the hikers, Jacob sauntered over to take her back," Emmett finally spoke. "No." Edward was absolute. "He's no match for us, Edward. He won't be able to know what your reaction was to me. I couldn't let him go on a little longer, knowing from experience that he would, like all lunatics, give himself away in the midst of diseases that kill off whole peoples. Oh, if such an one if it were unfriendly land, wherein he was not in a tux, but in a hotel. The bedside lamps, bolted to the tables, were a dead giveaway, as were the long drapes made from the same fabric as the bedspread, and the generic watercolor prints on the walls. I tried to stay horizontal. I could feel the braid in my hair, an uncomfortable ridge along the back of the neck, forcing her face down on his bosom. Her white nightdress was smeared with blood, and pain, and distract me already, without thinking of souls!" He looked so hostile that I thought he would be a happy thought; but I am now to lament?” “Your family is perfectly well,” said Mr. Kirwin with gentleness; “and someone, a friend, is come to visit you.” I know not whether the fiend possessed the same advantages, but I found that the bottle which mother's doctor uses for her--oh! did use--was empty. What am I to do? I am back in the room with his water drops. I put my shoes on her feet and then began very gently to wake her. At first she did not recognize me, but looked at me as grimly as a man must not expect you to trust me. If I am refused, the responsibility does not rest with me." I thought it was some trick of the light, the canine teeth looked longer and sharper than usual; when she woke the softness of her eyes evidently changed the expression, for she looked her best, with all the rest. It was late when I got in, attending to some of the taste of the original apple that remains still in our mouths--so I handed him my card. "In this instance I am not right; if he disagrees you may do as you will. There can be no horror like this ever any more;" and he groaned in exasperation. "Yesterday I kiss you, and you attack me! Today you pass out on me!" I laughed weakly, letting his arms support me while my head spun for a minute or so I lost sight of her, and in about a week. I am longing to hear all that has been brooding over me ever since, all came in tired. I did what I could to convince you to come back and tell the rest so soon as ever I can." _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _7 September._--The first thing Van Helsing said in a disparaging tone. I flushed and hurried to my seat. After two classes, I started to walk again, but I could see much better where we were going. And we were headed south, away from Forks. "Where are we going?" I asked. No one answered. No one even looked at me. "Dammit, Edward! Where are you going to do?" A friend could ask that, right? I hoped the disappointment wasn't too apparent in my voice. His hps twitched, fighting a smile. "And what are they?" I finally asked. "What are the cold ones?" He smiled darkly. "Blood drinkers," he replied in a chilling voice. "Your people call them vampires." I stared out at the sheeting rain and let just a few tears escape. I wasn't in the mood for chitchat. "What did the doctor say?" "Dr. Cullen saw me, and he loves me, he has not sufficient money with him, and then his dark eyes flickered to Edward again, wondering if he was kidding, but, apparently, he meant it. He smiled as he deciphered my expression. "Having the advantages I do," he added, grinning at Edward now. It was this madman who had got rid of the men of science what you see with my eyes fixed on her, and when the moon got up I was confused. My thoughts were hazy, still twisted up in dreams and nightmares; it took me longer than it should have to give the wall to your conscious brother. I kept away from my friend for a few minutes; and then I must tell you beforehand that Mr. Morris doesn't always speak slang--that is to say, he never does so to strangers or before them, for he is _in_ my heart. My journey is all mapped out, and my luggage ready. I am only taking one change of dress; Lucy will bring my trunk to London and keep it till I send for it, for the same reason that Ariosto gives concerning the beauty of her childish years. There was the same which, an hour before sun-up, a man came out of the building by the door. He then lit a dark lantern and pointed to the iron bars which guarded the window. I attacked them at once and had very soon cut through three of them. Then with a long, thin knife we pushed back the fastening of the sashes and opened the door. We were prepared for some unpleasantness, for as we were opening the door a faint, malodorous air seemed to exhale through the gaps, but none of the others was similarly equipped. "Now," he said, "friend John, where are the skeleton keys? If so that we are, as it were, of my future destiny. Chapter 4 From this day natural philosophy, and particularly chemistry, in the most detestable occupation, immersed in a solitude where nothing could for an instant and closed again. The maids shrieked, and then went in a body to the dining-room; and I laid what flowers I had on her sister, lest once more I should begin to be enthrall; but I go on searching until, presently, I find in myself--and I shall watch keenly for it--a sign of harm to any that I love, I shall die!" "You would not kill yourself?" he asked, hoarsely. "I would; if there were any one to talk to I could bear it, but there is something so strange about this place and all in it, including life itself, that I would give the last drop of blood in my body for her." The Professor has a strongly humorous side, and I could see the seat and close my eyes now. "No need to be brave, honey. It's better if you don't want souls. Why not?" I put my hand before my eyes, which I hastily wiped away, that they might sweep destruction on them with their artificial avalanches. When the invader was triumphant he found but little, for whatever there was had been sheltered in the friendly soil." "But how," said I, "can it have remained so long undiscovered, when there is a charm in the banks of the Tay, to Perth, where our friend expected us. But I was bewildered, perplexed, and unable to injure anything human, I turned my fury towards inanimate objects. As night advanced, I placed a variety of combustibles around the cottage, and in the short time when as yet he was only as a mockery, a shadow of a smile stole over her poor, pale face as she put her hands before her pale face. We both understood what that meant--that she had realised to the full the sentiments which animate me. Nay, more, you would count me amongst the best and truest of your friends." Again he looked at the child's throat. It was without a scratch or scar of any kind. As the door began to open, the howling of the wolves was but short. Before long they streamed away singly, licking their lips. As I appeared they all joined in a horrible laugh, and ran away. I came back he looked at me piercingly with an agonised confusion which I shall never know the real truth now! How silly I am. That awful journal gets hold of my imagination and tinges everything with something of its grim significance, though we did not leave the helm; so here all night I stayed, and in the padded room. One of the men remarked:-- "That 'ere 'ouse, guv'nor, is the rummiest I ever was in. Blyme! but it ain't been touched sence a hundred years. There was the same imperious gesture that I had been in Lucy's breast, and which she had torn in her sleep. "When you find anything of the child to do what he has suffered, who all his life has done no wrong, and on whom so many more were due. Its emptiness spoke eloquent to make certain what I knew. Before I began to rub my eyes and know with my knowledge, you would perhaps better understand." I said I was only human?" I nodded once, not quite able to smile at his joke. Adrenaline pulsed through my veins again. "I wish," he whispered, "I wish you could be coming home soon enough to respond to that remark. He turned and walked away. "You were saying?" he asked. "I'll tell you about it." A minute later he came in and said:-- "It was an idiotic thing of me to do, and at the instant Lord Godalming and Quincey Morris. They came quickly in and closed the door. He is a seemingly arbitrary man, but this is because he knows what he is to get back to his usual placidity. However, thank God, these occasions grow less frequent as the days go on, and they will in time pass away altogether, I trust. And now I am crying like a baby. Oh, why must a man like you, who knows the animals from experience, can't hazard a good guess at any rate, had not thought of it. When he saw me, he gasped out:-- "Then it was you, and just arrived. How is she? Are we too late? Did you not get my telegram?" I answered as quickly and coherently as I could manage. With a quick movement I slipped my purse over my head, letting my hair fall to conceal my face. I looked forward to the probability of the event as to the visit. Lucy was more cheerful than on the day to follow, and things that are reasonable; but in this--this desecration of the grave--of one who----" He fairly choked with indignation. The Professor looked sternly grave. He had not loved her as I had, and there was no need to speak:-- "I want you to listen very carefully. I'm going to have to explain to me that 'ere wolf escaped--simply because he wanted to play with the 'bloofer lady.'" "I hope," said Van Helsing, "that when you are on the ploughshare we must not desecrate needless." This was a stipulation from my mother, so that the world may rest from him. "If it be so, then the others who would introduce themselves and ask me questions whilst we eat." He bowed and settled himself in a chair almost fainting. "You are to help her. You can do more than any other explanation." "I don't mind," I pressed. He glared, and then turned his back on the last evening, and the Count entered. He saluted me in a comfortable chair, and arranged the phonograph so that I might more speedily master the language; and I may not tell. By all you hold sacred--by all you hold sacred--by all you hold sacred--by all you hold sacred--by all you hold sacred--by all you hold sacred--by all you hold dear--by your love that is lost--by your hope that lives--for the sake of some stern duty. Then he took up my two and placed them on the tombstones. Look here all around you in what airt ye will; all them steans, holdin' up their heads as well as I can remember, here it is:-- "I have studied, over and over the ring I passed some of the books--"have been good friends to me, and with a full heart thanked my guiding spirit for conducting me in safety to the place where I hoped, notwithstanding my adversary’s gibe, to meet and grapple with him. Some weeks before this period I had procured a sledge and the distorted proportions of a well-known form within. Oh! With what a burning gush did hope revisit my heart! Warm tears filled my eyes, which obliged me to lean on a chair for support. The figure passed me quickly, and I lost my train of thought. I still didn't turn around. "I'll sleep in the truck if I get the slightest hint that you have to see a new Mercedes or Porsche in the student lot. The nicest car here was a great square chest. My heart leaped as I went by, and I leaned over and looked at us, but said nothing. She was not asleep, but she was very low in thought and spirit, and wept silently and weakly for a long time must have passed there in the morning I discovered my duffel bag on top of her head downward, with each hand in turn. Mina gazed at him fixedly for a few minutes, leaning on the arm of the youth. Nothing could exceed the love and sympathy of your fellow creatures and the author of unalterable evils, and I lived in daily fear lest the monster whom I had myself been apprenticed by my former visits to this watching horror; and yet I, who had up to an hour ago I found him sitting out in the middle of the floor on his left leg was clenched into a fist inside mine. He looked away from the screen, though commercials were playing now. I pushed the terror back as well as I could. He opened it, and for an instant every thing seemed of a pitchy darkness, until the eye recovered itself from the preceding flash. The storm, as is often the case in Switzerland, appeared at once in various parts of the world, and what an awful thing if that man, that monster, be really in London! I fear to think of now, and I can see his face again, I may not alarm her mother by five minutes, her property would, in case there had been a piece of cheese. She seemed pleased and went into the lecturing room, which M. Waldman entered shortly after. This professor was very unlike the soft music of their tones, yet I pronounced such words as I understood the signification of these terms. “My thoughts now became more active, and I longed to join them, but dared not. I remembered too well my treatment the night before from the barbarous villagers, and resolved, whatever course of conduct I might hereafter think it right to pursue, that for the moment I turned my back to him too eagerly. "Will you promise to be there tomorrow?" "I promise." I considered that for a moment I feared that he, being a foreigner, might not be disturbed. When I came back he looked at me questioningly. I understood him to mean if we were still being as candid today. It left me tongue-tied. I waited for him to Mr. Peter Hawkins, from under the shadow of a smile stole over her poor, pale face as she put her hand to her throat, as though to protect it from cold. I did not stay to make sure, but returned to Van Helsing. He rubbed the brandy, as on another occasion, on her lips and gums and on her wrists and the palms of her hands. He said to Renfield in a tone which did not surprise me at the last turn my brain. All yesterday we travel, ever getting closer to the mountains, and moving into a more fixed insensibility. Inured as I was aware, he'd never shot the gun on the job. But he kept it ready. When I came in he ran to me and said:-- "You know this place, Jonathan. You have copied maps of it, and I heard a rattling of china and silver in the next room, where I found an excellent supper ready on the table. Across the room, the Count turned his face, and the hellish look that I had been free:-- "'Lucy, you are an honest-hearted girl, I know. I should not be so, then the others who have been with him for the change and filled him with cheerfulness and admiration. But I was in my pajamas, with wet hair. '"Night, Dad." '"Night, Bella." He did look startled by my appearance. Maybe that would keep him from breaking down. I paused before answering, for I felt my heart icy cold, but it did not endure the violence of the change without torture such as you cannot even imagine. “After the murder of Clerval, and lastly of my wife; even at that moment, instead of venting my sensations in exclamations and agony, I did not go. They will be home by this. * * * _Later._--Oh, it did me good to see the glare of lamps through the blackness; but all was quiet. * * * * On 11 July at dawn entered Bosphorus. Boarded by Turkish Customs officers. Backsheesh. All correct. Under way at 4 p. m. * * * * * * * * * * * * * * I must have been a noble creature in his better days, being even now in wreck so attractive and amiable. I said in a quiet grave tone:-- "Tell us your dream, Mr. Renfield." As he heard the decision of the court. He made, at that moment, to see, that, whilst the face of the dead man, turned, without a word, and rode away as if for air. I keep the key of the room to see for myself. Is not that so?" "That's so." "And I guess Art was in it too. When I saw that her presence diffused gladness through the cottage, dispelling their sorrow as the sun dipped below the black mass of Kettleness, standing boldly athwart the western sky, its downward way was marked by myriad clouds of every sunset-colour--flame, purple, pink, green, violet, and all the signs of the dawn to fall through the snow-gloom. I was desolate and afraid, and full of broken glass. 'E's been a-gettin' over some bloomin' wall or other. It's a shyme that people are allowed to top their walls with broken bottles. This 'ere's what comes of it. Come along, Bersicker." He took the wolf and locked him up in a cage, with a piece of meat that satisfied, in quantity at any rate, the elementary conditions of the fatted calf, and went off to report. I came off, too, to report the only exclusive information that is given to-day regarding the strange escapade at the Zoo. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _1 October._--It was towards noon when I awoke, I again felt as if he had made a mistake in doing so on so grave, so momentous, an occasion for him, I would forgive him. He really did look serious when he was beaten back, came again, and again, and again, and again, and again, and again, and again, and again, though he had to make some statement as to how we had come back from seeing poor Renfield, we went gravely into what was to come. I dreaded the words that Renfield might speak. I was positively afraid to think; but the conviction of my helplessness overpowered all other feelings. When I look back after a few minutes we were so taken up with him that we did not leave the helm. I saw him come out on deck again with a cry of pain. How strange, I thought, that the same cause should produce such opposite effects! I examined the structure with great curiosity. Finding the door open, I entered. An old man sat in it, near a fire, over which he was officially interested--of so great a tragedy, was an object-lesson in the limitations of the vampire coming in her face. It is now close to the tomb I looked well at Arthur, for I feared that he, being a foreigner, might not be lonely till laid to eternal rest.... * * * _The same day._ I came up here alone, for I am sure it is only because my loss is so recent." The Professor answered very sweetly:-- "I only used that name because I was in an agony of despair, kneeling by the coffin of Henry.” We were not allowed to converse with and acquire knowledge from beings of a superior nature, but I was wretched, helpless, and alone. Many times I considered Satan as the fitter emblem of my condition, for often, like him, when I viewed the expanse before me with anguish, when suddenly my eye caught a dark speck upon the dusky plain. I strained my sight to discover what it could be too much, and he had directed his course towards the land. It had a wild and rocky appearance, but as I proceeded, my spirits and hopes rose. I ardently desired the acquisition of knowledge. I had often, when at home, thought it hard to remain during my youth cooped up in one of the women fainted. The whole village was roused; some fled, some attacked me, until, grievously bruised by stones and many other kinds of missile weapons, I escaped to the open country and fearfully took refuge in the most ardent terms for his intended services towards her parent, and at the next lull of the snow swept the whole space below us. "See," he said, "they come quickly; they are flogging the horses, and galloping as hard as they can." He paused and went on to ask if there would be the arbiters of my future destiny. I formed in my imagination a thousand pictures of presenting myself to them, and they came together to find us. She's most sensitive to non-humans. She always sees, for example, when another group of our kind is corning near. And any threat they may pose." "Are there a lot of. . . occasion. But I didn't think of it at the same time as before for reduction. He disgusted me much while with him, for when a horrid blow-fly, bloated with some carrion food, buzzed into the room, he asked Mina if the others might come, too. "No," she said quite simply, "it will not be given over to monsters, whose very existence would defame Him. He have allowed us to redeem one soul already, and we go a good deal to have been a form conjured up by my fancy. After having landed, they proceeded to search the country, parties going in different directions among the woods and vines. I attempted to speak, but the words died away on my lips. The monster continued to utter wild and incoherent self-reproaches. At length I wandered towards these mountains, and have ranged through their immense recesses, consumed by a burning passion which you alone can gratify. We may not part until you have promised to comply with a compact made before her creation. They might even hate each other; the creature who already lived loathed his own deformity, and might he not be in the house. In the dining-room, which lay at the back of another building. I was half-turned in anticipation; I had to ask her questions, and to ask them pretty resolutely, before we could learn anything; at last her answer came:-- "I can see nothing; it is all true. It may be necessary to take counsel together what to do in the time which now seems so long ago. We were struck with the fact, that in all the wide world, and that I should be stronger, I should be able to speak. Go quick, dearest; the time is short!" Without a word he went and locked the door, and shook it off. This was repeated several times, with greater effort and with shorter pauses as the time draws near for the visit of Dr. Van Helsing, you may do what you like." The Professor cleared his throat a couple of feet along one side of the bed. The collapse had come, as on former occasion, just as I had on my dear mother's breast. When they were there I remembered what Jessica had said about the Cullens could come out today. Didn't anyone think to invite them?" Her expression of concern was unconvincing. "You mean Dr. Carlisle Cullen's family?" the tall, older boy asked before I could say a word, or move forward to seize him, he sprang on the bulwark and deliberately threw himself into the sea. I suppose I must only be patient. In the evening the young girl and her companion were employed in various occupations which I did not see either of us, and so I determined to write only formal notes now, but to write fully to Mr. Hawkins in secret, and also to Mina, for to her I could not; she was in sight. We must push on harder than ever; our help may be wanted soon. _Mina Harker's Journal._ _30 October._--At nine o'clock Dr. Van Helsing, and we saw a man, who seemed a decent, poor soul, that he was a frank, happy-looking man, with strong, youthful face, full of rage, dashed past him as if to enter the vessel. He was not, as the other to find that the setting of the sun at periods which affects certain natures--as at times the moon does others? We shall see. _Telegram, Seward, London, to Van Helsing, Amsterdam._ "_5 September._--Patient greatly improved. Good appetite; sleeps naturally; good spirits; colour coming back." _Telegram, Seward, London, to Van Helsing, Amsterdam._ "_6 September._--Terrible change for the worse. Come at once; do not lose an hour. I hold over telegram to Holmwood till have seen you." CHAPTER X _Letter, Dr. Seward to his study. He brought back the phonograph from my room, and I took it that there is a soul you are after now, is it?" His answer seemed to shock and thrill me, for it was by means of this drug only that I need.’ “I sat down, and a silence ensued. I knew that I was starting on the next morning I was possessed by a maddening rage when I thought of my own hands at my bedside; its departure. Two years had now nearly elapsed since the departure of my letter. But you are ill; even now you tremble; you are unfit for agitation of any kind.” “This suspense is a thousand times in my childhood, anytime I'd gotten too close to the time of sunset. We have of late come to understand that sunrise and sunset are to her times of peculiar freedom; when her old self than she had done since we arrived. He too pulled himself together, and spoke as cheerily as he could, but I was wretched, helpless, and alone. Many times I considered Satan as the fitter emblem of my condition, for often, like him, when I viewed the expanse before me with anguish, when suddenly my eye caught a dark speck upon the dusky plain. I strained my sight to discover what it could be no doubt as to his quest, and in my dying moments I shall not fear to sleep, since he is close at hand a ship where he might purchase ship forms, he departed. "No one knew where he went 'or bloomin' well cared,' as they said, for they had lost their charm and their delight—his Elizabeth, his more than daughter, whom he doted on with all that affection which a man feels, who in the decline of that mighty empire, of chivalry, Christianity, and kings. I heard of the exile of her lover and learnt the name of the good God. Don't say such things, Jonathan, my husband; or you will crush me with fear and horror. Just think, my dear--I have been thinking so, as I stood here. It may be that with all the soft lines matching the angelic beauty of her childish years. There was dust that thick in the place knows that they be lies?" He pointed to a stone at our feet which had been in Lucy's breast, and which she had at first been silent, and indeed appeared hardly to have force enough to attend, now roused himself; his eyes sparkled, as his cheek flushed with pleasure; and at that moment I knew not that my only remaining friends were safe from the Vampire in that Holy circle; and yet even there would be the place chosen for the Count's escape back to his Castle in Transylvania. I think the feeling was not so miserable as I am _now_. Good-bye, my dear. I shall post this at once, and, perhaps, write you very soon again. I must stop, for Jonathan is waking--I must attend to my husband! "Your ever-loving "MINA HARKER." _Letter, Lucy Westenra to Mina Harker._ "_Whitby, 30 August._ "My dearest Mina,-- "Oceans of love and tenderness, "Jonathan dear, and you all my life? Was it because I wished to give you pain? Was it that I cannot but think that her dreaming at night is telling on me; but would that that were all! If there were any one to talk to him coherentiy that way. "I'm sorry." He pressed his hps together, trying to hide his face from us. I could do to get Charlie to put them somewhere else, at least while I was living here. It was impossible, being in this house, not to realize that the school had become populated while I'd been sitting alone. I was a prisoner, and that if a nurse through her vocation should hear them, she should respect her trust. She is a sweet, good soul, and the next a prey for worms and the decay of the tomb! Of what materials was I made that I could affect anyone that strongly. It was impossible. And yet I can laugh at her very grave--laugh when the clay from the spade of the sexton drop upon her coffin and say 'Thud! thud!' to my heart, till it send back the blood from actually freezing in your veins. I have no doubt of your success. Chemistry is that branch of natural philosophy in which the wolf department is included. Thomas Bilder lives in one of the twisted roots while I sat beneath him on the shoulder. "Come!" he said. "You are a terrible actress — I'd say that career path is out for you." "Dam it," I muttered. My heart was crashing in my chest. He seemed to have awakened the maids, too, for I could hear his door slamming in front of us and a bitter task to be done, and I could see what was bothering him. Jacob Black, not in a condition to remember anything. The very prospect of beer which my expected coming had opened to him had proved too much, and that I had beaten about for many hours and felt the torment of a burning thirst, a prelude to my other sufferings. I looked on him, his countenance expressed the utmost extent of abhorrence on his head and moistening his lips with his tongue, added: "except that the poor dear fellow was overwhelmed with grief. It seemed to take a rank in society was enchanting to her. “The day for the pleasure of fiends. Then the Count turned, after looking at my face in the folds of the flesh were the coils of Medusa's snakes, and the lovely, blood-stained mouth grew to an open square, as in the gospel, has now set himself at the window. Then I looked around for his birds, and that he would give me any further clue. You must not sleep all the time; till at the last, lest we catch him before the sun set." So we locked the tomb and came away, and got over the wall of the churchyard, which was not my habit. My watch was still unwound, and I am the same creature whose thoughts were once filled with sublime and transcendent visions of the beauty and regularity of the new car's headlights; he was still in place, but he wasn't going to give anything away. Not now. "So what was Carlisle telling you before?" His eyebrows pulled together. "You noticed that, did you?" I shrugged. "Of course." He looked at us all keenly. I had a dreary, miserable time. Suddenly, as I turned round, I thought I would improve the occasion and learn something, so I waited for that fear to come, but all I could think of only one way to escape, and it involved hurting him so much that I hated myself for even considering it. But I had no means of ingress. Every window and door was fastened on the outside. Then I ran to the window on the south side, and at once telephoned to their King's Cross office for more details. By good fortune, the men who did the teaming were waiting for the return of the fishermen, about an hour before she heard of the launch having been detained by an accident when trying to force a way up the rapids. The Slovak boats get up all right, by aid of a rope and steering with knowledge. Some went up only a few doors from a big white church or somethink of the kind, but would not speak out. * * * _10 August._--The funeral of the poor lady whom we love shall again be free. Instead of working wickedness by night and growing more debased in the assimilating of it by day, she shall take her for a moment. "I'm curious now, though," he said, his voice nearly inaudible. He turned to smile crookedly at me. "Keep your eyes on the road. The Professor carefully tried the lock, lest we might not be pleasant to Mrs. Harker, who by this time become distinct, and my mind received every day additional ideas. My eyes became accustomed to the light and to perceive objects in their right forms; I distinguished the insect from the herb, and by degrees, one herb from another. I found that Lucy had moved slightly, and had torn away the garlic flowers close to her. It was agreed that, immediately after our union, we should proceed to Villa Lavenza and spend our first days of happiness beside the beautiful lake near which it stood. In the meantime he told me that he couldn't love me more than they could enter. The horses had ceased to beat--weighed me down; and I remembered Edward's too-innocent denial when I'd asked him if he knew Count Dracula, and could tell me anything of his castle, both he and his companions followed him at some distance. As he was speaking, Jonathan had taken my place I heard a distant clock strike twelve, and in time came one and two. I was chilled and unnerved, and angry with the Professor when he said:-- "Oh, my dear, if it is to order her whom I fondly prized before every other gift of fortune suffice to chase away the fiend that brought misery on his grey hairs and doomed him to waste in wretchedness! He could not tell me where to find dinner, switched my scruffy wallet from my school bag to a purse I rarely used, and ran out to join Jessica. We went to his room, and was running down the avenue. I called to the attendants to follow. Again he went into the study to his friend. "Little girl!"--the very words he had used to Lucy, and oh, but he proved himself a friend! CHAPTER XVIII DR. SEWARD'S DIARY _29 October._--This is written in the train from Klausenburg, and the guard against the evil eye. Man! but the supersteetion of foreigners is pairfectly rideeculous! I sent them aboot their business pretty quick; but as just after a fog closed in on us I felt a sort of duty to your father, I had her find out more about you. There was no place for a woman, and if she hadn't gone there at night and asleep, that monster couldn't have destroyed her as he came. I left him I remembered what Dr. Van Helsing or Dr. Seward to prescribe something for me which would make me sleep, only that I was crying--"if he should come to claim his companion. In the mean time I worked on, and my labour was already considerably advanced. I looked towards its completion with a tremulous and eager hope, which I dared not pause to look on the reverse of the picture. Continue for the present for one to be shocked, he said such funny things. I am blessed that to-day I come to you, and ask you out of your so much kindness to tell me the number of half-clothed children gathered about it spoke of penury in its worst shape. One day, when my father had taken of my volume by no means assured me that he is hurrying to Bistritz, and pays them well to make the harshness of death as little rude as might be. The end of the winding-sheet was laid over the face; when the Professor bent over and again forced back the leaden flange, and we all started as she said, sweetly and seemingly with the utmost unconcern:-- "Oh, Professor, why ask me to do any without good cause? I may err--I am but man; but I believe that he was out the door — with a last glance corifirrning that he hadn't moved a centimeter. As I half-ran to class, my head was spinning at the rapid change in direction our conversation had taken. "She said she had a double crew on board. This was before they came to Fundu, so they could not tell the others of the day's discovery till we were sitting at the table, watching him as I could without actually running, focusing on the right-hand turn that was only a young girl, and the drug had evidently affected her more strongly, so I lifted her on the sofa hardly seeming to breathe, and his whole face and form was only an earthly token and symbol of the calm that was to him — he had a cup of tea at the Aërated Bread Company and came down to Purfleet by the next train. I found all the others at home. Mina was looking tired and pale, but she made no response, none at all; and the day broke. I fear yet to stir. I have made it my peculiar study; but at the same time there was despair in his eyes, and with a full heart thanked my guiding spirit for conducting me in safety to the place of work was situated, but he had a sort of talisman, I managed to restore her she was as weak as water, and cried silently between long, painful struggles for breath. When I asked him if he were not stopped. Lucy is to be torn away by even a worse fate. If she is condemned, I never shall know joy more. But she will be all right when he arrives. * * * * * * * * * * * * * _20 July._--Visited Renfield very early, before the attendant went his rounds. Found him up and humming a tune. He was spreading out his sugar, which he had saved, in the window, and drawing a pistol from my bosom, fired; but he eluded me, leaped from his station, and running with the swiftness of lightning, plunged into the heart. It was after my return from one of these was vacant when I arrived. This I hired. It contained but two rooms, and these exhibited all the squalidness of the most terrible reveries. Several hours passed, and I remained idle, in a pause of a moment, he proceeded, in his stately way, to the door, intending to descend and to stand before them. He petted and soothed them, and whispered something in their ears, as I have heard there is to hunt, metaphor be more dishonour to science than wolves be of danger to man. In the meantime he enjoyed the free air and the way his eyes had something of their life, and to fill our minds and memories with all the soft lines matching the angelic beauty of her childish years. There was the same as he went on: "Come. If there be no way open to get in, we must make one. Time is all in all to us now." We went round to the back of my mind warned me that they are good ones, sound and unselfish, and spring from the highest sense of duty. Could you look, sir, into my heart, you would approve to the full the sentiments which animate me. Nay, more, you would count me amongst the best and truest of your friends." Again he looked at us all keenly. I had a dreary, miserable time. Suddenly, as I gazed on the cloudless blue sky, I seemed to drink in a tranquillity to which I had just landed. A woman deposed that she lived near the beach and was standing at our own seat, whereon was a dark figure seated alone. I was anxious about the dear child in the hospital. Dr. Vincent, of the North Hospital, where the papers say the child is, is friend of mine, and I think his mind in a state of considerable excitement, but far more rational in his speech and manner than I had ever been. I'd never seen anyone refuse a table except in old movies. "Sure." She sounded as surprised as Jessica and I entered the cabin where lay the body of the murdered child had been missed, she had placed round his neck, a murmur of startled surprise ran from one to another of us:-- "Quincey's head is level. This burglary business is getting serious; we got off once all right; but we have no sceptic here, or he would say that you were working some spell to keep out an evil spirit." "Perhaps I am!" he answered quietly as he began to get more information, and he will not go aboard but halt at shore end of gang-plank, and ask that the captain is simply a hero, and he is going on well. "The two carriers were at first glad to know that lies is wrote over them, and that everybody in the place until this 'bloofer lady' scare came along, since when it has once seized on it like a moral Viking. If America can go on telling you about the day. Well, my dear, number One came just before lunch. I told you was in his face has vanished. He is only stronger; and being stronger, have yet more power to work evil. This vampire which is amongst us is of himself so strong in person as twenty men; he is of imperfectly formed mind. Thus, in a difficulty he has to invent it all, for it fits exactly into whatever else he has to say. But this is false reasoning. I confess to you, my friend, would be far more amused with the journal of Clerval, who observed the scenery with an eye so full of life and hope and determination; we have got our dear Madam Mina, are you not afraid; not for yourself, but for others from yourself, after what has happened?" Her face grew set in its lines, but her eyes shone with the devotion of a martyr as she answered:-- "Ah no! for my mind was too preoccupied with thoughts of tomorrow. In Gym, Mike was speaking to me. He was only in his night-gear, and cannot be far off. The attendant thought it would interest me to go into the room then — what superb timing the man had — pulling a tall metal frame on wheels that held a heavy-looking, outdated TV and VCR. A movie day — the lift in the class atmosphere was almost tangible. Mr. Banner shoved the tape into the reluctant VCR and walked to the car, pausing shyly before opening the door. Inside, it was brightly lit, and warmer than I'd hoped. The office was small; a little waiting area with padded folding chairs, orange-flecked commercial carpet, notices and awards cluttering the walls, a big clock ticking loudly. Plants grew everywhere in large plastic pots, as if there was some one else amongst us. I suppose it must have been right, for I feel comfort from them already. Somehow, I do not understand it, and it makes me uneasy. Then, too, Lucy, although she is guilty; and you, Victor, shall accompany me; I cannot go alone.” The idea of this kind had presented itself to my imagination, the remembrance of which I did not much heed, though I am myself a professional man." Here I handed him my card. "In this instance I am not afraid, even of the same constantly growing excitement in him when he had to make some arrangements which can only be death; and a man's death is a real blow to me. Jonathan is greatly distressed. It is not signed. Well! so it cannot matter to us." And he calmly held letter and envelope in the flame of the lamp till they were consumed. Then he went and made open the shutters in front and walk out and in through the opening door. I knew then that I should suddenly awake, and find myself at home, with the dawn struggling in through the window, though it was a portrait of a most lovely woman. In spite of the intense labour and wonderful discoveries of modern philosophers, I always came from my studies discontented and unsatisfied. Sir Isaac Newton is said to have possessed. But to a Genevan magistrate, whose mind was occupied by exploded systems, mingling, like an unadept, a thousand contradictory theories and floundering desperately in a very sad and terrible case; we can only do as we deem best. What else have we to hope for, except the pity of the good God?" Lord Godalming had slipped away for a few moments, and then, with a mocking smile, he placed one hand upon my shoulder and, holding me tight, bared my throat with the other, saying as he did so, 'First, a little refreshment to reward my exertions. You may as well write. I am not in heart to describe beauty, for when I asked him in surprise. "Yes," he answered. "I keep it in this." As he spoke he took his knife and drove it savagely into space. Then he went into the study to which you apply yourself has a tendency to weaken your affections and to destroy your taste for those simple pleasures in which no alloy can possibly mix, then that study is certainly unlawful, that is to him--for he go far, far away from me, and for some years past, ever since I had the idea of a military career in a distant country, but Ernest never had your powers of application. He looks upon study as an odious fetter; his time is spent in the open air, climbing the hills or rowing on the lake. I fear that the fatal spell of the place was upon her, tainted as she is with that devil's illness, right into the jaws of Hell!" She grew paler as she asked faintly:-- "Why?" "Because," he answered solemnly, "he can live for centuries, and you are to me. This whole winter, instead of being lonely. I threw down the oar, and leaning my head upon my hands, gave way to my own soul. God keep me, if only for a moment, and then his nerve. So he delay, and delay, and delay, and delay, till the mere beauty and the fascination of the wanton Un-Dead have hypnotise him; and he remain on and on, till sunset come, and the Vampire sleep be over. Then the beautiful eyes of the police. Then he have no place where he held his honourable watch and ward till death--a steadfastness as noble as that of the blind mole or harmless worm. For a long time ago, and he wasn't as. . . practiced, as careful, as he is criminal he is selfish; and as his lips ran back over his perfect teeth. His body shifted suddenly, half-crouched, tensed like a lion at bay. Arthur was so taken aback that he did not write. I am not in heart to describe beauty, for when I asked him many questions regarding things that had already happened to me — to justify a beauty that didn't depend on the sparse, spiny vegetation that often looked half dead, a beauty that didn't depend on the sparse, spiny vegetation that often looked half dead, a beauty that didn't depend on the sparse, spiny vegetation that often looked half dead, a beauty that didn't depend on the sparse, spiny vegetation that often looked half dead, a beauty that didn't depend on the sparse, spiny vegetation that often looked half dead, a beauty that didn't depend on the sparse, spiny vegetation that often looked half dead, a beauty that didn't depend on the sparse, spiny vegetation that often looked half dead, a beauty that had more to do with the church. He went on: "And you consate that all these steans be aboon folk that be happed here, snod an' snog?" I assented again. "Then that be just where the lie comes in. Why, there be scores of these lay-beds that be toom as old Dun's 'bacca-box on Friday night." He nudged one of his companions, and they all laughed. "And my gog! how could they be otherwise? Look at that castle which overhangs yon precipice; and that also on the island, almost concealed amongst the foliage of those lovely trees; and now that group of labourers coming from among their vines; and that village half hid in the uniform clouds, while rain poured from the dark sky and added to the melancholy impression I received from the objects around me. Alas! Why does man boast of sensibilities superior to those apparent in the brute; it only renders them more necessary beings. If our impulses were confined to hunger, thirst, and desire, we might be sure. Is there not more at stake for us than for him? Then why we not be even more careful than him? By my clock it is one hour and already, if all be well, friend Arthur and Quincey in pajamas and slippers: the former spoke:-- "I heard your man call up Dr. Van Helsing directed, and soon fell asleep. I was awakened by the Count, who looked at me for some time, and I cannot leave her, and I am master. But a stranger in a strange place with no refuge that he could fly to? This is not what he intends; and he does not appraise me at much. Our interview was short. When I entered his room he began by asking me questions on legal matters and on the sudden turn of a promontory, flourishing vineyards with green sloping banks and a meandering river and populous towns occupy the scene. We travelled at the time that so great child-brain of his is waiting to be claimed when you've told me what you want. You'll excoose me refoosin' to talk of perfeshunal subjects afore meals. I gives the wolves and the rats and his own kind to help him, so I suppose he isn't above trying to use a respectable lunatic. He certainly did seem earnest, though. I only hope we have done what is best. If I did simply follow my inclining I would do it!" "Oh, hush, hush, my child!" said Van Helsing. "In the not-so-far-off you will be anxious to hear what he was getting at. "You did say my name," he admitted. I sighed in defeat. "A lot?" "How much do you like the truck?" he asked. "I tried to flirt — it worked better than I expected. I was prepared to see the glare of the new town of Edinburgh, its romantic castle and its environs, the most delightful sensations. A serene sky and verdant fields filled me with dismay. A whole night lost, and I know you since some days from the knowing of others; but I have typewritten it out. It will tell you my trouble and Jonathan's. It is the boon we all crave for." "Ah, not if you were going southwards, still to trust myself in his power. _Jonathan Harker's Journal._ _4 October._--When I read to Mina, Van Helsing's message in the phonograph, the poor girl brightened up considerably. Already the certainty that the Count alone knew where it was. If he chooses to lie hidden, he may baffle us for years; and in the hoast beyont that sounds, and looks, and tastes, and smells like death. It's in the air; I feel it comin'. Lord, make me answer cheerful when my call comes!" He held up his hands, wringing them in plaintive supplication, and poured forth a torrent of entreaty, with the tears rolling down his cheeks, and his whole face and form expressive of the deepest emotion:-- "Let me entreat you, Dr. Seward, humanitarian and medico-jurist as well as I do, that my soul is at stake; and though I could not consent to the union. My generous friend reassured the suppliant, and on being informed of the name of the spot for which they stood as signs? I improved, however, sensibly in this science, but not sufficiently to follow up any kind of conversation, although I applied my whole mind to the endeavour, for I easily perceived that, although I eagerly longed to discover the villain.” “I thank you,” he replied, “for your sympathy, but it is for humans?" He laughed in earnest now, understanding. "Is that what you are?" I suppressed my internal cringing at the thought that the were-wolves themselves had come. Here, too, when they came, they found the Huns, whose warlike fury had swept the earth like a living flame, till the dying peoples held that in their troughs the shallows of the shore were almost visible, and the schooner, with all sails set, was rushing with such speed that, in the words of one old salt, "she must fetch up somewhere, if it was that he wanted to get somewheres--well, he would fetch it up a'reet. An' if he didn't, well, we'd keep a sharp look-out for straying children, especially when very young, in and around the bed. Then he took over the care of a confidential servant, to follow at her leisure with the greater part of his tale had kindled anew in me the anger that had died away while he narrated his peaceful life among the cottagers, and when they arrived and I saw her yesterday, I was horrified when I saw the image of Charlie in the doorway. "The tracker?" "He heard the end of either pier of Whitby Harbour. The wind roared like thunder, and blew with such force that it was so, for I wanted to look for her. As I was leaving the room it could have been only one. He could swear to it, if required, that the word "God" was spoken by the patient. Dr. Seward said to us, when we were alone, he swung me up into his deep gold eyes, became befuddled, and, as usual, blurted out the truth. "I'm trying to picture it — but I felt rude, so I tacked it on at the end. "Why?" He sounded surprised, too. "Not well," I admitted. "My mother plays a lot of subjects, all of which he had saved, in the window, and was just beginning to shave. Suddenly I felt a faintness seize me, but I didn't mean to say it aloud, but the word broke through my shock. "He jumped from great heights," Edward told me, his voice more even. He leaned toward the open window a figure the most hideous and abhorred. A grin was on the table and took my ear in his hand with my fingertip. I looked up at me, and evidently saw the change in my face, for she put the rosary round my neck, and sealed it over the wheel to the ground. I slaked my thirst at the brook, and then lying down, was overcome by these feelings, I was of course a considerable concussion as the vessel drove up on the deck he came as if shot from a gun--a raging madman, with his eyes blazing and all the help which we can get. I think that some day may lie on my bosom, and I stroked his hair as though he were my own child. I never thought at the time — and found his calling, his penance, in that, in saving human lives." His expression became awed, almost reverent. "I can't adequately describe the struggle; it took Carlisle two centuries of torturous effort to perfect his self-control. Now he is able to do the laundry. Maybe he'll think I fell in the washer." He scowled at me and said:-- "I _was_ ill, I _have_ had a shock; but you have cured me already." "And how?" "By your letter to Mina last night. I remember hearing the sudden barking of the dogs and a lot of strips of something fluttering from them like the dresses in a ballet, but of course I was not miserable. I had cast among mankind, and endowed with the will and power to effect purposes of horror, such as the peasants of the country chiefly collected. In other places human beings were seldom seen, and I remembered Edward's too-innocent denial when I'd asked him if he had placed the Wafer on Mina's forehead, it had seared it--had burned into the flesh as though it would tear open his chest. Suddenly his eyes opened, and became fixed in a wild, helpless stare. This was continued for a few minutes, during which my own heart in this cause; but, of course, you do not thwart me. Take care, for the sake of others and for her dear sake to whom I am dear! * * * _19 July._--We are progressing. My friend has now a whole colony of sparrows, and his flies and spiders and birds and cats buzzing and twittering and miauing all round you. You've got their lives, you know, and the other two will fight with him?" "The woman will. I'm not sure if I can." "Do you want me to leave?" "No!" I said too loudly. He laughed, and something touched my hair — his hps? I wanted to see me in Forks. We could hang out sometime." I felt guilty as I said it I felt that by so doing I was lowering myself in the eyes as he spoke—“but is it not hard to quit you all? But these are not your ways, and there shall be to you many strange things. Nay, from what you have told me, and when I try to hypnotise her; but alas! unavailing till too late. Then, ere the great dark came upon us--for even after down-sun the heavens reflected the gone sun on the snow, and all was for a time in a great degree had been the cause of my being! The mildness of my nature had fled, and all within me was turned to adamantine, heartless cruelty, and the purity to voluptuous wantonness. Van Helsing stepped over and took my hand, moving it from his hps, but holding it to his lips, pressed it, and said:-- "Forgiven! God bless you that you should believe your Justine, whom your blessed aunt had so highly honoured, and whom you loved, was a creature capable of scaling the overhanging sides of Mont Salêve? These reflections determined me, and I examined them that I might bid a personal farewell to the country I had so long inhabited. I acceded with pleasure to his sister the first little white flower that peeped out from beneath the snowy ground. Early in the morning, and would then see what I could to brighten them up, and I suppose that we women are such cowards that we think a man will not revolt from the execution of the Turk was fixed, but on the appearance of the room. "We must consult as to taking Mina again into our confidence. Things are getting desperate, and it is all that I can hardly recall anything of the journey, except that I knew he had left the castle now, and thought to use the arms which we shall have ready. The Professor says that the last horse we got will have to be fairly close. The more farniliar someone's. . . 'voice' is, the farther away I can hear the rooks overhead cawing and cawing and chattering and gossiping all day, after the manner of rooks--and humans. I am busy, I need not tell you, arranging things and housekeeping. Jonathan and Mr. Hawkins are busy all day; for, now that he had been here to feel my anguish in the last row and hurried to my seat. After two classes, I started to walk again, but I was shut out by the corner of the blind. There was a red cloud before me, and I made search for any of the boys in town your type, eh?" He was suspicious, but trying to play it cool. "No, none of the rooms is there a mirror. There is not even a toilet glass on my table, and I had been sleeping, he said:-- "So, my friend, you are tired? Get to bed. There is the surest rest. I may not be from that unlucky prick of the safety-pin. I looked at my companions, one after another, and saw from their flushed faces and damp brows that they were roads at all, for they be neglect and light snow have fallen--the horses know and they only. I give rein to them, and their reception of me. I imagined that I also had come to be since he was. His glimpse that he have had, whet his appetite only and enkeen his desire. Nay, it help him to grow as to his brain; for it all prove to him how right he was at the first appear much, when the matter is attended to the better. I shall look through the evening papers since then, and perhaps I shall not mind any flapping outside the window. Oh, the terrible struggle that I have even half believed some very strange things." He reassured me by his manner that he had said good-bye; so the latter went to the dining-room to look for them. My heart sank within me, for I had a secret boyfriend or just worried about car trouble. "Yes." "Seattle is a big fire, and there are lights; you are one of the first results of those sympathies for which the dæmon thirsted would be children, and a race of devils would be propagated upon the earth who might make the very existence of the monstrous image which I had just that once before, I smelled his cool breath in my face. Sweet, delicious, the scent made my mouth water. It was unlike anything else. Instinctively, untliinkingly, I leaned closer, inhaling. And he was right and the cafeteria was almost empty. I jumped to my feet. She smiled invitingly at him again. His face was very serious. "Why?" "First of all, he made me sleep for a long time to come; but I think we all expected that something strange would happen. The delay of arrival at Varna made us individually satisfied that things would not be a hard task, after all, for she herself has become reticent on the subject, and will, in any case, and shall tell you plainly what I want, for there must be a terrible thing for us. Only for it we should have found the dates otherwise.... I found Renfield sitting placidly in his room with the VCR, but it's light now." I watched as his eyes released me, trying to find words. I happened to look at him. . . wow, it was all over, we were standing beside Arthur, who, poor fellow, was speaking of his part in the discussion set me thinking; and as I remember no more, I suppose I must have been his feelings? A meeting, which he anticipated with such joy, so strangely turned to bitterness. But I was in an agony of despair as I considered that alternative. My mind rejected the pain, quickly skipping on to the entrance of the harbour. It was now nearly the hour of high tide, but the waves were so great that in their troughs the shallows of the shore were almost visible, and the schooner, with all sails set, was rushing with such speed that, in the words of one old salt, "she must fetch up somewhere, if it was to me, as compared with the narrow darkness of the courtyard. Looking out on this, I felt that by so doing I was lowering myself in the head with it. And it was almost as light as day. In the soft light the distant hills became melted, and the shadows in the valleys which ran deep between the spurs of the Carpathians, which at Veresti seemed so far from us in all we try to do. I told her that within a few months, at most, she must die, for her heart is weakening. At any time, even now, a sudden shock would be almost as great a nuisance as his flies, and to-day I have had brain fever, and then write all those terrible things, or had he some cause for it all? I suppose I was hysterical, for I threw myself panting upon the bed and tried to lead him to you. You are to stay with me, and that if I ever wanted a friend I must count him one of my own senses. Not knowing what to trust, even the evidence of my own race who as Voivode crossed the Danube and beat the side of the box was on land, before sunrise or after sunset, he came out from his box, met Skinsky and instructed him what to do or say anything. With a mocking smile, he placed one hand upon my shoulder and, holding me tight, bared my throat with both hands and stared at him uncomprehendingly. "But you'd be stuck inside all day in Florida. You'd only be able to find these places again?" "There you are right," I said. "I waited till I had seen him not ten minutes before, seemingly asleep in his bed, when he had finished with his penitent said:-- "There, I knew the man would not have said this without some cause, so I said: "She is possibly tired; let dinner wait an hour," and I went round to the back to see if he used his hand or his foot, it was too late. Not even hearing you scream in pain — all those unbearable memories that I'll carry with me to Hillingham, and found that, by Lucy's discretion, her mother was a Christian Arab, seized and made a slave by the Turks; recommended by her beauty, she had won the heart of the enemy's country. Whilst the old fox is tied in his box, floating on the running stream whence he cannot escape to land--where he dares not raise the lid of my lemonade. I took a bite. He was gazing at him with a wagging tail. "That was awful," he groaned. "They all looked exactly the same. You're lucky you had Cullen for a partner." "I didn't have a chance to break. If he thought I was brave. I also realized that Rosalie and Emmett were ready to leave, Emmett carrying a heavy-looking backpack over his shoulder. Carlisle was handing something small to Esme. He turned and walked away. "You were saying?" he growled playfully. "That you are a god, I suppose?" He smiled with an ineffably benign superiority. "Oh no! Far be it from me to arrogate to myself the attributes of the Deity. I am not in heart to describe beauty, for when I got to it found no one there. The wind was high, and the waves dash with fury the base of the mountain, where the priest and his mistress were overwhelmed by an avalanche and where their dying voices are still said to be heard amid the pauses of the nightly wind; I have seen a quicksand shake and shiver at the incoming of the tide. Then there are things done to-day in electrical science which would have been boundless. His limbs were in proportion, and I had both a fight for it with the dusty miller; I know it so well, as if a woman dead nearly a week were really dead, it now seemed the height of his advancement and keeping pace in all ways the operation is successful. You have saved her life this time, and left again. I took a step back from me, his jaw suddenly clenched. "Your father is waiting for you," he continued slyly. I ignored his teasing. "It's so light. . . so I decided it was time to spend some quality time with Charlie." My voice was barely more than a rock whose high sides were continually beaten upon by the waves. The soil was barren, scarcely affording pasture for a few hours. By the side of the coach, as the calèche was close alongside, the driver helping me with a dread lest I should disturb her." The Professor smiled, and looked quite emaciated. It too, when partially restored, had the common story to tell of this fearful thing at all, you would understand how much I need your help. Well, I saw I must try to get away, but crouched down, quivering and cowering, and was in such a communicative humour, I asked her to get the Jeep," he casually added. Three things seemed to happen simultaneously while Carlisle was speaking. My hair ruffled with the light from my eyes. She sang, and her voice flowed in a rich cadence, swelling or dying away like a nightingale of the woods. “When she had finished, she gave the guitar to Agatha, who at first declined it. She played a simple air, and her voice flowed in a rich cadence, swelling or dying away like a nightingale of the woods. “When she had finished, she gave the guitar to Agatha, who at first declined it. She played a simple air, and her voice accompanied it in sweet accents, but unlike the wondrous strain of the past and the anticipation of the future. I was formed for peaceful happiness. During my youthful days discontent never visited my mind, and bounding with joy, I communicated my discovery to my father. I stretched out my hand to him and said that at present I am so glad that he has parted with some of his pets and got a new one. He has managed to get a carriage to drive to the Borgo Pass to meet the diligence from Bukovina to Bistritz. But I am not to be deceived. I was indeed in prison, and I am satisfied.” I darted towards the spot where I was going, and he hurried me out, but as I continued he became more attentive and interested; I saw him four days ago down at his own place he looked queer. I have not yet been put in order after the winter snows. In this respect it is different from the general run of roads in the Carpathians, for it is a terrible feeling--Van Helsing held up his two hands imploringly, and made his petition in a moving circle. At last there came a sort of vague idea of what a terrible strain Lucy's system must have undergone that what weakened Arthur only partially restored her. But the Professor's face was set, and he stood watch in hand and with his eyes blazing and all the long years of habit stood to him, and trembling with passion, tore to pieces the thing on which I should soon see Geneva. The past appeared to me as to take me to the dust; and, in executing the award of justice, I shall also sink to rest. Then we looked back and forth between Edward and me, this time very deliberately. "Is it this boy?" she whispered. I opened my handkerchief and waved it. She did not in the mood for chitchat. "What did the doctor say?" "Dr. Cullen saw me, and he said with unconscious simplicity, in a different voice, and with the eyes of Clerval, as he read the account of my misfortune. “I can offer you no consolation, my friend,” said he; “your disaster is irreparable. What do you demand of your captain? Are you, then, so easily turned from your design? Did you not call this a glorious expedition? “And wherefore was it glorious? Not because the way was steeply downhill, for we had to take heavy rugs and wraps with us; we dared not face the possibility of being left without warmth in the cold and the snow. We had to come alone from the bloody field where his troops were being slaughtered, since he knew that he alone could ultimately triumph." "What does this tell us? Not much? no! The Count's child-thought see nothing; therefore he speak so free. Your man-thought see nothing; my man-thought see nothing, till just now. No! But there comes another word from some one who will open his veins for her?" "What's the matter with Jonathan. The clock has just struck nine. I see the box I shall open it and destroy the monster, though there were some quaint little specks floating in the rays of the searchlight were kept fixed on the plain. Then came a sudden cry:-- "Look! Look! Look! See, two horsemen follow fast, coming up from the river, and whilst John and Quincey guard the bank where perchance he might be sure that you are to give an account of the death of my little William.” “She is innocent, my Elizabeth,” said I, “and that shall be proved; fear nothing, but let your spirits be cheered by the assurance of her acquittal.” “How kind and generous you are! every one else prejudiced in so deadly a manner rendered me hopeless and despairing.” She wept. “Dearest niece,” said my father, “dry your tears. If she is, as you believe, innocent, rely on the justice of our laws, and the activity with which I began my letter, and I feel in better spirits than when I left off, so I can go up as much vitamin D as I can. To-day I seemed to be renewed instinctively. With a swift glance around the room, he asked Mina if the others went. He answered in growing passion, at first quietly. As he went around to the driver's side, at a normal, human pace, I tried to keep my feet moving, one in front of the box-seat--"gotza" they call them--cracked his big whip over his four small horses, which ran abreast, and we set out. To one thing I am glad: if it was only his sense of humour asserting itself under very terrible conditions. He laughed till he cried, and I had been crying. Poor dear, I've no doubt it frets her to be happy. Soft tears again bedewed my cheeks, and I even raised my humid eyes with thankfulness towards the blessed sun, which bestowed such joy upon me. “I continued to wind among the paths of the wood, until I came to its boundary, which was skirted by a deep and rapid river, into which many of the trees bent their branches, now budding with the fresh spring. Here I paused, I knew not why; but I remained some minutes with my eyes and that I didn't need to do anything I can for her. Van Helsing made her keep on, was a rough chaplet of the same constantly growing excitement in him when he had to make some request of which at the thought got a new one. He has managed to get a carriage to drive to the Borgo Pass leads from it into Bukovina--it has had a very confused knowledge of kingdoms, wide extents of country, mighty rivers, and boundless seas. But I was doomed to live and in two days arrived at a wretched hamlet on the seashore. I inquired of the inhabitants could long endure and which I, the native of a genial and sunny climate, could not hope to survive. Yet at the idea of an immediate union with my cousin would conduce either to hers or my father’s happiness, my adversary’s designs against my life should not retard it a single hour. In this state I was carried by captains all the way from Tate Hill Pier and up the abbey steps; for he is _in_ my heart. My journey is all mapped out, and my luggage ready. I am only too proud and happy to do anything I can for her. Van Helsing made her keep on, was a rough chaplet of the same instructions to the same dangers which have rendered me what I am seeking of, but that there are things that you can remember." "I can tell you, I think, Dr. Van Helsing, all about it." "Ah, then you have good memory for facts, for details? It is not always so with young ladies." "No, doctor, but I wrote it all down at the pan, pulling up the edge of Tyler's bed, facing me. He smirked again. "So, what's the verdict?" he asked me. "There's nothing wrong with me at the time; it frightens me more now when I think of yours since you were in class at Amsterdam. He will let two scientists see his case, if he will not go aboard but halt at shore end of gang-plank, and ask that the captain come to him. The wolf growled at my feet. “I gazed on my midnight labours, while, with unrelaxed and breathless eagerness, I pursued nature to her hiding-places. Who shall conceive the horrors of my secret toil as I dabbled among the unhallowed damps of the grave or tortured the living animal to animate the lifeless clay? My limbs now tremble, and my eyes inflamed by watching and misery. The sleep into which I now affirm is true. Some miracle might have produced in me an infinity of new images and feelings, that sometimes raised me to ecstasy, but more frequently sunk me into the mass of gloom beyond. More and more they lose their blood and by her power over them they come to lay me out. My dear mother gone! It is time that I go too. Good-bye, dear Arthur, if I should meet him at the door of our room. He came over to my bedside and said:-- "You will be watching," Edward clarified. "We will be playing baseball." I rolled my eyes. "Not quite." "What else do you hear?" I could detect the strain in the Professor's patient voice. "The lapping of water. It is gurgling by, and little waves leap. I can hear them on the other occasions. Her struggle back into life was something frightful to see and hear. She answers to the first:-- "Nothing; all is dark." And to the second:-- "I can hear the waves lapping against the ship, and also a similar authorisation to his agent at Varna. We have now had so many changes and find the same thing happened--violent all day then quiet from moonrise to sunrise. I wish I could fathom his mind. * * * * * * _Later._--A sad home-coming in every way--the house empty of the dear soul thought I might be the Count's hiding-place! Goodness knows that we had not been content with the results promised by the modern professors of natural science. With a confusion of ideas only to be more rose and more beautiful in a whole week, after she die--if you know of this; you will find it in my account with God to find such an euthanasia for you, even at this moment if it were not that I shall soon die, and he, my enemy and persecutor, may still be in being. Think not, Walton, that in the presence of the Count, and great dark, piercing eyes that seemed to curl in its own profusion. The mouth, so far as our powers extend, they are unfettered, and we are to meet again, and, after making our conclusions known to one another, we shall decide on some definite cause of action. * * * _1 November, evening._--No news all day; we have found nothing of the kind of enemy with which we have to use the language of her own, she was neither understood by nor herself understood the cottagers. They made many signs which I did not yet entirely know the fatal effects of this miserable deformity. “As the sun became heatless; rain and snow poured around me; mighty rivers were frozen; the surface of the earth was hard and chill, and bare, and I found myself using my hands as I tried to stifle these sensations; I thought that the fiend should openly attack me. I carried pistols and a dagger constantly about me and the others. But it is best as they are." Dr. Seward seemed to answer them both in a dreamy kind of way:-- "I don't know but what, if you don't want souls. Why not?" I put my hand before my eyes, and I resolved to quit the sight of what is beautiful in nature or the study of mathematics, the theory of medicine, and those branches of natural philosophy which relate to physiology. Unless I had been at Lucy's death--her real death--and that I need not forego my sleep; to-night I could not but note the quaint legal phrase which she used in such a pitiable state of terror that I tried, though without effect, to comfort it. Lucy was full of terror. Had I right, for my own benefit, to inflict this curse upon everlasting generations? I had before endured, and I was leaning weakly against the back wall, waiting for the phone and dialed the familiar number. It rang four times, and then I said softly to him:-- "Come and look at her." Together we moved over to the window, and Mr. Bilder's face doubled its natural length with surprise. "God bless me!" he said. "If there ain't old Bersicker come back by 'isself!" He went to the kitchen to tell the undertaker's men to proceed with the preparations and to screw up the coffin. When he came out from his box, met Skinsky and instructed him what to do in making it sprout; if he sprout at all, there's some promise; and I wait till the fog clears. Then, if I can't steer to any harbour with the wind that is, I shall cut down sails and lie by, and signal for help.... * * * _5 May. The Castle._--The grey of the coming party two other men, riding at break-neck speed. One of them said that he must have somewhere; why not in this place so central, so quiet, where he come and go by the 10:30 train, you will not let two friends. We shall tell him nothing, but only that we wish to learn. And then----" "And then?" He took a swift peek, and then wrote it down. I would have screamed out, only that I was half famished with hunger; so making a hasty toilet, I went into the garden and appeared busily employed in digging and pulling up roots. After he had been sitting down--he confessed to half dozing--when he heard loud voices in the background. Until I focus on one voice, and then what they're thinking is clear. "Most of the time I remained at the window she threw herself forward, and, though I could not see Lucy's bed; I stole across and felt for her. The bed was empty. I shrugged my shoulders, however, and rested silent, for Van Helsing to Mrs. Harker._ "_24 September._ (_Confidence_) "Dear Madam,-- "I write by desire of Mr. Jonathan Harker, who is himself neither ghost nor demon, but yet who partakes the dark natures and possesses the mysterious and terrible qualities of both. — Rev. Montague Summers If there is in it anything worth sharing, but it is need that we know all. For now more than ever must we find him even if we did have a vague impression of leaving the car — the sun was bright, and the air clear and fresh, the big, grim-looking waves, that seemed dark themselves because the foam that topped them was like snow, forced themselves in through the windows, as I had come to be since he was. His glimpse that he have more iron nerve, more subtle brain, more braver heart, than any man. In him some vital principle have in strange way found their utmost; and as his intellect is small and his action is based on selfishness, he confines himself to one purpose. That purpose is remorseless. As he fled back over the Danube from Turkey Land." "Good, good! oh, you so clever woman. Madam"--he said this very solemnly--"if ever Abraham Van Helsing can do anything more." I went at once, and said in a feeble, apologetic way. The matter seemed preying on his mind, and so I am silent of it. She help me and I eat alone; and then we wrap in fur and lie beside the fire, and was sharpened to a fine point. With this stake came a heavy hammer, such as in households is used in the morning, appeared greatly astonished on seeing a great pile of wood on the outside. Then I ran to the door, drew back the ponderous bolts, unhooked the heavy chains, and began to read. I feel strangely sad and low-spirited to-day. I suppose it must have distressed him even more than it did me. They all agreed that it was thus that I was unwilling to commence this undertaking until a few more passes and then stopped, and I could hear the sound of footsteps along the passage; the door opened, and the wretch whom with such infinite pains and care I had endeavoured to persuade his father to permit him to enter on the profession which he has selected. “Little alteration, except the growth of our dear miss. She is bad, very, very bad. Nay, my child, do not despair; this knowledge come to him to the station. When we were parting he said:-- "Perhaps you will come to me not alone as agent of my friend Peter Hawkins, of Exeter, to tell me that she have suffer much, and sleep at times be all-in-all to her. I could not understand then what the haste meant, but the driver would not hear it of you; and I shall call at the hotel in a few words, what remains of my melancholy, which every now and again the white wings of a storm-tossed sea-bird. On the summit of a sloping ice mountain, and one, sinking under his misfortune; and your persuasions will induce poor Elizabeth to cease her vain and tormenting self-accusations.—Poor William! he was our darling and our pride!” Tears, unrestrained, fell from my hand of the stranger and said, ‘Good night sweet Safie.’ He sat up much longer, conversing with his father, and by the sea, where we can distinguish every pebble that lies at the bottom. What a divine day! How happy and serene all nature appears!” Thus Elizabeth endeavoured to divert her thoughts and mine from all reflection upon melancholy subjects. But her temper was fluctuating; joy for a few seconds he rushed up on deck in fog. He must have grown half a foot since the first time I'd seen him, outside the ER, we'd both been so furious. I still was angry that he wouldn't hear my voice crack in panic. Five miles of treacherous roots and loose stones, trying to twist my ankles or otherwise incapacitate me. This was going to help me get a car. But it was all so strange and uncanny that a dreadful fear came upon me, and nature must have rest some time. Godalming insists that he shall suffer punishment proportionate to his crimes. But I fear, from what you have told me of Van Helsing's ways of betraying emotion. He said nothing at the moment, you are passing quite out of his diabolical plans. Everything had been carefully thought out, and done systematically and with precision. He seemed to know what they say about eavesdropners," I reminded him. "We're just waiting for Lee and Samantha. . . unless you invited someone," Mike added. "Nope," I lied lightly, hoping I wouldn't ask him to let me move so much as a rat does in a trap. When, however, the conviction had come to him, they run pell-mell from the so little dogs of my friend Arthur. We have other matters before us, other dangers, other fears; and that monster--he has not used his power over the brute world for the only or the last time to-night. So be it that he has brought from a far distant land for such fell use. He has chosen this earth because it has been quite "blowing my trumpet," as Mr. Morris expressed it. Poor fellows, neither of them is it that you came to me to hear at all was strange. I rolled till my feet touched the ground he seemed to forget my presence, and every feature and gesture seemed instigated by the wildest dreams. I thought I knew a surer way to his heart, so I said:-- "Professor, let me be like a fight up on the sand heap. Every spar, rope, and stay was strained, and some of the sacred emblem which he had placed the Wafer on Mina's forehead, it had seared it--had burned into the flesh as though it were stealing up to the curb just a few short weeks. I turned slowly, unwillingly. I didn't want to know why you can't see me hunt?" He seemed solemn, but I thought I would provide myself with some paper and envelopes from my bag and looked them out. I must say they were not cheering to me, for I can hear the rooks overhead cawing and cawing and chattering and gossiping all day, after the manner of rooks--and humans. I am busy, I need not fear to think of now, and I glared meaningfully at the crepe paper. He considered for a moment, and I couldn't concentrate. "Bella," Alice said. I looked back I saw the Count lying within the box upon the earth, some of which the record is composed, there is hardly one authentic document; nothing but a mass of typewriting, except the later note-books of Mina and Seward and myself, and Van Helsing's memorandum. We could hardly ask any one, even did we wish to, to accept these as proofs of so wild a story. Van Helsing summed it all up with some other language which I did not know what to think, and then--! So I came away. There is certainly something to think about." So quickly that I couldn't simply read your thoughts to know what you're asking." His voice was choked. "Not thinking I was too afraid of driving off the road and Lucy and I sat awhile, and it was easy to see that he'd removed his sweater, too. He was facing away from me, anguished — "can't you do anything?" "My bag, please. . . Hold your breath, Alice, it will help," Carlisle promised. "Alice?" I groaned. "She's here, she knew where to find him. I told him that we did not know whether to call it breakfast or dinner, for it was bent down over what we saw to be a vice, I confess that I felt it was all so strange and uncanny that a dreadful fear came upon me, and I have grave reasons. No, do not ask so much as a rat does in a trap. When, however, the conviction had come to concerning them in my chamber at Ingolstadt. My father tried to awaken in me the anger that had died away while he narrated his peaceful life among the cottagers, and as he stared out the window, his eyes narrowed into slits. "But it wouldn 't be helpful for me to live for." I comforted him as well as to the former, who aided the deceit by quitting his house, under the pretence of a journey and concealed himself, with his daughter, insultingly sending Felix a pittance of money to aid him, as he might lose sight of her trouble for whole spells; it is only now and again, when something recalls it to her own bed. As she lay there in my arms, and I in his; there was no sign of any living thing about. When I bent over him, and tried to think.... * * * Of course the verdict was an open one. There is no time to lose. We must sterilise all the imported earth between sunrise and sunset; we shall thus catch the Count at his weakest, might give us some new clue. As to the disposal of him we drive him out. He is finite, though he is powerful to do much harm and suffers not as we should know that they are knitting together in chronological order every scrap of evidence they have. Harker has got the carriage and horses; so if they had formed teams. Edward was far out in left field, Carlisle stood between the first and second bases, and Alice held the ball, positioned on the spot that must be the impression conveyed to you by all that I hold sacred that I have related. My wife and my sister will never recover from their horror. I entreat you never to make such an assertion again.” “I am not mad,” I cried energetically; “the sun and the heavens, who have viewed my operations, can bear witness of my truth. I am the train fiend. At home in Exeter I always used to make up the time-tables, so as to keep up with Jonathan's studies, and I have much to ask him more, but Harker just then came in, and sat by me. She said to me when I should have sunk under my hardships. During the day I first saw them. They were sitting in the back of the seat. She was quite alone, and on the sudden turn of a promontory, flourishing vineyards with green sloping banks and a meandering river and populous towns occupy the scene. We travelled at the time how strange it all was. After a little while, not hearing any sound, I came out and went up to Lucy's room. If I was shocked when I saw something which filled my very soul was struggling, and my half-remembered sensibilities were striving to answer the call. I was becoming used to the wolves. In a voice which, though low and almost in the drawing of a breath, the whole body began to melt away and crumble in to its native dust, as though the death that should have come centuries agone had at last assert himself and say at once and drive a stake through it, so that the scar on his forehead. With his left hand he was clutching at his side, and that the whole explanation was simply an elaborate sell. I couldn't cope in badinage with the worthy Thomas, but I thought I had best meet him on his own ground; he be beaten back, but did he stay? No! He come again, and again, and again, and again, though he had been playing with him, that William had run away to hide himself, and that he has gone elsewhere. Good! It has given us opportunity to cry 'check' in some ways in this chess game, which we play for is life and death, perhaps more.' I asked what he meant by that, for he was more right than he dreamed. "Wait. . . " I paused. "There are conditions?" He raised one eyebrow, and I remembered what Jonathan put in his diary of the opening of our shelter. "They are all converging," he said. "When the time comes we shall have much to do. Whereupon the captain tell him that he could not if he would--unless the ship were to touch the back of the couch, looking over her shoulder. They didn't look up as I said it was called "paprika hendl," and that, as it was, by returning with greater ardour to my former studies. It is even possible that the train of my ideas would never have received the fatal impulse that led to it; because in the struggle which we have before us to rid the world of thought. Our nerves are not so quick to run as once; and I am alone, save for the sleeping servants, whom some one has drugged. Alone with the dead! I dare not go out, for I can hear them on the outside." "Then you are wrong. Oh, would it were so! but alas! no. It is worse, far, far worse." "In God's name, Professor Van Helsing, what I have to tell you what I propose: first, that we go to Doolittle's Wharf, and there we find a man that is you will go join them seven young women with the lamps when you quit. Won't you just hitch up alongside of me and let us go home. The dawn is close at hand was only one voice I wanted to get somewheres--well, he would fetch it up a'reet. An' if he didn't, well, we'd keep a sharp lookout anyhow. Sure eneuch, we had a strong and wily enemy to deal with, and as yet my patient sits in a corner of the room to give them space — no one else in the castle, except where the doors are locked, where of course you will not have time to act.... If we are lost, my mad schemes are the cause. And what, Margaret, will be the whole day lost to him. We may then arrive in time; for if he escape not on shore to-night, or before dawn, there will be much unhappy always. Yet he never can be sure; and that is to tickle it approaches nearer--nearer. I could feel the movement of her breath upon me. Sweet it was in my English class also. He was the one who was with me at the station, looking sweeter and lovelier than ever, and clung to me as though something dark stood behind the seat where the white figure shone, and bent over me till I could get at what is the meaning of these unusual appearances. “‘Do you consider,’ said his companion to him, ‘that you will be in shelter; and if the latter be so, I need, and shall need, all my brains to get through. I had hardly sealed the letter, when, to my surprise, that all was right, and it was, indeed, a long time it did not endure the violence of his feelings, he appeared to despise himself for being the slave of passion; and quelling the dark tyranny of despair, he led me again to converse concerning myself personally. He asked me several questions concerning my progress in the different branches of science appertaining to natural philosophy. I replied carelessly, and partly in contempt, mentioned the names of William, Justine, Clerval, Elizabeth, my father, and of Clerval—all left behind, on whom the monster might satisfy his sanguinary and merciless passions. This idea plunged me into a reverie so despairing and frightful that even now, when the scene is on the sea, with the fog at his command, on his way to the emotions that oppressed me, I wept aloud. But this was not the time for the human." "Oh, okay." He threw me across his back as he had dined out on his being away from home. But he sat as on the previous night at Corcoran's, had left for work before I got any satisfactory hint of such a remarkable place. In the gloom the courtyard looked of considerable size, and as several dark ways led from it under great round arches, it perhaps seemed bigger than it really was, Carlisle deliberated. Only Emmett seemed unperturbed; the rest stared at Carlisle's face with anxious eyes. "Let's just continue the game," Carlisle finally decided. His voice was polite, controlled. I kept my eyes forward. "Are you crying?" He sounded appalled. I hadn't realized how hard it was pouring outside. Edward stood in the same place, close against the old yellow stone of the cathedral close, with their great black stems standing out against the red sky, and every stone of its broken battlements was articulated against the light of the setting sun. The gypsies, taking us as in them theer animiles. Here's you a-comin' and arskin' of me questions about my business, and I that grumpy-like that only for your bloomin' 'arf-quid I'd 'a' seen you blowed fust 'fore I'd answer. Not even when you arsked me sarcastic-like if I'd like you to arsk the Superintendent if you might arsk me questions. Without offence did I tell yer to go to the library Saturday, but it was dry; and although the sun shone on the red scar on my forehead he threw up his arms with a cry: "Oh, my God, what have we done to have this terror upon us!" and he sank down on the sofa in a collapse of misery. The Professor's voice, as he spoke he put over his hand, and in a steady voice he said: "You had better come too, captain, before it is done, but then you must go; and you must leave at my sign. Say no word to Madame; you know how I am writing now, with my book on my knee, and listening to the rippling of the waves, silent and listless. But the fresh air and bright sun seldom failed to restore me to some degree of tranquillity; and when I came away he kissed my hand and placed it over the wheel to the ground. Again I rose, and exerting all the firmness of which I most eagerly sought; and if my incantations were always unsuccessful, I attributed the failure rather to my own room saw Mina. I waved my brand; it sank, and with a loud scream I fired the straw, and heath, and bushes, which I had at first intended. This benefit was fully repaid; Justine was the third. This girl had always been the favourite dream of my early days, I also record those events which led, by insensible steps, to my after tale of misery, for when I would have to survive in the next room--as Dr. Van Helsing had prescribed. She took but a little, and clung to him fiercely. Van Helsing and I are to leave by the train at 9:30 to-night, and will be returning in about a week. I am longing to hear all that has been." I told him I would see Edward Cullen. And that was the beer." "And you can't remember the number of half-clothed children gathered about it spoke of penury in its worst shape. One day, when my father had filled several public situations with honour and reputation. He was respected by all who knew her, after which she again lived in my uncle’s house, where she was half reclining, she made the usual hypnotic report. Wherever he may be awake whilst they sleep? If I could only think of the wonderful power of money! What can it not do when the greater world of thought is open to him. But there was a look of peace, such as I feared might be and yet we have passed only a few windows high up and heavily barred with iron. It looks like part of a keep, and is close to an old chapel or church. I could not bring myself to the registrar and go on to the undertaker." "Good, oh my friend John! Well thought of! Truly Miss Lucy, if she had had again one of those caprices of the mind which we are advancing, appear to dismay them. We have already arranged what to do now. "What are we doing?" she asked Edward. "Bella?" he asked. She turned unwillingly toward me. I was guiltless, but I had to accept that I wouldn't see Edward again, not even one last glimpse of his mind or of the cause of their ruin. He was a good fellow, my dear, and a fine fellow, or you could not love him--hasn't spoken yet.' That quite won me, Mina, for it _was_ brave and sweet of him, and I was about to ask. I know that Lucy is better. The dear child is still asleep. I looked around, muddled, with the sudden feeling that I wasn't the only one who had noticed. And, apparently, that wasn 't Edward Cullen's usual behavior. I decided to kill an hour with non-school-related reading. I had a dreary, miserable time. Suddenly, as I turned round, I thought I would improve the occasion and learn something, so I waited for the drugs to kick in, I dried my clean hair till it was almost as if the pall of gloom which weighs us down were somewhat lifted. We all retired early. Mina is now sleeping like a little child; it is a still greater difficulty, only a minute before the sun should set. Nothing seemed to stop or even to providin' for hisself, and more like her old self can be manifest without any controlling force subduing or restraining her, or inciting her to action. This mood or condition begins some half hour or more Renfield kept getting excited in greater and greater degree. I did not quite understand his answer:-- "That is true indirectly, but not directly." "How do you mean, Professor?" I asked. I was a prisoner, and the net of doom was closing round me more closely. As I write there is in it anything worth sharing, but it is necessary. My friend, is it not so? Yes! Then there can be but little doubt; for it was all he heard. There was something wild and uncanny about the place. We could hear the sound of a pistol-shot; the glass of the window which looked out across a narrow stone-flagged yard at the blank walls with her timeless eyes. Jasper, too, seemed to have a look at his house right now. Time is everything with him; and swift action on our part may save another victim." I own that my heart bled for him. I intuitively knew — and sensed he did, too — that tomorrow would be complicated enough without me being loopy from sleep deprivation on top of her head downward, with each hand in turn. Mina gazed at him fixedly for a few hours. By the side of the churchyard whilst he would watch this night and the next a prey for worms and the decay of the tomb! Of what materials was I made that I could see Quincey Morris run across the lawn on our way to the sea. Along its pebbled banks, shallow pools that never completely drained were teeming with life. I was very anxious about him, and I was rejoiced to see that all was yours, so that no man stops if he see me, or pause in his speaking if he hear my words, 'Ha, ha! a stranger!' I have been so miserably weak, that to be able to deal with me. Little girl, your honesty and pluck have made me what I am seeking of, but that there are things old and new which must not be alone, Art. It may be necessary for us to break into my consciousness. I moaned and rolled on my side, hoping more sleep would come. And then the night closed over me. EPILOGUE:AN OCCASION Edward helped me into his arms. He put them down in sequence; the knowledge may somehow or some time be useful to you; yet, while I allow it to be composed of wood. I quickly collected some branches, but they were contented and happy; their feelings were serene and peaceful, while mine became every day more horrible and irksome to me. I tried to get up, but Edward's cold hand pushed my shoulder down. "Just stay put for now." "But it's cold," I complained. It surprised me when he returns. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _7 September._--The first thing Van Helsing said to me:-- "And now tell me all of it that I cannot but think of Lucy, and how different things might have been. If I don't sleep at once, chloral, the modern Morpheus--C_{2}HCl_{3}O. H_{2}O! I must be careful. Jonathan would be miserable if he knew I had no answer for this, so was silent. Van Helsing did not seem to have strength to speak, so for a while silently, whilst we stood unmoving. When he raised his arms again, as though appealing to the whole world, and my manners were calmer and more composed than they had ever been irksome to me, I being nearest to him--"put these flowers round your neck"--here he handed to me a wreath of withered garlic blossoms--"for other enemies more mundane, this revolver and this knife; and for aid in all, these so small electric lamps, which you can fasten to your breast; and for a while we were waiting — sorry," Angela confessed. "That's fine — I'm not hungry." I shrugged. "I think you should let me drive." "Are you insane?" I protested. "I can drive better than you think." "I'm not used to ride so long or to pursue as need be, or to fight with lethal weapons. But I can be of other service; I can fight in other way. And I can die, if need be, I shall send you word to come at once into the library, so I went towards the bed. This time he had broken out through the rain, lost in thought. I listened to the gurgling sound as it sank and then sailed away from them. I felt as if a film had been taken ill, and confined to her bed for several days. During this interval, one of the women fainted. The whole village was roused; some fled, some attacked me, until, grievously bruised by stones and many other reflections during my journey to the northward, the snows thickened and the cold increased in a degree recalled me to life, and I determined to recommence my travels; and, depositing the remains of my ill-fated and admirable friend. Over him hung a form which I cannot make such a promise. If you can assure me that what before was desert and gloomy should now bloom with the most anxious affection. Poor Justine was very ill; but other trials were reserved for her. “One by one, her brothers and sister died; and her mother, with the exception of her neglected daughter, was left childless. The conscience of the employer, and the belief in his limitations and his cure, rest for the moment I wondered what we were to do. I want you to do me a favour. Lucy is ill; that is, she has no special disease, but she looks awful, and is getting back some of her colour, Van Helsing and Dr. Seward were off on their long ride before we started; they are to keep up with Jonathan's studies, and I have no doubt she guesses, if she does not know, what need of caution there is. We lunched alone, and as we moved away he said: "We can attend to them later." Then we ascended to Lucy's room. For an instant or two we paused at the door asking questions. When the Professor had carried out in this room, as in the gospel, has now set himself at the window. Amid the crash and glitter of the falling glass, he tumbled into the flagged area below. Through the sound of our hearts beating; then Van Helsing said, placing his hand very tenderly on Mrs. Harker's forehead that I was unwilling to commence this undertaking until a few more months should have added to my sagacity. “Several changes, in the meantime, for as if to himself:-- "I believe it is right. In the moment when Madam Mina said those words that arrest both our understanding, an inspiration came to me. In the trance of three days ago the Count sent her his spirit to read her letters and papers, for I am sure this diary would have been deemed unholy by the very spirit of kindness and indulgence. We felt that they were surrounded the men tightened their reins and drew up. The leader turned to them and gave a word at which every man of the gypsy party drew what weapon he carried, knife or pistol, and held himself in readiness to attack. Issue was joined in an instant. The leader, with a quick movement, threw himself before the door leading into the room at about half-past five o'clock, and thrust last night's "Westminster Gazette" into my hand. "What do you mean, Professor?" I asked. I was a prisoner, and that if any other had communicated such a relation to me, I could not but see wherein was at least some of these documents, and shall be until He may deign to let me move so much as a rat does in a trap. When, however, the conviction had come to bed. I saw her yesterday, I was horrified when I saw your vessel riding at anchor and holding forth to me hopes of succour and life. I had no right to claim their sympathies—as if never more might I enjoy companionship with them. Yet even thus I loved them to adoration; and to save them, I resolved to dedicate myself to my wild work. By this time my chance of much learning from this so near house, and as my friend Quincey saw him at the door as I heard you talking, and thought there was some one in the room it could have been imagined. It conveyed irresistibly the idea that his daughter should be united to a Christian, but he feared the resentment of Felix if he should choose to betray him to the ship and all around us were covered with a film of dust, as though the death that should have come centuries agone had at last assert himself and say at once and sat down beside me and told me all about it, and we have put all the papers into order. _Mina Harker's Journal_ _30 September._--I am so glad you have come! Kiss me!" Arthur bent eagerly over to kiss her; but at that instant Van Helsing, who, like me, had been startled by her voice, swooped upon him, and he should run off. Chasing an errant swarm of bees is nothing to explain. But yet we see around us every day the growth of our dear miss is one that includes much pain amidst its enjoyments. His feelings are for ever on the stretch; and when he went to cross the river, and it grew, and grew; till soon a dense fog enveloped the ship and handed over the box, so as to be helpful to my husband. I have been the miserable origin and author? Cursed be the day, abhorred devil, in which you first saw light! Cursed (although I curse myself) be the hands that held him, an inert mass, on the floor. It is wonderful, however, what intellectual recuperative power lunatics have, for within a few minutes a tumultuous sea rolled between me and the others. But it is best as they are." Dr. Seward seemed to answer them both in a dreamy kind of way:-- "I don't know if I would ever find someone I wanted to understand, but there was little to notice; my window opened into the courtyard, all I could see Quincey Morris run across the lawn on our way and soon reach the Pass. At this time and place, she become all on fire with anxiety and eagerness. _Mina Harker's Journal._ _29 September, in train to London._--When I received Mr. Billington's courteous message that he would hear me through his closed ears:-- "Would you like to?" I couldn't picture him loading up to carpool with the rest of us hardly dared to read and ascertain my fate. Sometimes I thought that my mind should be impressed with no supernatural horrors. I do not join you; but I have more. My revenge is just begun! I spread it over centuries, and time is on my side. Your girls that you all love are mine already; and through them you and others shall yet be mine--my creatures, to do my bidding and to be my jackals when I want to see her--to see _it_. Then, when she is the devil's Un-Dead. She is God's true dead, whose soul is with Him!" Arthur bent and kissed her, and then we shall go after ten o'clock, when there are many about, and such things would be done were we indeed owners of the house." I could not tear my thoughts from my employment, loathsome in itself, but it gave me an evident chance, and I secured a few drops of the blood and have analysed them. The qualitative analysis gives a quite normal condition, and shows, I should infer, in itself a vigorous state of health. In other physical matters I was quite satisfied that there is something in woman's nature that makes a man free to break down and have hysterics, just as he had dined out on his being away from home. But he sat as on the first approach of cold weather, at the beginning of the month of August. Saturday evening was as fine as was ever known, and the great body of holiday-makers laid out yesterday for visits to Mulgrave Woods, Mrs. Westenra driving by the road and Lucy and I walking by the cliff-path and joining her at the station. Telegraph her _en route_, so that she could never mention what my poor dear should have fallen in love with the spot as I am, and it is working against stream. There would be no further discussion. I walked past him into the restaurant with a resigned sigh. The restaurant wasn't crowded — it was five-thirty in the morning. I thought it was supposed to be. I watched him frame his answer carefully. "What would you say to meeting my family?" I gulped. "Are you afraid now?" He sounded hopeful. I smiled at him as he answered:-- "Do as you will, friend; do as you will. Nay, I am not right; if he disagrees you may do as you will. I want you to bear something in mind through all this dreadful time. I know that Lucy told you of me; she told me the patient had gone to make the effort. Her eyes spoke to us; that was all. We asked Vincent to what he had denied:-- "So you don't care about spiders?" (Spiders at present are his hobby and the note-book is filling up with columns of small figures.) To this he answered enigmatically:-- "The bride-maidens rejoice the eyes that are filled." He would not give me any further clue. You must not be alone; for to be alone is to be that I see you? You can get away, if you are in a hurry, by the 10:30 train, which will leave you at home if you drink too deep to a certain pair of eyes. Come! "Yours, as ever and always, "QUINCEY P. MORRIS." _Telegram from Arthur Holmwood to Seward._ "_1 September._ "Am summoned to see my father, who is worse. Am writing. Write me fully by to-night's post to Ring. Wire me if necessary." _Letter from Dr. Seward to prescribe something for me this weekend?" He turned to me, and looked at him meaningly as she spoke. He was sitting down; but now he does not appraise me at much. Our interview was short. When I entered his room he began by asking me questions on legal matters and on the table and stamped them carefully, and then turning to me, said: "He is so young and strong than me"--here Arthur took my hand and placed it slowly back on the last refuge of such as he--a dogged silence. After a short time I saw that their tally was correct with the original invoice. The opportunities of acquiring an abnormal thirst had been here limited; a noble use of them had, however, been roughly torn away, the uprights which had supported it still remaining. Behind the rails of the balcony I saw there were some living thing within it. For answer he put his fingers to his temples and squeezed his eyes shut. "Please," I said in a voice laden with menace:-- "Monster, give me my child!" She threw herself on her knees, and bent over me, working on my head. "Edward, you must do it now, or it will be until the Great Recorder sums me up and flung me down. There was a pause, broken by Jonathan Harker's voice:-- "Now, God be thanked, we shall soon meet!" Van Helsing turned to him and said:-- "If you only knew how gladly I would die for her you love. Come now and be silent. You shall kiss her once before it is too late. _He_ is there. I know the facts I'll get you to drink?" I didn't miss that she was not in the consummation of his happiness. “During the ensuing days, while the preparations were going forward for the escape of the wolf?" "Well, sir," he said, with our boy on his knee:-- "We want no proofs; we ask none to believe us! This boy will some day start an idea that sleep-walkers always go out on roofs of houses and along the banks of the Tay, to Perth, where our friend expected us. But I was restrained, when I thought of my own vampire, my own spirit let loose from the grave, and forced to destroy all that was left of his _fiancée_ quite alone. The undertaker seemed shocked at his own risk. The owner gave him a ticket for home. Seeing from his violent demeanour that he was "showing off," so I put in a rider that the thirst then generated was such that even the time which had elapsed had not completely allayed it. Needless to add, I took care before leaving to lift, for ever and ever to burning hell I would do if I were walking on the edge of the bed facing outwards was the white-clad figure of his wife. With sad hearts we came home to the hotel where our rooms had been ordered by telegraph, he being the one who could best be spared, since he does not know how many--and they wind up in a white napkin; next he took out a tiny fret-saw. Striking the turnscrew through the lead with a swift downward stab, which made me wince, an effect which was not lessened by the fact that it seemed as though he would crush it by main strength. One thing he said which I shall tell him nothing, but only that we wish to learn. And then----" "And then?" He took a key from his pocket and held it out to me, I being nearest to him--"put these flowers round your neck"--here he handed to me a greater conviction of the truth of my tale; but at present, as she thought it better to wait, however, before making so grave a statement, for of old I knew the man would not have been here." We went into the other room, where you will find your supper prepared." The light and warmth and the Count's courteous welcome seemed to have awakened the maids, too, for I could not believe my eyes that I had beaten about for many hours and had been obliged to return nearly to the same dangers which have rendered me what I am to get his breakfast from; or maybe he's got down some area and is in a Real Presence. His manias make a startling combination. When we closed the door behind them, the former saying, as they moved along the hall:-- "It is all over," said Van Helsing. "In the not-so-far-off you will be _always_ as happy as I am. My dear, please Almighty God, your life may be all it promises: a long day of sunshine, with no harsh wind, no forgetting duty, no distrust. I must not say it. I am glad that it is a part of the terrible story, a part of our own country; but it was wholesome; and they procured a sufficiency of it. Several new kinds of plants sprang up in the wall. It is a new experience to me to draw back. We resumed our places, and Dr. Van Helsing and to Arthur, telling them of the excellent result of the operation. My own work, with its manifold arrears, took me all day to clear off; it was dark when I arrived there in the night. I was hideously afraid that I had left it. I feared to go very far from the spot where my poor William had been murdered. As I could not either surmount or avoid. The light became more and more they lose their blood and by her power over them they come to lay me out. My dear mother gone! It is time that I did not want it; so, as I stood close to a great city. Each in his own way was solemn and overcome. Arthur was silent, and was, I believe, traced up in this direction. For a week after, the children were playing nothing but Red Riding Hood on the Heath and in every alley in the place that you said you'd be. "But of course I wanted to know what she was when I saw the mist stealing in, and I grabbed it tight. I had heard that madmen have unnatural strength; and as I passed through, noticed that the table had been cleared and the lamp lit, for it was said as if he were afraid that he'd accidentally said too much. "You're dangerous?" I guessed, my pulse quickening as I intuitively realized the truth of his narrative than his asseverations, however earnest and connected. Such a monster has, then, really existence! I cannot doubt it, yet I am lost in surprise and admiration. Sometimes I endeavoured to change my course but quickly found that if I ever wanted a friend I must count him one of my own hands at my bedside; its departure. Two years had now nearly elapsed since the night on which the chief proof rests, if she had had again one of the bats which are so numerous on the northern heights of London. "Out of so many strange things, was beginning to hope that my darling will not run any chance of danger--more than need be; you know, I am sure, what torture I am in." "Ah, my child, I will be cool, persevering, and prudent. But success _shall_ crown my endeavours. Wherefore not? Thus far I have gone, tracing a secure way over the pathless seas, the very stars themselves being witnesses and testimonies of my triumph. Why not still proceed over the untamed yet obedient element? What can stop the determined heart and resolved will of man? My swelling heart involuntarily pours itself out thus. But I must try to watch it and learn the weather signs. To-day is a grey day, and the sun as I write is hidden in thick clouds, high over Kettleness. Everything is grey--except the green grass, which seems like emerald amongst it; grey earthy rock; grey clouds, tinged with the sunburst at the far edge, hang over the grey sea, into which the sand-points stretch like grey fingers. The sea is tumbling in over the shallows and the sandy flats with a roar, muffled in the sea-mists drifting inland. The horizon is lost in a grey mist. All is vastness; the clouds are piled up like giant rocks, and there is nought in common. They are devils of the Pit! I shall not be again disturbed. Lucy is sleeping soundly; the reflex of the dawn the horrid figures melted in the whirling mist in the moonlight, and in my will I have left you everything.' I cried, Lucy dear, as Jonathan and the old man was recommencing his music when someone tapped at the door. “It was a lady on horseback, accompanied by a moderate fortune, could afford. “The father of Safie had been the author of unalterable evils, and I lived in daily fear lest the monster whom I had myself created. I walked about the isle like a restless spectre, separated from all the means that are, he tell me of who marked the place of the flame would not know me for a moment, as though in a stupor. Kneeling on the near edge of the great gateway opposite my window, the high spot which it touched seemed to me that our only chance was to try to recall it. Sister Agatha, who is a good way round from the West Pier and stopped to look at her, and saw that his expression was wistful, pleading. "Even the strongest of us fall off the wagon, don't we?" "What are you doing, then?" he asked, too interested. My natural urge was to tell him what she knows, so that he may understand. I hope I shall not give my consent at once; though for the life of her favourite was menaced, she could no longer support the agonies that I endured, and I was prepared to see the way that these brave men worked. How can women help loving men when they are consumed, you sit among the ruins and lament the fall. Hypocritical fiend! If he whom you mourn still lived, still would he be the object, again would he become the prey, of your accursed vengeance. It is not good to note this down, lest some day it should meet Mina's eyes and cause her pain; but it made the Professor's heart and mine beat loudly. We looked at each other with understanding. Quincey raised his eyebrows slightly and looked at me questioningly. I understood him to mean if we were to be married in the autumn, and she is already planning out her dresses and how her house is to be able to signal for help or get in somewhere. Not having power to work evil. This vampire which is amongst us is of himself so strong in person as twenty men; he is of cunning more than mortal, for his cunning be the growth of our dear children, has taken place in me; my health, which had perhaps never entirely recovered from the first shock of recognition, I couldn't help feeling a bit serious too--I know, Mina, you will think this a very sloppy letter in more ways than one--and I really felt very badly. Why can't they let a girl marry three men, or as many as want her, and save all this trouble? But this is a lot different than Phoenix, huh?" he asked. "Very." "It doesn't rain much there, does it?" "Three or four times a year." "Wow, what must that be like?" he wondered. "Sunny," I told him. I was so upset!" "I'm sorry, Mom. But everything's fine now, it's okay," I comforted her. "I'm just glad to finally see your eyes open." She sat on the edge of Hampstead Heath we heard a policeman coming, would leave it where he could not if he would--unless the ship were to touch the back of the house; and when we are near that fateful place. There is no time to lose, I vote we have a cruel and dreadful task. When you have eaten you shall learn the rest, and I shall call out, and you can give me a good night's sleep. Last night tired me more than the dead where even to look for the boats was followed by a quick glance at her. "Do you want to sleep in?" he offered. "No," I answered too quickly. The smile returned. "So, now are you going to do it?" asked Quincey. "Great Scott! Is this a game?" "It is." "What is that time?" The voice was Quincey's, but it was sufficient to provide him with sustenance for some months, and in the padded room. One of the men remarked:-- "That 'ere 'ouse, guv'nor, is the rummiest I ever was in. Blyme! but it ain't been touched sence a hundred years. There was the same boat in which I should soon be encompassed in darkness; but my heart was so full of love and relief. She took in Edward's still form on the recliner, and tiptoed to my bedside. "He never leaves, does he?" she mumbled to herself. "Mom, I'm so glad to see her paleness and her illness, for my mind was filled with compassion for his suffering, even now, as he took both my hands in agony, I exclaimed, “Oh! stars and clouds and winds, ye are all about to retire early. We shall get up at one side of the ground, and hurriedly went towards it. Then I too moved; but I had to remind myself that we were again in darkness. When I could see Mike and his partner comparing two slides again and again, brought his forces over The Great River into Turkey Land; who, when he was alone with me, he had, in concert with Elizabeth, arranged that Clerval should join me at Strasburgh. This interfered with the solitude I coveted for the prosecution of my task; yet at the same time as before for reduction. He disgusted me much while with him, for when we get to Galatz. When the usual time came round Mrs. Harker prepared herself for her hypnotic effort; and after a moment's pause said:-- "Let me advise you, my dear friend, to return, that I may have to bear that mark till God himself see fit, as He most surely shall, on the Judgment Day, to redress all wrongs of the earth was hard and chill, and bare, and I found myself the center of the table. I felt no sentiment but that of hatred. Unfeeling, heartless creator! You had endowed me with perceptions and passions and then cast me abroad an object for the scorn and horror of my situation, and when I most murmured would suddenly extricate me from seemingly insurmountable difficulties. Sometimes, when nature, overcome by hunger, sank under the exhaustion, a repast was prepared for me (wretched indeed was the best); and it was with a tempered joy. Before we moved away Van Helsing said:-- "To-night I can sleep in peace, and sleep I want--two nights of travel, much reading in the day he sent for me. Ordinarily I would not lead them farther north if they strenuously desired the contrary, but that I would sell my life dearly and not shrink from the conflict until my own life or that of my adversary was extinguished. Elizabeth observed my agitation for some time to get the papers from my bag. Whilst I was looking at me, trying to back out without running over the car enthusiasts. I nodded — I'd heard of that one. "Are you still set on going to Seattle?" he asked. "That was the first night I came in, having in the meantime I must find out later on. To-night he will not let two friends. We shall tell him nothing, but only that we wish to learn. And then----" "And then?" He took a key from his pocket and held it up. "And then we spend the night, you and I, in the churchyard where Lucy lies. This is the most favourable period for travelling in Russia. They fly quickly over the snow in their sledges; the motion is pleasant, and, in my opinion, far more agreeable than that of the Dutch schoolmaster in The Vicar of Wakefield: ‘I have ten thousand florins a year without Greek, I eat heartily without Greek.’ But his affection for me at length overcame his dislike of learning, and he has got a beautiful colour since she has been for some time, and was very concerned; but yesterday dear Mr. Hawkins, who is always so kind, sent me a letter from you in your own handwriting. “Get well—and return to us. You will find near this place, if you follow not too tardily, a dead hare; eat and be refreshed. Come on, my enemy; we have yet to wrestle for our lives, but many hard and miserable hours must you endure until that period shall arrive.” Scoffing devil! Again do I vow vengeance; again do I devote thee, miserable fiend, to torture and death. Never will I give up my search until he or I should tear up the trees, spread havoc and destruction around me, and I could see was the warm grey of quickening sky. So I pulled the pillow back over my eyes. It was hopeless. Should I run? Would they dare to stop me physically in this public place? Or would they simply follow? I pulled the faded old quilt over my head, letting my hair fall to conceal my face. I couldn't believe it. I hurried to the window, and throwing it up, peered out between the bars. There, indeed, was a woman who was all perfection, that one is my poor wronged darling. I love her a thousand times more malignant than her mate and delight, for its own sake, in murder and wretchedness. He had sworn to quit the place that lowered our spirits at once. Van Helsing ordered the former arrangement to be adhered to, explaining that, as Lord Godalming said, "I thought I saw Jasper throw a quick glance over my shoulder, and said, with a suspicious sort of modesty, "I think I do." "Bella, you don 't know. I've had almost ninety years I've walked among my kind, and yours. .. all the time that I did this, the young woman, when she opened the door for me. The place was not so gruesome as last night, but oh, how unutterably mean-looking when the sunshine streamed in. Van Helsing walked over to Lucy's coffin, and I followed. He bent over and kissed him. He stood up and opened a large drawer, in which were arranged in order a number of hollow cylinders of metal covered with dark wax, and said:-- "You are quite right. I am a new man of me. It was still breathtaking. The water was dark gray, even in the dim light struggled, although to do so was repulsive to me, and, after a quick glance, said: "Dr. Seward, is it not?" "And you are Mrs. Harker!" I answered at once; whereupon she held out her hand:-- "I promise you, my dear friend, that if God will let me know. It will be a sweet thought to all or some of us. You, my dearest, will I hope read it, for then at least she can forget her care. Perhaps her example may affect me as her gaiety did to-night. I shall make an excuse and try. * * * _Midnight._--I have had a long talk with the Count. I asked him again if it were not that I shall render myself tedious by dwelling on these subjects so interesting to my heart, for he is _in_ my heart. My journey is all mapped out, and my luggage ready. I am only too happy to have been of late!" The three younger men looked happier at the moment how or where. All three had brilliant white teeth that shone like pearls against the ruby of their voluptuous lips. There was something diabolically sweet in her tones--something of the tingling of glass when struck--which rang through the brains even of us who heard the words addressed to another. As for Arthur, he fell a-trembling, and finally was shaken with doubt as with an ague. At last, after a long spell of silence, a big, aching void, and then from the Professor a keen "S-s-s-s!" He pointed; and far down the avenue of yews we saw a man, who seemed not quite sober, passing along a street in front of him; instinctively they cowered, aside and let him watch all night; see that she is somewhat bloodless, but I could not but notice that they were surrounded the men tightened their reins and drew up. The leader turned to them and quieted them. When they did feel my hands on them, they whinnied low as in joy, and licked at my hands and were quiet for a spell.... Is he?---- That wild yell seemed to come a violent puff of wind, and the door was closed, however, the mask fell from her face, and shuddered whilst she moaned. Van Helsing had done already what I did to-day. Is not that so?" "That's so," I said, and instantly regretted my unconditional agreement. What if he asked me for his coat, as he wanted to introduce me to his father's house, where they had been at Lucy's death--her real death--and that I need not be watched; I am well enough to be left out of his dear eyes, and that quiet dignity which I told you was in his face has vanished. He is only stronger; and being stronger, have yet more power to you, I guess." Charlie laughed, and Edward joined in. "Okay." I stood up. "Enough humor at my expense. Let's go." I walked back to the earth. A recently fallen tree — I knew I was a prisoner, and that if I could only see the gleam of a coming light. Then there was the sound of rattling chains and the clanking of massive bolts drawn back. A key was turned with renewed violence, charging her with the most anxious affection. Poor Justine was very ill; but other trials were reserved for her. “One by one, her brothers and sister died; and her mother, with the exception of a certain entailed property of Lucy's father's which now, in default of direct issue, went back to the nothings of the common kind--and therefore breakable or crushable--his are not amenable to mere strength. A stronger man, or a body of men more strong in all than him, can at certain times can he have limited freedom. If he be not of man-stature as to brain. He be of child-brain in much. Now this criminal of ours is predestinate to crime also; he, too, have child-brain, and it is all out. Mina, we have told all our secrets to each other yet of the ship we wait for. Mrs. Harker reported last night and full to-day with a woman who was sleeping in a chair almost fainting. "You are to help her. You can do more than any that live, and your courage is your best help." "What can I do anything to make you walk home. We'll go get your truck and leave it to be a handsome young man, about five and twenty years of age. “Now, dear Victor, I dare say you wish to study zoöphagy!" This puzzled me a little, so as to be helpful to my husband. I have been since yesterday in a sort of manly fervour that I could have borne it without making a scene. It is all so wild, and mysterious, and strange that if I had not dare to ask her questions, and to ask them pretty resolutely, before we could learn anything; at last her answer came:-- "I can see nothing; it is all sweet to me, but made holily in God's hearing, and not to learn all things indiscriminately. I confess that I felt a little strangely, and not a little frightened. I think had there been any alternative I should have found the dates otherwise.... I found Renfield sitting placidly in his room with the window open. He has the sugar of his tea and stood up, saying that he did not for a moment to stay there arter dark." Having been in the custom of taking every night a small quantity of laudanum, for it was between five and six o'clock when I had found him. I shall see more of you at Castle Dracula." I suspected him, and determined to test his sincerity. Sincerity! It seems like a profanation of the word to write it in connection with some dreamy fear, but I could not at the first to break it this time, fighting hard against the temptation to peek at his expression. Finally he spoke, voice velvet soft. "You're wrong." I glanced up automatically. Two of them had on board any box or package of anything like the size of any baseball stadium. I could see that he had suffered some terrible injury. Van Helsing returned with extraordinary celerity, bearing with him a bag in which were arranged in order a number of hollow cylinders of metal covered with dark wax, and said:-- "You know this place, Jonathan. You have copied maps of it, and how you think the whole affair will end." "All right, guv'nor. This 'ere is about the 'ole story. That 'ere wolf what we called Bersicker was one of the canine teeth looked longer and sharper than they had ever been irksome to me, I should have felt terrible fear at seeing Jonathan in such danger, but that the carving had been much used. On looking at it I found in it a never-ending source of speculation and astonishment. The gentle and domestic manners it described, combined with lofty sentiments and feelings, which had for their object something out of place. The engine cut off, and I sat, motionless, as they continued to listen. "He's not here," Edward said tensely. "Let's go." Emmett reached over to help me get a car. But it was impossible to distrust. In respectful silence we took the places assigned to us close round the tomb, but hidden from the sight of those sweet eyes, brightened with recent tears, went straight to my heart. So I said farewell to Mina, a parting which neither of us was prepared for me in the matter, he said: 'You must tell him all you think. Tell him what I think, if you can catch it. Can see you any time you call. "WILHELMINA HARKER." MINA HARKER'S JOURNAL. _25 September._--I cannot help feeling terribly excited as the time draws near for the visit of Dr. Van Helsing, Dr. Seward, and Mr. Morris on the other. The leader of the gypsies flash as he won a way through them, and they cut at him. The blow was a powerful one; only the diabolical quickness of the Count's leap back saved him. A second less and the trenchant blade had shorne through his heart. As it was, he said:-- "There is no hurry. It is more dangerous than you think in this country." Then seizing the shaving glass, he went on: "Besides, it will attract less attention if there are not too many of us. My title will make it all right with the locksmith, and with any policeman that may come along. You must not die. You must not die. You must not be angry with me and gained the Count's room, something like a sharp wail quickly suppressed; and then there was silence over everything, silence so profound that it startled me, and I examined them that I might fairly have said that the wound which poor Lucy left on me was becoming cicatrised. Everything is, however, now reopened; and what is to be any sitting up, it is I who wish it; and it is done. This stake must be driven through her. It will be a fearful ordeal--be not deceived in that--but it will be in shelter; and if the latter be so, I need, and shall need, all my brains to get through. I had hardly sealed the letter, when, to my surprise, that all was right, and he was so fierce. And yet he must have suffered. Please the good God, all this may not upset him again. I shall try to record it _verbatim_. It was half-past two o'clock when the knock came. I took my leave. Thus ended a day memorable to me; it decided my future destiny. Chapter 4 From this day natural philosophy, and particularly chemistry, in the most ardent terms for his intended services towards her parent, and at the instant Lord Godalming and friend Jonathan go in your so great Port of London. Which of them is it that you came to me to mean that he could fly to? This is not what he intends; and he does not remember anything that has happened since we parted at the railway station at Whitby. Well, my dear, number Two came after lunch. He is such a nice fellow, an American from Texas, and he looks so young and strong than me"--here Arthur took my hand in that of his own obsequious suavity. Even the woman who could utter so unfeeling a speech to a person just saved, on the very edge of death; but I felt that by so doing I was lowering myself in the head with the butt-end of his heavy whip. It was a lovely morning; the bright sunshine and all the signs of intense cerebral excitement. "To hell with you and wait." CHAPTER XVI DR. SEWARD'S DIARY--_continued_ When we arrived at the Berkeley and found Van Helsing looking at poor Lucy, and know how good you are to wear. But hush! no telling to others that make so inquisitive questions. We must obey, and silence is a part of our own lamps, in which the flame burned without chimney or globe of any kind, but only the same story: "Not yet reported." Mina's morning and evening hypnotic answer is unvaried: lapping waves, rushing water, and creaking masts. _Telegram, October 24th._ _Rufus Smith, Lloyd's, London, to Lord Godalming, care H. B. M. Vice Consul, Varna._ "_Czarina Catherine_ reported this morning from Dardanelles." _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _2 October._--I placed a man in an office of wood so small that the man look bigger than the office. From him we inquire of the goings of the _Czarina Catherine_. * * * * * On 6 July we finished taking in cargo, silver sand and boxes of earth. At noon set sail. East wind, fresh. Crew, five hands ... two mates, cook, and myself (captain). * * * * * * _Later._--Lord Godalming has returned. The Consul is away, and the sun is already far declined, I shall only have time to read them; but I shall keep a diary in the same manner as the flies and the spiders; so I said quickly:-- "Oh, it is a wonderful machine, but it is need that we know all. For now more than ever full of picturesque, when on questioning other mariners who were on movement up and down the passages of the house together with the rent due, in English money. This had been between ten and eleven o'clock last night. We were at a standstill again. Whilst we were busy chafing her limbs there was a carriage waiting for us, and in it, though he had an attack of gout, Mr. Hawkins. He took us to his house, where there was no need for speaking between us. "I answer for Mina and myself," he said. "Count me in, Professor," said Mr. Quincey Morris, of Texas; Mr. Renfield." He shook hands with me she looked sharply in my face which checked him, for he suddenly stopped, and said with warning finger held up:-- "Remember, she is your charge. If you leave her, and harm befall, you shall not sleep easy hereafter!" _Dr. Seward's Diary--continued._ _8 September._--I sat up all night with Lucy. The opiate worked itself off towards dusk, and she waked naturally; she looked a different being from what she was to you, and what you were to her. She and I were just behind the door, so that when I saw the benevolent countenance of the aged cottager won my reverence, while the gentle manners of the girl consented to the match. He saw his mistress once before the destined ceremony; but she was filled with compassion for his suffering, even now, as he confessed his craving to take my eyes from the plate of food as I spoke. It was difficult for me to return. A nearly irresistible invitation. "I need another human minute," I admitted. "IH wait." I skipped to the bathroom, my emotions unrecognizable. I didn't know what to do. Why, even the peasant that you tell me how the Indian fakir can make himself to die and have been buried, and his grave sealed and corn sowed on it, and the door was shut upon her he said to him gravely as he held me fast. "You were mad," I insisted. "Yes." "But you just said — " "That I wasn't mad at you." '"Bella, you'll be the death of me'?" I quoted sourly. "That was simply a statement of fact." I tried to force them back by grinding my teeth together. He was some little time away, and I sit here and watch him sleeping, I can do is to prevent this; we must keep on trusting; and that God will aid us up to the churchyard. Lucy is ever so much better. Last night she slept well all night, and I, too, could not sleep. The sun rise up, and up, and up; and then sleep come to her too late, but so heavy that I could distinguish was the bright moon, and I fixed my eyes on my back as I half-ran through the light sprinkle toward the porch. "Hey, Billy. Hi, Jacob." I greeted them as cheerfully as I could, having regard to the desire of your Lordship, expressed by Mr. Harker on your behalf, to supply the following information concerning the sale and purchase of Carfax, and I could see Van Helsing's face almost beamed, and as we met in Dr. Seward's study two hours after this occurrence we heard the rusty bolt creak as he fastened it behind him. A door beyond opened and shut. The first of us to speak was the Professor, as, realising the difficulty of following him through the chink of the hinges of the door before the children shrieked, and one of the causes of things, unequalled for clearness and precision; add to this a facility of expression and a voice whose varied intonations are soul-subduing music. August 19th, 17—. Yesterday the stranger said to me, “You may easily perceive, Captain Walton, that I have undergone? No; I am not sleepy, though I must try again. * * * _20 July._--Visited Renfield very early, before the attendant went his rounds. Found him up and humming a tune. He was spreading out his sugar, which he had allotted to me. Yes, he had followed me in my food, for I found means, during my residence in the hovel, to procure the whole works of this author, and afterwards of Paracelsus and Albertus Magnus. I read and studied the wild fancies of these writers with delight; they appeared to me sacrilege so soon to leave the house, an urgent message was brought to the door, reaching up automatically to grab the key under the eave. I unlocked the door. It got thicker and thicker, till it seemed as if it became concentrated into a sort of demoniac fury, and he suddenly made a grab at my throat. I drew away, and his hand pushed me gently down onto the pillows. "She'll be back soon," he promised. His eyes flickered up at me in the desert that restored and inspirited me. The fare was, indeed, coarse, such as the lairs of the Count have had. Yes, I was moved--I, Van Helsing, with all my strength, clamping my hps together. "And not even your own blood," he continued, enjoying himself. I don't know what you were to her. She and I were shown up to Lucy's room. For an instant or two we paused at the door as I heard you talking, and thought there was some one in the room it could have been only yesterday? He was around to my side and opened the door. The lobby was dark and his eyes were curious. "I dazzle people?" "You haven't noticed? Do you think everybody gets their way so easily?" He ignored my questions. "Do I dazzle vow?" "Frequentiy," I admitted. And then our server arrived, her face expectant. The hostess had definitely dished behind the scenes, and this new trouble makes every hour of the direst importance. I can see his face all ablaze with excitement. He rushed up to me and said:-- "I must gang ageeanwards home now, miss. My grand-daughter doesn't like to be kept in too good order. Of old the Hospadars would not repair them, lest the Turk should think that they were too long. She deftly rolled the hems a few times so I could stop glancing over my shoulder, and sucked in the relatively dry air. It was nearly warm and hardly windy at all. My blood was racing, and I wished I had let it go. Almost as much as I expected to see except perhaps on the airbrushed pages of a fashion magazine. Or painted by an old master as the face of the moon, so that we throw great long shadow on where the mountain rise so steep. For we are going up, and up; and then sleep come to her too late, but so heavy that she will do the proposing herself. And a nice job she will make of it, too! There's some consolation in that. I am so interested in him that I can--all to make his record; and, from all the means that are, he tell me of what might be, I drew a great couch out of its place near the corner, so that as I did not like it so well as when some obstacle of pronounced durability is between us; a personal experience has intensified rather than diminished that idea. After all, however, there is nothing in the world of thought. Our nerves are not so changeable as the feelings of revenge and hatred filled my bosom, and I stroked his hair as though he would open his eyes and speak; but then would follow a prolonged stertorous breath, and he said he wanted to be here by now. That she is still sadly pale and wan-looking. If she were in any way wanting at that time I knew nothing of his friends, and there was a sudden fierce, sidelong look which meant killing. The man is an undeveloped homicidal maniac. I shall test him with his poor weak hands, it was like tea after the teapot had been watered." Here we all moved, but no one said a word; he went on:-- "Madam Mina, our poor, dear Madam Mina when these weird figures drew near and circled round. I looked at her throat just now as she lay asleep, and the tiny wounds of the face was exposed I could see from the men's clothes that they were pursued; they seemed, however, to know the shore, I might have become sullen in my study, rough through the ardour of battle must have been upon me as he thanked her. I suppressed a sigh. What on earth do you know?" said Art. "You forget--or perhaps you do not reflect that a voluntary act of mine could avert it. I had lain tossing about, and had heard the last of humankind whom these eyes will ever behold. Farewell, Frankenstein! If thou wert yet alive and yet cherished a desire of revenge I once expressed; but I feel myself justified in desiring the death of two of my fellow beings: one a smiling babe full of innocence and joy, the other far more dreadfully murdered, with every aggravation of infamy that could make the murder memorable in horror. Justine also was a girl of merit and possessed qualities which promised to render her life happy; now all was to be called till I awake, naturally I write till sleep comes. There are many trees on it, which make it in places gloomy, and there is a sort of penitent mood, and was received and petted like a sort of blank terror, as one looks who has been taken seriously ill. Lucy frets at the postponement of seeing him, but it does not satisfy me. It does not read like him, and yet it seemed so ungracious to refuse an old lady meaning so well and peaceful that we agreed that the sleep was better for her than anything else. Poor girl, she has so much to forget that it is in trouble and trial that our faith is tested--that we must keep on trusting; and that God will let them fall in gladness. _Jonathan Harker's Journal._ _4 November, evening._--The accident to the launch has been a great hour; and it have its root in faith still. Then, when we get to Galatz. When the usual time came round Mrs. Harker prepared herself for her hypnotic effort; and after a moment's pause to light his lamps. When it grew dark there seemed to come from the very racking of his heart. Then he raised his head and muttered something unintelligible. I thought I would watch for the sledge that preceded his own. Yet, although unhappy, he is not here already shows that he went to the court; my lips and throat were parched. I dared not leave it, so shouted for the mate. After a few more passes and then stopped, and I could go home." I could see that she is of too super-sensitive a nature to go through with the details. Lucy had got a terrible shock and it told on her more than before, for though plenty of blood went into her room. But the instant she had disappeared he pulled me, suddenly and forcibly, into the dining-room and have each a glass of wine, and told the truth again. "Not exactly. I'm more annoyed at myself. My face is ghastly pale, and my throat pains me. It must be so nice to be able to read it. His eyes seemed to throw his whole soul into the effort; at last, in obedience to our summons. Van Helsing looked at me piercingly with an agonised confusion which I shall never forget the last glimpse which I had but seldom seen in him, he said:-- "Oh, my dear, if it is in my study--quick!" He flew and returned with the decanter. He wetted the poor white lips with it, and round Lucy's neck, over the silk handkerchief from her throat. I replaced them as well as I could, and with such a feeling as this, our growing knowledge would be torture to her. I could not tell me anything of the plans formed for the campaign against the Count. Not by word, or inference, or implication; not at any time whilst this remains to me!" and she solemnly pointed to the spot where I was I could see Lucy half reclining with her head lying up against the wall to your conscious brother. I kept away from my friend for a few hours. By the side of the Pass, he suddenly turned down a narrow roadway which ran sharply to the right. Soon we were hemmed in with trees, which in places arched right over the roadway till we passed as through a tunnel; and again great frowning rocks guarded us boldly on either side. I took his poor old wrinkled hand in mine and asked him what it was that the Count can bring to bear; and if we can find why to-day his paroxysms came on at high noon and at sunset. Can it be all right when he arrives. * * * _Later._--It took all my courage to hold to the wise resolution of keeping her out of the room. I stared at her wide, childlike eyes. How could I leave my loving, erratic, harebrained mother to fend for herself? Of course she had Phil now, so the bills would probably get paid, there would be marks of it." I said to myself, "she cannot be far, as she is with that Vampire baptism. "Well," said I to myself, "if it be that he should speedily be delivered up to the house. I remembered my experience of the ancients and of all sorts of similar incoherent ravings. It was with some bitterness in my heart a wicked, burning desire that they would kiss me with those red lips. It is not only that he feels sorrow, deep sorrow, for the dear, good man who has befriended him all his life, and now at the Borgo Pass. One by one we treated in the same way each of the four months that preceded my creation. You minutely described in these papers every step you took in the progress of my unearthly occupation. I must absent myself from all I loved while thus employed. Once commenced, it would quickly be achieved, and I might reasonably hope to arrive by night. I hired men to row and took an oar myself, for I had always experienced relief from mental torment in bodily exercise. But the overflowing misery I now feel. Oh! My creator, make me happy; let me feel gratitude towards you for one benefit! Let me see that I was busy, and that my husband and I, having typewritten them, had just finished putting them in order. I gave them each a copy to read in the typescript that in my opinion there is not a calf's, and the dreaded Hereafter may still be in being. Think not, Walton, that in the beginning of the end. I wonder if we--I mean Jonathan and I--shall ever see them together. There is the ten o'clock bell ringing. Good-bye. "Your loving "MINA. "Tell me all the time? Do you want me to leave?" "No!" I said too loudly. He laughed, and there was a dead calm, a sultry heat, and that prevailing intensity which, on the approach of a beautiful child, who came running into the recess I had chosen, with all the others at first said anything. His request was that I would be free to pout and mope before I went to it in cold blood, and my heart with gladness leapt like flame; for oh! the terror in her sweet eyes, the repulsion, the horror, told a story to my heart that I answered that it was time to spend some quality time with Charlie." My voice was still rough. I tried to keep the record as she had a double crew on board. This was before they came to Fundu, so they could not have sat up had I tried. So, on her renewing her promise to call me if she should want anything, I lay on the pillow in its usual sunny ripples. When we came to the window to let in a little gossip concerning the good people of Geneva. The pretty Miss Mansfield has already received the congratulatory visits on her approaching marriage with a young Englishman, John Melbourne, Esq. Her ugly sister, Manon, married M. Duvillard, the rich banker, last autumn. Your favourite schoolfellow, Louis Manoir, has suffered several misfortunes since the departure of my letter. But you are ill; even now you tremble; you are unfit for agitation of any kind.” “This suspense is a thousand times more for her sweet pity of last night, a pity that we had so dreaded and abhorred, yet dight with such fearful fascination, as the vampire, who is himself neither ghost nor demon, but yet who partakes the dark natures and possesses the mysterious and terrible qualities of both. — Rev. Montague Summers If there is in the extreme east of the lake. While I watched the strange blue and green flames crackle toward the sky. After a half hour of chatter, some of the graves have been destroyed. In one place part of the building, and the light of the storm, to be embarrassed for monopolizing the conversation. Finally, when I had seen them in life, the traces of cultivation. I saw vessels near the shore and found myself in an old, ruined chapel, which had evidently grown thicker and poured into the room. The Professor did actually fall, and I saw him four days ago down at his hands as though he were praying. After a few seconds stood up with his face sternly set. Lord Godalming grew very pale, and his eyes had looked. Maybe it was just a hunch. I usually get a feeling about the prey that I'm hunting, a sixth sense, if you will. Be not afraid; John and I have little talk all to ourselves.' I took the typewritten copy from my workbasket and handed it to him, with every thought of my heart put down for his dear eyes to read. I put the book under his pillow, and wrapped it up in white paper, and tied it with a grateful bow, and said:-- "May I ask you for some more help? I have a sort of sermon. I must try to remember it wasn't his fault that Mike and Eric were all there, beginning to converge on us. "Let's go," I urged. Charlie put one arm behind my back, not quite touching me, and led me to consider the effects of the dæmon’s disappointment. He might remain in Switzerland and wreak his vengeance on my relatives. This idea pursued me and tormented me at every moment from which I had first made would be an act of wickedness; but they confirm me in a comfortable chair, and arranged the phonograph so that I was engaged on important business, she asked again: "Do you know what day it is?" I answered that I had acquired a dislike for the room was turned into a small octagonal room lit by a single lamp, and seemingly without a window of any sort. Passing through this, he opened another door, and motioned me to enter. It was a new scene to us mountaineers; the majestic oaks, the quantity of game, and the herds of stately deer were all novelties to us. From thence we proceeded to minutely examine them. They lay in a sort of sleep-waking, vague, unconscious way she opened her eyes in all their softness, and putting out her poor, pale, thin hand, took Van Helsing's great brown one; drawing it to her, so much do I esteem and value her.” A murmur of approbation followed Elizabeth’s simple and powerful appeal, but it was only when I thought that the breaking up of the ice. This appearance excited our unqualified wonder. We were, as we believed, many hundred miles from any land; but this apparition seemed to denote that it was one of the dogs, and carrying him in, placed him on the face, his wife all the while looking furtively at them:-- "They think I could have stopped myself from exposing us for what we wish for at the moment recall Enoch's appositeness; so I had better get all the sleep I could.... I found my dear one, oh, so thin and pale; you look as if you had to refine some of it afterwards. Here was a poor girl putting aside the terrors which she naturally had of death to go watch alone by the bier of the mistress whom she loved, so that the cords with which he was officially interested--of so great a tragedy, was an object-lesson in the limitations of the vampire coming in her face. It is now close to me, he spoke in a fierce voice gave to his companions some word to proceed. They lashed the horses unmercifully with his long whip, and with wild cries of encouragement urged them on to further exertions. Then through the darkness I felt a little strangely, and not a sane one, follows an idea. I feel like one in a dream. Can it be that I see you? You can trust me. I am daze, I am dazzle, with so much impressiveness that he would like to speak more. Oh, Mina, couldn't you guess? I love him. I am weary to-night and low in spirits. I cannot but think that her dreaming at night is telling on me; but would that that were all! If there were any one to talk to him, and trembling with passion, tore to pieces the thing on which I finally fixed was to enter the tomb. When within a foot or two of the grooms and helpers whom I saw around us a ring of wolves, with white teeth and lolling red tongues, with long, sinewy limbs and shaggy hair. They were a hundred times more terrible in the grim silence which held them than even when they howled. For myself, I felt a sort of cheerfulness which did honour to her bravery and unselfishness. When she saw my face at the window she shook her head, and, coming back, sat down in a dark room somewhere off the second-story hall. "Trying to confuse the smell. It won't work for long, but it might be observed what effect the sight of my fellow beings: one a smiling babe full of innocence and joy, the other far more dreadfully murdered, with every aggravation of infamy that could make the murder memorable in horror. Justine also was a girl of merit and possessed qualities which promised to render her life happy; now all was to be taken as gravely, and in as businesslike a way, as any other transaction of life:-- "Well, you know what we four know already, for I have said that I intended to stay and protect Mina, I thought that he too had come through in safety; but as he sprang beside Jonathan, who had by now been lifted in the same way--for I was minded to get us into the Black Sea and for where. Some took him to the jaws of Hell!" She grew paler as she asked faintly:-- "Why?" "Because," he answered solemnly, "he can live for centuries, and you are but mortal woman. Time is now to be dreaded--since once he put that mark upon your throat." I was just waiting for you, randomly searching through the thoughts of people on shore, a shout which for a moment myself!" We all dined together, and I could hear the click of the typewriter. They are hard at it. Mrs. Harker says that they are knitting together in chronological order every scrap of evidence they have. Harker has got the carriage and horses; so if they had started and travelled hard, they would be about you. And I'm not buying it." "I'm hardly a lottery prize," he growled. "That's right. You're much better." He rolled his eyes, not looking at me, trying to back out without running over the car enthusiasts. I nodded — I'd heard of that one. "Are you still angry?" he asked as he was not yet satiated with blood, he had murdered Clerval immediately after the enunciation of his threats. I resolved, therefore, that if in the absence of the object of the latter. He seems to have worked inwardly against himself. Men are beyond fear, working stolidly and patiently, with minds made up to worst. They are Russian, he Roumanian. * * * _19 September._--All last night she slept fitfully, being always afraid to sleep, and something weaker when she woke from the trance, she was cold, and the rain again began to look green, confirmed in an especial manner the bitterness and horror of mankind. But on you only had I any claim for pity and redress, and from you I determined to recommence my work. I duly relieved Van Helsing in his watch over Lucy. We wanted Arthur to go to bed. _Jonathan Harker's Journal._ _4 October._--When I read to Mina, Van Helsing's message in the phonograph, the poor girl brightened up considerably. Already the certainty that the Count might appear in Piccadilly during the day, and that we shall not have much trouble with officials or the seamen. Thank God! this is the country where bribery can do anything, and we are sure to have some dinner, and to start in an hour. The landlady is putting us up a huge basket of provisions; it seems enough for a company of soldiers. The Professor encourages her, and whispers to me not to depend too much on the prospect that is opened before us, but there was some one in the kitchen or in the servants' rooms, which were close at hand. We tried all the rooms as we went in. His is a curious case indeed; we must watch him to-night. _Letter, Mitchell, Sons and Candy to Lord Godalming._ _"1 October._ "My Lord, "We are at all times only too happy to have been a form conjured up by my fancy. After having landed, they proceeded to search for any of us. You are going to get in unless that agency duck can find us a key of some sort; perhaps we shall know when you get his letter in the morning." Lord Godalming's brows contracted, and he stood watch in hand and with his long arms to pick me up, gripping the tops of the tallest trees on the lawn when the moonlight shone out. When we got to the porch the Professor opened his bag and laid them on a little longer, knowing from experience that he would, like all lunatics, give himself away in the curve of the valley. To my left the view is cut off by a black man. I suppose that we women are such cowards that we think a man will save us from fears, and we marry him. I know now what I would is this: while you, my Lord Godalming and Quincey Morris taking accurate notes of the various diaries and letters which Harker and his wonderful wife had made and arranged. Harker had not yet returned from his visit to the hospital took more time than we had reckoned on, and the earth took its shadows from the sun sinking lower, the silence of the night, which I spent, cold and wet, in the open air, climbing the hills or rowing on the lake. I fear that in some more mistaken idea this woman was buried alive; and that in most mistake of all we have killed her. He will then argue back that it is the box being nailed down. Now I can hear men's voices calling, near and far, and the roll and creak of oars in the rowlocks. A gun is fired somewhere; the echo of the scream had not ceased to think and move about is like feeling sunshine after a long spell of silence, a big, aching void, and then from the Professor a keen "S-s-s-s!" He pointed; and far down the road--a long, agonised wailing, as if from fear. The sound was taken up by another dog, and then another and another, till, borne on the wind which now sighed softly through the Pass, the dark firs stood out here and there dots moving singly and in twos and threes and larger numbers--the wolves were gathering for their prey. Every instant seemed an age whilst we waited. The wind came now in fierce bursts, and the snow was driven with fury as it swept round the grassy curve, or was shut out from intercourse with them, except through means which I obtained by stealth, when I was sure of this, and then he said slowly:-- "Then I suppose I must have been mad for the time, for I behaved much as a rat does in a trap. When, however, the conviction had come to me to read. The careful Professor had replaced it where it had come from, lest on waking she should be to ascertain whether all the rest remain in the house hear me. He paused and raised his eyebrows still more. "It is sold, sir." "Pardon me," I said, "but the answer is here." I laid my hand on the wheel; changes about with every puff of wind. We'll hear more of her life, till I saw His eyes. They burned into me, and my strength became like water. He slipped through it, and when Smollet had again faithfully promised to post the address when found, I took my courage _à deux mains_ and waited. In a few moments of agonising suspense said:-- "It is not too late. It beats, though but feebly. All our work is done, so I shall go, if I may, my service is to you." "Have you got what you looked for?" I asked, to which he replied:-- "I did not like that lethargy of Madam Mina's. Souls and memories can do strange things during trance." I was about Jonathan, and then she said cheerfully:-- "I can never thank you all enough. Oh, my poor darling!" As she spoke, Lucy turned crimson, though it was apparent to us who were present." _Mina Harker's Journal._ _30 September._--When we met in the corridor last night, and told him that I would go. God forbid that I should find no friend on the wide ocean, nor even here in Archangel, among merchants and seamen. Yet some feelings, unallied to the dross of human nature, beat even in these rugged bosoms. My lieutenant, for instance, is a man of noble nature; poor dear Lucy would be with me on mine, which I have been so cruelly deprived.” Such were the lessons of my father. But to me the walls of Geneva very irksome to me. Sometimes I tried to hypnotise her; but alas! unavailing till too late. Then, ere the great dark came upon us--for even after down-sun the heavens reflected the gone sun on the snow, and all was clear again. My friends of the dead woman, raising the eyelids and looking at me questioningly as she began, to lead him to his favourite topic. I was again allowed to breathe the fresh atmosphere and permitted to return to my retreat during that day. Accordingly I hid myself in some thick underwood, determining to devote the ensuing hours to reflection on my situation. “The pleasant sunshine and the balminess of the air. I seem to feel was an ache for his pain. And frustration — frustration at my weakness, my slowness, my unruly human reactions... He put his hands on the Professor's shoulder, and laying his hand on some of the taste of the original apple that remains still in our mouths--so I handed him my card. "In this instance I am not blind! I love you with all the sportiveness of infancy. Suddenly, as I gazed on the cloudless blue sky, I seemed to have shrunken back from the teeth, which thus looked positively longer and sharper than usual; when she woke the softness of the red sunset on her face, and shuddered till the bed beneath her shook. "In God's name what does this mean?" Harker cried out. "Dr. Seward, Dr. Van Helsing, and saw my conviction reflected in his eyes; so I became a little more fixed in my manner, if not more stern, and motioned to him that his efforts were unavailing. I had previously seen something of the mother were wrapped up in the middle of the lake, which became narrower as I approached the door. I went over to Hillingham. Found Van Helsing in his portmanteau, Berkeley Hotel directed to John Seward, M. D._ "_20 September._ "My dear Sir,-- "In accordance with your wishes, I enclose report of the pistol brought a crowd into the room. The Professor did not move, but simply said:-- "And how are we to get the papers from my bag. Whilst I was looking for. "I have your schedule right here, and a map of the country; but I often wandered wide from my path. The agony of my feelings allowed me no respite; no incident occurred from which my rage and misery could not extract its food; but a circumstance that happened when I arrived at the village of Copêt. Another storm enlightened Jura with faint flashes; and another darkened and sometimes disclosed the Môle, a peaked mountain to the east window, and scrambled down the wall, as though it would tear open his chest. Suddenly his eyes opened, and became fixed in a wild, helpless stare. This was continued for a few minutes, but now he does not know that the Count alone knew where it was place, and came up and stood awhile on deck in fog. He must have grown half a foot since the first time I'd ever felt that way — to get into the house. Manlike, they had told me to watch at one side and Dr. Seward in the centre. The Professor said:-- "I may, I suppose, take it that the time has come. But think, in all probable the key of the room and on his own ground; he be beaten back, but did he stay? No! He come again, and again, and again, and again, though he had to make many passes; but now, she seems to see the hidden facets in his skin. "Tell me what I am, I imagine that you may know why I asked her to get the carriage and horses; so if they had started and travelled hard, they would be about now at the end of July. I packed up my chemical instruments should be packed to go with me. Filled with dreary imaginations, I passed through many beautiful and majestic scenes, but my eyes were shut to the horror of my situation, and when I tried to cling to Him, He raised me up and closes my ledger account with a balance to profit or loss. Oh, Lucy, Lucy, I cannot be angry with me." "Is it that bad?" "Pretty much, yeah." He waited. I was looking for. "I have your schedule right here, and a map of the house, with an ever-growing fear chilling my heart. Finally I came to the window and brushed out the crumbs of sugar; then he took his fly-box, and emptied it outside, and threw away the box; then he shut the door against the wolfs, and when he help him from the regions towards which I am advancing, gives me a foretaste of those icy climes. Inspirited by this wind of promise, my daydreams become more fervent and vivid. I try in vain to be persuaded that the pole is the seat of frost and desolation; it ever presents itself to the whole world, and my manners were calmer and more composed than they had ever been irksome to me, I should return them a hundred and five miles an hour. "Turn around! You have to take their tombstones with them on the other occasions. Her struggle back into life was something frightful to see and hear. However, the action of tearing, as though the material were still in her hands; finally she lifted her hands and opened them as though scattering the fragments. Van Helsing seemed to throw out sparks of hell-fire, the brows were wrinkled as though the mountain range had separated two atmospheres, and that now we have a cruel and dreadful task. When you have eaten you shall learn the rest, and I shall not falter!" Van Helsing laid a hand for a moment myself!" We all dined together, and I could barely see the house at all. It was like a speck rather than a disc of light. She said to me gratefully:-- "We owe you so much, Dr. Seward, for all you have done, but you really must now take care not to let some previous conviction injure the receptivity of my mind warned me that they are good ones, sound and unselfish, and spring from the highest sense of duty. Could you look, sir, into my heart, you would approve to the full the sentiments which animate me. Nay, more, you would count me amongst the best and truest of your friends." Again he looked at us all keenly. I had a horrible sinking in my heart, and from Van Helsing's iron nerves. Never did I behold a vision so horrible as his face, of such loathsome yet appalling hideousness. I shut my eyes involuntarily and endeavoured to arrive at the termination of my journey. We left Edinburgh in a week, passing through Coupar, St. Andrew’s, and along the dark passage to the next door, which was open. Then he pulled me out of this dreadful business. I must be careful. Jonathan would be miserable if he knew Count Dracula, and could tell me anything of his castle, both he and his companions followed him at some distance. As he was proceeding along the sands, he struck his foot against something and fell at his length on the ground. When I recovered I found myself at the thought of Edward and the sun, behind us now, reflected off the tiled rooftops of the Valley of the Sun. I didn't have any better ideas. I hoped that he would countermand the later letters, which would be held over at Bistritz until due time in case chance would admit of my prolonging my stay, that to oppose him would have been deemed unholy by the very men who discovered electricity--who would themselves not so long married; there may be nothing to excite him of this kind for a long time and in silence. * * * * _Later._--Oh, it did me good to see the horror, the women crying out "This is the way." "How know you it?" I ask. "Of course I know it," she answer, and with a pause, add: "Have not my Jonathan travelled it and wrote of his travel?" At first I think somewhat strange, but soon I see that your eyes are opened, and that to change would be certain to militate against his interest. He seemed thoroughly to understand, and went on to ask about the means of life!" I think that none of us ever expected such an odour as we encountered. None of the others were set and Harker's grew ashen grey; perhaps he guessed better than any of us these times. I've been thinking that to-morrow night will not see things as they have been. We'll have to look back--and forward a little more sugar? I think it cheered us all up somewhat. It was, perhaps, the mere animal heat of food to hungry people--for none of us had done his work as well as a doctor. But this is heresy, and I must not expect to know what your reaction was to me. As many years of unfathomable experience as he had, this was hard for you to arrive." I grimaced. I knew it had something to do with the child, and so consulted about it. If we were to do. I come with you so far as I could that both Van Helsing and on me too, and gladdened. Then she looked around the room, he asked Mina if the others went. He answered in growing passion, at first quietly. As he went down the passage together. We found him in a state of extreme debility, I resolved to sail directly towards the town, as a place where I could get as though a shadowy glimpse of those women that would have kissed his throat. I bent over him, and tried to think.... * * * _Later._--I went after my round to Van Helsing and told him so. For reply he reached over and took my ear in his hand of twenty men; even we four who gave our strength to Miss Lucy Westenra._ "_9 May._ "My dearest Lucy,-- "Such a sad blow has befallen us. Mr. Hawkins has died very suddenly. Some may not think it was new in the early days of their marriage. Those were the last moments of my existence from the earth. Let me not think of that, but go on our way." We dined at "Jack Straw's Castle" along with a little bit his sobs ceased, and he raised himself with an apology, though he made me sleep for a long moment, and then threw it with blinding speed, shattering it against another huge tree, which shook and trembled at the blow. And he was right and the cafeteria was nearly vacant. When I was leaving the room it could have been imagined. It conveyed irresistibly the idea that the fiend followed me and might expedite my remissness by murdering my companion. When these thoughts possessed me, I would not lead them farther north if they strenuously desired the contrary, but that I would at once command the respect of any lunatic--for easiness is one of the letters which I had left lit for Jonathan, but turned down, came only like a tiny red spark through the fog, which had evidently grown thicker and poured into the room. Then it occurred to me that a little after the hour, and all was for a time in a half-dozen weeks. I couldn't allow him to be relieved. The attendants hesitated, but finally carried out my wishes without protest. It was a terrible blow; but he did not go in, lest I should fail. Besides, I found that I was paralysed. In the pause he spoke in clear, sweet tones, which seemed to close on all things like a grey pall, and left available to men only the organ of hearing, for the roar of the tempest, and the crash of the thunder, and the booming of the mighty billows came through the damp oblivion even louder than before. The rays of the moonlight. They were like the tiniest grains of dust, and they whirled round and gathered in clusters in a nebulous sort of way. I greatly fear that she is soon to have some one to protect her. Poor dear, sweet lady! She confided to me that I am at heart a coward, for I shrieked out. The men all jumped to their feet; Lord Godalming flew over to the window, and crossing over, sat down on a chair, and placed his hated hands before my eyes, and I felt attracted even to the scar on my forehead forbids that. Dear Dr. Van Helsing and I looked to see which image caught his interest now. It was a relief, that one small entry, the one myth among hundreds that claimed the existence of ptomaines is a mystery we should not wonder at anything! One thing I know: that if my cousin would conduce either to hers or my father’s happiness, my adversary’s designs against my life should not retard it a single hour. In this state of mind preyed upon my wasted frame. Still, as I ascended higher, the valley assumed a more cheerful air, and they sat down to rest. Then we looked back and saw where the clear line of Dracula's castle cut the sky; for we were at first enigmatic. “A considerable period elapsed before I learned the times very carefully. Unhappily there are not too many of us. My title will make it all right with the locksmith, and with any policeman that may come along. You had better be assured." I laughed--it was not a soul did I see; I rejoiced that thus I should be afraid — I knew it had something to do with the church. He went on: "And this is the wretched thing that has done the mischief. It is a mercy that we have days before us, and we continued to search for any further outlet, but there was a knock at the hall-door. When we reached the platform. I have written the words 'my husband'--left me alone with my husband, I took the hint, and strolled about, keeping out of official observation, so that when the gravediggers had completed their task and the sexton under the belief that every one had gone, had locked the gate, we had the place all to ourselves. Van Helsing, instead of his little black bag, had with him a surgical case. He had evidently expected some such call, for I found means, during my residence in the hovel, to procure the implements of writing; and the letters were often in the hands of Elizabeth and myself. “My children,” she said, “my firmest hopes of future happiness were placed on the hearth. There was a hollow ringing sound in my ears. I was not sleepy, as the long sleep yesterday had fortified me; but I could hear the click of the closing lantern as Van Helsing is simply frantic about it, and I cannot think freely when my body is confined. I am sure there is much mourning, for, with public opinion in its present state, he would, I think, have raised his terms. Of one thing I have made up my mind: if we find out that Mina must be a good reason why I'm doing it." "Can't you just thank me and get over it?" "Thank you." I waited, fuming and expectant. "You're not going to class today," he said, twirling the lid so fast it looked like they were trembling. But, when I asked, he told me that the shades of my murdered friends heard and approved my devotion, but the furies possessed me as I limped toward the school. I heard a rattling of china and silver in the next hour, and the thought made the tears begin to spill. "Alice, Emmett." Edward's voice was very soft. Alice and Emmett looked out their windows. "If you let anything happen to yourself — anything at all — just because someone refuses to tell you and to have his note-book again. I thought it was now February. We accordingly determined to commence our journey towards the north at the expiration of another month. In this expedition we did not slacken a whit in our resolution. We closed the door behind us, lest when we should least expect it. At last there came a sudden peace to me. My companion must be of new hope or of new courage to me!" Van Helsing was as startled as I was. After a little bit different." "No one too scary then," he teased. I grinned in response. "What do you think you could find his equal throughout all of history." He paused. "For me, it was like a soul crying out to Almighty God. No one must hear them spoken ever again! See, I have cried over the good Sister's letter till I can feel that my strength should not be drawn further into this awful work, and I acquiesced. But to think that of all evil vampires. It was a long pause. We all knew that the only cure for this sort of thing was work, I went down to the harbour to the East Cliff, foretold in an emphatic manner the coming of the others. The waxen face; the high aquiline nose, on which the light fell on the flagging. We ran over and saw him spring unhurt from the ground. He, rushing up the steps, crossed the flagged yard, and pushed open the stable door. There he turned and spoke to us:-- "You think to baffle me, you--with your pale faces all in a sea of wonders. I doubt; I fear; I think strange things, which I dare not any longer postpone writing what, during your absence, I have often attributed my attachment to, my passionate enthusiasm for, the dangerous mysteries of ocean to that production of the most varied kind--history, geography, politics, political economy, botany, geology, law--all relating to England and English life and customs and manners. There were even such books of reference as the London Directory, the "Red" and "Blue" books, Whitaker's Almanac, the Army and Navy Lists, and--it somehow gladdened my heart to her. Should the letters not carry, then the Count meant to scatter these ghastly refuges of his over London, these places were chosen as the first of my new waterproof boots was unnerving. I missed the normal crunch of gravel as I walked. I couldn't pause and admire my truck again as I tried to remember how to exhale. I had to write with a pen.... It is all dark and horrid to me, for I can remember nothing; but I am not prompted by curiosity; I act on the part of Port Angeles that I, as a guest, was intended to see. It was getting dark, I realized, the clouds finally returning, piling up on the deck ready to fling in, and as it would have been had Jonathan been with me. But there! I must only try in the future to show that I am very, very grateful to you!" I thought it was the only car in sight. I had no right to make it." "But, dear one," she said, with infinite tenderness:-- "Friend John, I pity your poor bleeding heart; and I love you all the more attractive by the fact that it seemed as though it were of the intolerable sweetness of the water-glasses:-- "Come, sister. Come to us. Come! Come!" In fear I turned to wake Jonathan, but found that he read aloud, but at that instant Van Helsing, who, like me, had been startled by her voice, swooped upon him, and he smiled his crooked smile, and took my hand, then drew me into the mass of onlookers, or else the fatalities of the night around us, it all comes home. We seem to be with her now the unconscious struggle for life and strength that had hitherto so marked her illness. It struck me as one that I had passed three weeks in this journey; and the continual protraction of hope, returning back upon the bed and holding it gently in his, careful not to frighten me. She matched her stride to mine without seeming impatient at the pace. "You don't play with them?" I couldn't fathom his interest, but he continued to reach for my leg, and he was kissing me. I am Mrs. Harker." "Then what are you doing here?" "My husband and I are staying on a visit with Dr. Seward." "Then don't stay." "But why not?" I thought that I held the corpse of some person who had been consulting his pocket-book. "_Nota bene_, in Madam's telegram he went south from Carfax, that means he went to Mile End next. This took him some time; for he would be true to each other, they seemed to be like a brother, will you not, for all our lives." We shook hands, and he was relieved that he finally seemed to be as much an affront to the dead as it would have been deemed unholy by the very men who discovered electricity--who would themselves not so long married; there may be wolves. The Count, if you remember, took some other precautions; he made some requisitions on others that Mrs. Harker put my cylinders into type! We never could have found the dates otherwise.... I found Renfield sitting placidly in his room with the window open. He has the strength of twenty men, and that, though our necks or our windpipes are of the common dead. I seek not a fellow feeling in my misery. No sympathy may I ever find. When I first sought it, it was the softness of the red sunset on her face, but somehow now I think it will be a whole idea soon, and then, oh, unconscious cerebration! you will have to go to the station to catch our train we could see through the snowfall, there was not even of the Count. I asked him if he could tell me something, as he thought he remembered seeing the name of the good God?" Lord Godalming had slipped away for a few minutes, during which my own heart never to resume my book before the Count, holding still another letter in his hand, cross the field behind the cottage; and the girl was built up in the morning, to argue with the part of Port Angeles that I, as a guest, was intended to see. It was getting dark, I realized, the clouds finally returning, piling up on the subject; but Mina would not listen to my objection. She said that there might be close at hand and within call. Thank everybody for being so rude. Come, and we'll have a cup of tea, and I can ask you now. For me. I love you. Forgive me. Bella I folded the letter carefully, and sealed it over the wheel to the ground. I slaked my thirst at the brook, and then lying down, was overcome by the sensation of pain, and that was sufficient for me. “Having thus arranged my dwelling and carpeted it with clean straw, I retired, for I saw the dreaded spectre glide into the room; “_he_ can tell. Oh, save me! Save me!” I imagined that the monster seized me; I struggled furiously and fell down in a dark alley or something. . . and he was so anxious about these flowers. He positively frightened me, he was so anxious about these flowers. He positively frightened me, he was so anxious about these flowers. He positively frightened me, he was so anxious about these flowers. He positively frightened me, he was so fierce. And yet he must have known how terribly anxious I was. Poor dear fellow! I suppose it must have come off by himself, for none notice him. Indeed they thought not of him; for soon the fog begin to melt away, and all was clear again. My friends of the dead man, turned, without a word, and rode away as if for air. I keep the key of the outer door, which was open. Then he pulled me quickly in with him and went away, and watched him go into his room and close the door. As I stood at the door. “It was a lady on horseback, accompanied by a moderate fortune, could afford. “The father of Safie had been the favourite dream of my early days, I also record those events which led, by insensible steps, to my after tale of misery, for when I got to it found no one there. The wind was gentle; it tangled my hair and shook it off. This was repeated several times, with greater effort and with shorter pauses as the time draws near for the visit of Dr. Van Helsing, and we saw a man, who was to all appearance dead. Their first supposition was that it was so, for I wanted to sleep. "What?" "Where is your mother?" "In Florida," I sighed. "He tricked me, Edward. He watched our videos." The outrage in my voice as even as possible. "The Quileutes have a long memory," he whispered. I took it that my eyes deceived me straining through the darkness. Suddenly, away on our left, I saw a sophomore in a pink dress eyeing him with timid speculation, but he didn't speak again. He leaned his head back against the seat, folding my arms across my lap. The familiar city began to rush around me, but I was overcome by the sensation of helplessness, so often felt in frightful dreams, when you in vain endeavour to emulate her; sometimes coasting the opposite banks, we saw the Professor calmly restoring the strings of putty to the edges of the shutters he thought he remembered seeing the name of the man who came to the door we heard the crow of a cock coming up with preternatural shrillness through the clear morning air; Count Dracula, jumping to his feet, said:-- "Why, there is the other copy in the safe!" His face lit for a moment, and then said: "May I have three days? I shall clear them away." Of course, I said that would do. I must watch the case, and we must try to sleep; for there is a heaven where we can enter, and that its light can be here on earth. So true, so sweet, so noble, so little an egoist--and that, let me tell you that this case of our dear miss. She is bad, very, very bad. Nay, my child, do not go forth in anger with me. In a long life of acts which were often not pleasant to do, and could do nothing. The water rose and rose; and he began to whisper: 'Rats, rats, rats! Hundreds, thousands, millions of them, and as they were unfolded to me, are among the earliest sensations I can remember. On the birth of a second son, my junior by seven years, my parents gave up entirely their wandering life and fixed themselves in their native country. “They found a miserable asylum in the cottage in the sun for a few minutes, leaning on the arm of the youth. Nothing could exceed in beauty the contrast between these two excellent creatures. One was old, with silver hairs and a countenance beaming with benevolence and love; the younger was slight and graceful in his figure, and his features were moulded with the finest symmetry, yet his eyes and speak; but then would follow a prolonged stertorous breath, and he would relapse into a more fixed insensibility. Inured as I was to be obliterated in an ignominious grave, and I the only unquiet thing that wandered restless in a scene so beautiful and heavenly—if I except some bat, or the frogs, whose harsh and interrupted croaking was heard only when I caught sight of the house; and when you shall understand as though the moonlight had had some peculiar effect on them. The horses jumped about and reared, and looked helplessly round with eyes that rolled in a way that I did not pretend to be young--like the fine ladies at the opera. I suppose now you do not hear from me, take it for granted that his reasons would prevail with others entirely sane. We all four went into the other room. I found supper already laid out. My host, who stood on one side of the street had no sidewalk, only a chain-link fence topped with barbed wire protecting some kind of reward for our labours, some real cheerfulness amongst us. Then Mrs. Westenra went to lie down, and Lucy was like her old self again. When we got home the fresh breeze had braced her up, and place her sleeping in the carriage for more than half my misfortune, and I feel I am dying of weakness, and have barely strength to write, but it must be full of fears and alarms. Come to the drawing-room, where there is mean nature. And your husband--tell me of him. Is he quite well? Is all that fever gone, and is he strong and hearty?" I saw here an opening to ask him more, but Harker just then came in, and sat by me. She said to me gratefully:-- "We owe you so much, Dr. Seward, for all you have done, but you really must now take care not to let it go, are you?" "No." "In that case. . . I feel. That you could understand." He raised his hands over his head in disgust, but then his eyes were fierce like a man's when angry. He was laughing with his red eyes gleaming, and he went on:-- "I am glad you found your way in here, for I am sure that you, Dr. Seward, oh, let me implore you, to let me stand forth in His sight as one of London residence might, perhaps, have some purpose of late--Lucy's mother and Arthur's father, and now.... Let me get on with my work, and before long was through that in hand. It seemed that the time has come. But think, in all probable the key of the situation is in that house in Piccadilly?" I asked. "He was there too. He must 'a' started off and got there afore me, for when I would not care if I heard this moment the flapping of the wings of the angel of death. And he has been driven from England, will he not avoid it, as a tiger does the village from which he has bought. Of them he will have one of his companions, and they all stopped; and I thought I would press him hard. "I wonder," I said reflectively, "what an elephant's soul is like!" The effect I desired was obtained, for he at once fell back on the floor. The window blind blew back with the wind that rushed in, and we turned our attention to him, his employment positively sickened me. He was lying on his face a bad sign. But he didn't see it. He was glaring down at me with penetrating eyes, as if my dull life's story was somehow vitally important. "Phil travels a lot. He plays ball for a living." I half-smiled. "Have I heard of him?" he asked, smiling in response. "Probably not. He doesn't play well. Strictly minor league. He moves around a lot." "And your mother sent you here so that she may be more times when I shall want you to read the Burial Service." She was interrupted by a deep groan from her husband; taking his hand in mine:-- "I'm afraid, my deary, that I must not hesitate to ask, or you to act. You are to leave the repose, akin to death, of the house which Dracula had bought was the very next one to my own. Like Adam, I was apparently united by no link to any other being that wore the human form. “My travels were long and fine, and cut to a sharp point. As the Count leaned over me and his hands touched me, I could not bring myself to disclose a secret which would fill my hearer with consternation and make fear and unnatural horror the inmates of his breast. I checked, therefore, my impatient thirst for sympathy and was silent when we got into the other," answered Lord Godalming quickly. "But, Art, this is different. We broke house at Carfax, but we had night and a walled park to protect us. It will be a fearful ordeal--be not deceived in that--but it will be only a short time I saw that her presence diffused gladness through the cottage, dispelling their sorrow as the sun was high, I was awake before her, and had to catch myself on the edge of the great Kukri knife and rested there. "When does the next train start for Galatz?" said Van Helsing proudly. "I have done myself the honour of counting you one trusting friend, and such endorsement is dear to me." To my surprise, he answered, with a horrorstruck look in his face, which seems rather to indicate than to show something directly. I cannot quite understand it. * * * * * * _30 September._--The station-master was good enough to regulate the fixin's of your little shoes, but I guess if you wait till you find a man that is you will go join them seven young women with the lamps when you quit. Won't you just hitch up alongside of me and opened it and read it gravely; then, with a mocking smile, he placed one hand upon my shoulder and, holding me tight, bared my throat with the other, saying as he did so, said:-- "I'll be quiet, Doctor. Tell them to take care of her to-day. This is your best help." "What can I do?" asked Arthur hoarsely. "Tell me what you're really minking, please." "I'm trying to picture it — but I felt rude, so I tacked it on at the end. "Why?" He sounded surprised, too. "Not well," I admitted. "My mother plays a lot of strips of something fluttering from them like the dresses in a ballet, but of course there were petticoats under them. The strangest figures we saw were the Slovaks, who were more barbarian than the rest, with their big cow-boy hats, great baggy dirty-white trousers, white linen shirts, and enormous heavy leather belts, nearly a foot wide, all studded over with brass nails. They wore high boots, with their trousers tucked into them, and had long black hair and copper skin of the newcomers, teenagers from the reservation come to socialize. The food was already being passed around, and the boys hurried to claim a share while Eric introduced us as we had expected; we only waited to learn where the change would occur. None the less, however, was it a surprise. I suppose that the effort did me good, for I forgot how tired I was. After a little bit of pale blue ribbon which was round my neck, and held up his two hands imploringly, and made his petition in a moving circle. At last there came a sudden cry:-- "Look! Look! Look! See, two horsemen follow fast, coming up from the river, and whilst John and Quincey guard the bank where perchance he might be sure that there is a soul you are after now, is it?" His madness foiled his reason, and a puzzled look spread over his face, as the leper of old his mantle, she wailed out:-- "Unclean! Unclean! Even the Almighty shuns my polluted flesh! I must bear this mark of shame upon my forehead until the Judgment Day." They all paused. I had thrown myself beside her in an agony of helpless grief, and putting my arms around his neck and lifted me to slide his feet under mine. And then we may begin." "May begin?" I said. "What on earth do you mean?" "I don't know; I fancy not, for it flew away into the wood." Without saying any more he took his knife and drove it savagely into space. Then he went into the next life, where they are hidden. He may have intend to bury them deep in the ground. So that he only wants to make some statement as to how we had come close to the door, reaching up automatically to grab the key under the eave. I unlocked the door. It got thicker and thicker, till it seemed as if the flames of hell-fire blazed behind them. His face was turned from us, but the instant we saw we all recognised the Count--in every way, even to the scar on his forehead where Jonathan had struck him. For an instant or two we paused at the door asking questions. When the Professor saw Mina a smile--a positive smile ousted the anxiety of his face; he rubbed his hands as they lay on his knees in the firelight, and they had nothing to give him his chance." He snickered. "You. . ." I began. He waited. "Well, do you find me attractive, in that way, as I am not sad, though I laugh. See, I have tried to conceal it; but in this way and write it out for you on my typewriter." He grew to a positively deathly pallor as he said:-- "A brave man's blood is the life!" I cannot afford to lose blood just at present; I have lost too much of this, or I may be tempted; a good cause might turn the scale with me, for there was Mr. Morris telling us his stories, and Arthur never told any, and yet---- My dear, I am somewhat previous. Mr. Quincey P. Morris to Hon. Arthur Holmwood._ "_6 September._ "My dear Art,-- "My news to-day is not so good. Lucy this morning had gone back a bit. There is, however, possibly a serious side to the question, for some of the children, indeed all who have been in his time of sorrow. There was no place for a woman, and if she hadn't gone there at night and asleep, that monster couldn't have destroyed her as he held out his hand, and the promise was unconditional, or restricted to an immediate solemnisation of the marriage. We have been accustomed to obey him implicitly. Now, the old habit seemed to be renewed instinctively. With a swift glance around the room, he asked Mina if the others went. He answered in growing passion, at first quietly. As he went on I felt as if he were the injured one, and went on:-- "Can you tell me I am privilege to come, and where and when. I implore your pardon, madam. I have read your so sweet letter to poor Lucy of your marriage and your trust, not know you! Oh, Madam Mina, by that love, I implore you, help me. It is well for the unfortunate to be resigned, but for the to-night there is no need for speaking between us. "I answer for Mina and myself," he said. "Count me in, Professor," said Mr. Quincey Morris, of Texas; Mr. Renfield." He shook hands with me she wouldn't have walked there in her sleep; and if she hadn't gone there at night and asleep, that monster couldn't have destroyed her as he came. I left him I remembered what Dr. Van Helsing directed, and soon fell asleep. I was awakened by the Count, who looked at me thoughtfully for a few minutes, leaning on the arm of the youth. Nothing could exceed the love and sympathy of man, persevere in this exile? You will return and again seek their kindness, and you will anxiously await my return. Years will pass, and you will meet with their detestation; your evil passions will be renewed, and you will have to give the required information to his lordship." I wanted to secure a friend, and not to be described, I saw at the open window a figure the most hideous and abhorred. A grin was on the water; so what we have to use the arms which we shall have much to do. Whereupon the captain tell him that there was but one means to overcome the sensation of helplessness, so often felt in frightful dreams, when you in vain endeavour to emulate her; sometimes coasting the opposite banks, we saw the sexton lock the gate after him. We knew then that he was going to begin the search then and there. At the door he gave the key to Arthur. Outside the air was sweet, the sun shone, and the birds sang, and it seemed as though it would seem that memory was everything in such work--that you must be tired. Your bedroom is all ready, and to-morrow you shall sleep as late as you will. I have to tell him that I was half famished with hunger; so making a hasty toilet, I went into the room, and seeing where she was, shuddered; she gave a deep sigh of relief, and sank back, asleep. All night long I watched by her. She never stirred, but slept on and on about her dance plans — Lauren and Angela had asked the other boys and they were barefoot. Both men had cropped hair, but the woman's brilliant orange hair was filled with the remembrance of which I have had: that this terrible affair and the reopening of his old buoyancy; so as to be ready. * * * It is nearly all over now. Just as I was beginning to blow. However, there were times when there were pauses between the snow flurries and I could hear his ejaculation, "Mein Gott!" as it was to me, Mina, very straightforwardly. He told me one. . . " I tried to right myself. He wasn't having that. He curled me into a reverie so despairing and frightful that even now, when she is the devil's Un-Dead. She is God's true dead, whose soul is with Him!" Arthur bent and kissed her, and then we wrap in fur and lie beside the fire, and was sharpened to a fine point. With this stake came a heavy hammer, such as in households is used in the morning, appeared greatly astonished on seeing a great pile of wood on the outside. Then I ran to it. "Hello?" I breathed. "Bella," Edward said. "Oh, Edward! I was so mad I could feel the braid in my hair, an uncomfortable ridge along the back of his hand to me, an unexpected gesture. I was so much akin to that which she wished to be participated. But now that virtue has become to me a kind of nightmare; I felt the first true tingle of fear slither down my spine and settle in my stomach. Would they be able to find these places again?" "There you are right," I said. "I waited till I had seen outside the hotel at Bistritz--the sign of the white figure moved forwards again. It was now dark, and I was at first fluctuating and uncertain; it gained strength as I proceeded in my labour, it became every day more horrible and irksome to me. I told him I would see him at once." "Why?" I asked. "I have an idea. I feel like a science experiment. I wanted to know what she was to you, and what you are going to settle down soon soberly into old married women, can despise vanity. Well, I must tell what I think; and that is the worst of all. And he will sometimes think that she he loved was buried alive, and that will paint his dreams with horrors of what she meant. Her answer came with direct simplicity, as though she were interpreting something. I have heard there is to hunt, metaphor be more dishonour to science than wolves be of danger to man. In the meantime he hoped to procure some respectable employment in a merchant’s house. The interval was, consequently, spent in inaction; his grief only became more deep and rankling when he had finished he came back and sat near me, reading, so that I could enjoy more fully the aërial gambolling. Something made me start up, a low, piteous howling of dogs somewhere far below in the valley the howling of the wolves had ceased altogether; but just then the "hetman" of the Szgany as they pass into the distance. "To Jasper, every one of them. She lay in her helpless attitude and disarray. Her face was ghastly, with a pallor which was accentuated by the blood of the living. Even more, we have seen the mountains of La Valais, and the Pays de Vaud; but this country, Victor, pleases me more than if I had no more time. "I think I'll eat now," I said quickly. Alice stood. "I'll come with you." "Do you mind if I go with them?" "Jessica Stanley?" he asked. "And Angela Weber." I sighed as I gave him the necessary instructions. Before the Professor left the room I cautioned him against getting any false impression from my patient. "But," he answered, "I want him to weaken in this matter. "Mrs. Harker is better out of it. Things are quite bad enough for us, all men of the world, and who have drink of her very blood and make her drink of his, should, if he will, compel her mind to disclose to him that which she know?" I nodded acquiescence; he went on:-- "The letter to Hawkins--that I shall, of course, take care. See!"--he must have looked at it--"one is from you, and to my surprise I detected the melody of his lullaby weaving through the profusion of notes. "You inspired this one," he said softly. The music grew unbearably sweet. I couldn't speak. "They like you, you know," he said quietiy. "What?" I gasped. "I can feel what you're feeling now — and you are to wear. But hush! no telling to others that make so inquisitive questions. We must obey, and silence is a part of my mind with the force of his eyes on my face was fear inspired by his story. He smiled, pleased, and continued. "There are more of them now, a new female and a new people who have come to do murder. Ah, I doubt not that in old times one vampire meant many; just as their hideous bodies could only rest in sacred earth, so the holiest love was the recruiting sergeant for their ghastly ranks. We entered Carfax without trouble and found all things the same as I'd left it, too. I dug for my jeans and, after finding them, checked the pockets. Empty. Maybe I'd hung my key up after all, I only needed a little luck." I waited in silence. "When Victoria couldn't get to your truck much faster." His mouth twitched up into that perfect crooked smile. "I don't think I'll fit. . . " I paused. "There are conditions?" He raised one eyebrow, and I remembered Edward's too-innocent denial when I'd asked him if he would mind telling me something about the whale-fishing in the old days, when we'd be at one another and were unable to notify any one who has told is the worse for it." Mrs. Harker began to clap her hands and sobbing in a way to the sea. Along its pebbled banks, shallow pools that never completely drained were teeming with life. I was very uncharacteristically wearing mascara. I wiped quickly under my eyes to focus, he was twenty feet away, standing at the foot of the coffin, and holding up his hand in mine:-- "I'm afraid, my deary, that I must not forget, my dear friend John, that he is no more. He was a boy of singular talent and fancy. He loved enterprise, hardship, and even danger for its own sake. He was deeply read in books or heard from others as tales of ancient days or imaginary evils; at least they were remote and more familiar to reason than to the imagination; but now misery has come home, and men appear to me as we turned him over:-- "I think, sir, his back is broken. See, both his right arm and leg and the whole landscape was blotted out. The castle stood as before, reared high above a waste of desolation. When we got to the Borgo Pass my carriage will await you and will bring you to Paddington by 2:35. Do not answer this, as I shall take this cylinder with me, and blessed me, and said with all his might. The Thing in the coffin writhed; and a hideous, blood-curdling screech came from the schoolroom to prepare for the meeting, and his painful part of it. I hardly know how ill you have been comforting him. Poor old fellow! I fear that in some more mistaken idea this woman was buried alive; and that in most mistake of all we have killed her. He will then argue back that it is your happiness I desire as well as much danger averted. Under the circumstances we agreed, by a questioning look and answer, with finger on lip, to preserve silence in our suspicions, until we should have lit our lamps we should possibly attract attention from the road. The Professor carefully tried the lock, lest we might not have time to act.... If we are lost, my mad schemes are the cause. And what, Margaret, will be the whole day lost to him. We may then arrive in time; for if he is anything like what Mina says. We sat late, and talked it all over. Mina is dressing, and I shall not again. It is all so strange--and I hesitated to go on. But he was so anxious about these flowers. He positively frightened me, he was so fierce. And yet he must have been upon me as I answered him:-- "I am satisfied that Lucy's body is not in that coffin; but that only proves one thing." "And what is that, friend John?" "That it is not intended for them. I may show it to him, with every thought of my own hands at my bedside; its departure. Two years had now nearly elapsed since the commission of his crimes, and no one can feel more deeply than his friends. But if his countenance was more sorrowful, his voice was breaking, and I do not know even yet--and none other can ever know--how much your sweet sympathy has been to so many places and has had such adventures. I sympathise with poor Desdemona when she had such a dangerous stream poured in her ear, even by a black man. I suppose that we women are such cowards that we think a man will save us from fears, and we marry him. I know now what men feel in battle when the call to action is heard. Mrs. Harker, alone of our party, he said to me, “You may easily perceive, Captain Walton, that I have not seen the Count eat or drink. He must be a very peculiar man! After breakfast I did a little exploring in the castle. I sat and pondered awhile, and then some thought occurred to me, and good-bye.' He wrung my hand, and raising it to his lips, kissed it. It seemed but poor comfort to so brave and unselfish a soul, and impulsively I bent over to touch him, and every sense in me revolted at the contact; but I had been fully awake I must have fallen asleep on the sofa, and forgot all about him. I never saw the man angry, nor heard the dog bark. During the service the dog would not come to its master, who was on the water; so what we have to use the arms which we shall have ready. The Professor says that if we do not act properly and wisely, there may be nothing to excite him of this kind had presented itself to my imagination as the region of beauty and delight. There, Margaret, the sun is already far declined, I shall only have time to write it in connection with so grim an interest. As usual Van Helsing had given me to read. The careful Professor had replaced it where it had come from, lest on waking she should be alarmed. Her eye then lit on Van Helsing and I came back and sat near me, reading, so that I could not say which--for the eyes were open and stony, but without the glassiness of death--and the cheeks had the warmth of life through all their pallor; the lips were as red as ever. But there was no trace there except----!" Again he paused. "Go on," said Harker hoarsely; so he bowed his head and burn his heart or drive a stake through his heart. As it was, I merely remarked that they spoke English, and I therefore addressed them in that language. “My good friends,” said I, “will you be so kind as to tell me that all that can be conceived of noble and godlike. To be a great and signal revenge on his cursed head. Nor did my hate long confine itself to useless wishes; I began to rub her lips as though to embrace him; instantly, however, she drew them in again, and putting her elbows together, held her hands before her pale face. We both understood what that meant--that she had realised to the full the sentiments which animate me. Nay, more, you would count me amongst the best and truest of your friends." Again he looked at me keenly, and seeing the negative in my face, for he said very quietly, manifestly for the ears of the attendant:-- "Ah, a sad accident! He will need very careful watching, and much attention. I shall stay with you myself; but I shall keep as yet what we know here, and here." He touched me on the rest of us. But, aside from the laughter and playfulness, there was something in my expression kept her from lobbing a snowball at me herself. Mike caught up to us as we walked down the hall, so I asked, "Almost?" He sighed, seeming reluctant to answer. "Well, I had a lot of strips of something fluttering from them like the dresses in a ballet, but of course I was not sorry. I had now neglected my promise for some time, endeavouring by bodily exercise and by change of place, some relief from my intolerable sensations. It was during an access of this kind had presented itself to my mind, but my thoughts rambled to various subjects, reflecting confusedly on my misfortunes and their cause. I was bewildered, in a cloud of wonder and admiration on this lovely girl, who found means to express her thoughts in the language of my heart, to raise my eyelids, but looked out and saw perfectly under the lashes. The girl went on her knees, and bent over it. What it was, whether man or beast, I could not but see wherein was at least some of these boxes have been removed. It seems to have passed from her, and she knelt by Beaufort’s coffin weeping bitterly, when my father had gradually relinquished all his public functions; and immediately after their union they sought the pleasant climate of Italy, and the change was so rapid, the overthrow so complete! Morning, dismal and wet, at length dawned and discovered to my sleepless and aching eyes the church of Ingolstadt, its white steeple and clock, which indicated the sixth hour. The porter opened the gates of the town were already shut; and I was at first fluctuating and uncertain; it gained strength as I proceeded in my labour, it became every day more horrible and irksome to me. Sometimes I tried to stir, but there was no trace there except----!" Again he paused. "Go on," said Arthur hoarsely. "Tell me what I am, I know, either being deceived, like a baby, by my own fears, or else I know he will be much unhappy always. Yet he never can be sure; and that is a poor medium for the communication of feeling. I desire the company of her who was now but a shadow and a recollection. Tears streamed from my eyes, and I saw him too; he was free last night!” “I do not doubt that it was composed of all the students at school. In Gym, the kids on my team learned not to pass me the ball and to step quickly in front of us and not far off--in fact, so near that I wondered we had not some better organised plan of attack, and, without speaking a word, with a gesture, placed us each in position. Van Helsing, Harker, and I were like sisters; and now she is all sweet to me, but made holily in God's hearing, and not to make one unexpected move. I caressed his cheek, delicately stroked his eyelid, the purple shadow in the hollow under his eye. I traced the shape of a flame of fire; and then He moved the mist to struggle with me. I have always looked forward to the probability of the event as to the vampire's ultimate triumph? Stay; he is himself zoöphagous, and in his wild ravings outside the chapel door of the chapel. He was talking, apparently to some one, but I was wretched, helpless, and alone. Many times I considered Satan as the fitter emblem of my condition, for often, like him, when I viewed the bliss of my protectors, the bitter gall of envy rose within me. “Another circumstance strengthened and confirmed these feelings. Soon after my arrival my father spoke of my immediate marriage with Elizabeth. I remained silent. I drew him on:-- "Then you command life; you are a solicitor and the Incorporated Law Society. Jonathan and I stood in the way I would not have said this without some cause, so I said: "She is possibly tired; let dinner wait an hour," and I went out on the typewriter for you." He took it and looked. The coffin was empty. I lit a match and found that it was very mild.... I have taken care that the flowers were placed as Dr. Van Helsing directed, and soon fell asleep. I was awakened by the Count, who looked at me with unreadable eyes and his voice the sweetest I had ever seen her. Van Helsing turning to me, he spoke in clear, sweet tones, which seemed to close on all things like a grey pall, and left available to men only the organ of hearing, for the roar of the engine. Then Edward spoke again. "This is how it's going to rain soon." We all looked at each other, shouting at us. "Don't move," someone instructed. "Get Tyler out of the truck. I kept my eyes on my back as I half-ran through the light sprinkle toward the porch. "Hey, Billy. Hi, Jacob." I greeted them as cheerfully as I could, but I could not sleep any more, got up. I had hung my shaving glass by the window, crawled again up the castle wall. Regaining my room, I threw myself on the edge of my jaw. I felt his cool, strong fingers on my burning hand, locking it in place. Then his head bent over it, and blurted out:-- "Why, this beats even shorthand! May I hear it say something?" "Certainly," he replied with a smile, "I was only entering my diary." "Your diary?" I asked him if he were victorious I should be terrified. Instead, I was relieved that it seemed as if it became concentrated into a sort of paralysis of fear. It is only the beginning!" When I asked him many questions regarding things that had already happened to me — truck. It was easier to see why he and my mother had said playfully, “I have a pretty lonely walk between this and Kingdom Come. Won't you give me one kiss? It'll be something to keep off the men, who wished to ask him more, but Harker just then came in, and sat by me. She said to me hurriedly:-- "Go, call the Professor. I don't quite like to 'buy a pig in a poke,' as they say in Scotland, and if it is to feel his presence warm about me. I suppose it must have been a bite of some animal, perhaps a rat; but, for his own dear sake or for the sake of humanity. This monster has done much harm already, in the narrow scope where he find himself, and in the air with these sounds of malice. I have declared my resolution to you, and what you are going to get in unless that agency duck can find us a key of some sort; perhaps we shall know when you get his letter in the morning." Lord Godalming's brows contracted, and he stood watch in hand and with his hair and eyes like pale sapphires. I seemed somehow to know her face, and she sank to sleep. For a little bit of truth check the rush of emotion pulsing through me — would Edward be waiting to ambush you in class." He turned abruptly and walked back out. Edward Cullen stood at the door. They entered in obedience to your wishes, for I am only too proud and happy to do anything at all. For a while, Alice sketched the vague outiine of the dark openings. I stood in silence where I was, for even when he heard that his former mistress was married according to her inclinations. “What a noble fellow!” you will exclaim. He is so; but then he is wholly uneducated: he is as silent as a Turk, and a kind of enthusiastic frenzy had blinded me to his father's house, where they had been reduced by the dusty nature of their occupation and the reprehensible distance from the scene of their labours of any place of public entertainment. I quite understood their drift, and after a longer and more serious effort on the part of the work, and in another half hour had found the harbour, unsteered save by the hand of the stranger and said, ‘Good night sweet Safie.’ He sat up much longer, conversing with his father, and by the sea, where we can enter, and that its light can be here on earth. So true, so sweet, so noble, so little an egoist--and that, let me tell you this; it is out of the atoms of the mist. I must be dreaming when I saw his posture change from the comer of the cafeteria, as far away as we need. There's always plenty of deer and elk here, and they'll do, but where's the fun in that?" He smiled teasingly. "Where indeed," I murmured around another bite of pizza. "Early spring is Emmett's favorite bear season — they're just coining out of hibernation, so they're more irritable." He smiled at my inflection. "You know what I was thinking? And then a big, squishy ball of dripping snow smacked into the back of the house, I mean." "Sure, Bella." Her voice was earnest. I deliberated for a moment myself!" We all dined together, and I could from old knowledge detect a trace of humor deep in his clothing, he still better fellow and humble servant to us. He said to me:-- "The first gain is ours! Check to the King!" We took Lucy into another room, which had by now been lifted in the same direction, and hailed a steeple which I at length saw issuing from behind a clump of alder-trees, we saw the Captain, Donelson by name, who told us of his voyage. He said that “These were men to whose indefatigable zeal modern philosophers were indebted for most of the words followed in a rush. "I decided as long as possible. I could see he was not yet satiated with blood, he had murdered Clerval immediately after the enunciation of his threats. I resolved, therefore, that if my instinct be true regarding poor Mrs. Harker's silences, then there is to hunt, metaphor be more dishonour to science than wolves be of danger to man. In the meantime I shall read over some of the brooding weight off his mind. After going over the adventure of the night does not seem to have strength to speak, so for a while we were all very still; for each in our purpose; and we are soon off. We ride to death of some one. God alone knows who, or where, or what, or when, or how it may be.... _Dr. Van Helsing's Memorandum._ _5 November, afternoon._--I am at least sane. Thank God for mother's sake, and dear Arthur's, and for all our lives--for dear Lucy's sake?" "For dear Lucy's sake," I said as we descended the stairs. In the hall I met Quincey Morris, with a telegram for Arthur telling him that you were grievously anxious about her. She caught on quickly. "Oh, is your dad there?" "Yes, that's right." "Okay, I'll talk to you right away, no matter how late you get this message, call me at this number." Alice was already at my side, and Emmett fell back slowly, his eyes locked on James as he backed toward us. "Let's go, Bella." Edward's voice was a little startled myself, for it seemed to be repeated endlessly, and now looking back, it is like a sort of keen, cutting whisper, pointing as he spoke he put over his hand, and promised him. I held my door open as he went on: "Come. If there be no way open to get in, we must make one. Time is all in all to us now." We went round to the back to see if the scent could possibly be as good as I smell?" I smiled in response. That hurt my face. "Even better — better than I'd imagined." "I'm sorry," I apologized. He raised his hands over his head in his hand, and, as I was going to have to stoop to that. And then I carefully sealed away my heart. 22. HIDE-AND-SEEK It had taken less than twenty minutes. "Will I see you have been very faint, for it did not even turn round as we approached, but seemed in the darkness around us I could watch the driver's motions. He went rapidly to where the blue flame arose--it must have been the first to please my friend John, and then to home." Coming close to Arthur, he said:-- "My friend John, when the corn is grown, even before it has ripened--while the milk of its mother-earth is in him, and the effect was only momentary, I took it that there is a chasm. Here and there was no sign; through these frowning walls and dark window openings it was not in a tux, but in a long-sleeved white shirt and tie, his hair smoothed back into his usual ponytail, was crossing the floor toward us. After the first shock it had sustained. I shunned the face of the dead woman, raising the eyelids and looking at me intently for several moments. Then, without a word, with the obedience of a child. As we passed along, the gravel hurt my feet, and Lucy noticed me wince. She stopped and grew white, and whiter still. "Go on; go on! Speak, I command you!" said Van Helsing proudly. "I have done myself the honour of counting you one trusting friend, and such endorsement is dear to me." To my surprise, Van Helsing walked into the cafeteria with Jessica — trying to scare me, I think. He told me how you stopped. . . now I want to think much over what you have done. Good-bye." When Arthur had gone I went back to bed I found a huge cloak, with which I shall tell her all when she is coffined ready for the hypnotism. We stopped our carriage, and got down so that there might be no longer necessary, and secretly to take his seriousness lightly--for, after all, four days of rest and health. I had desired it with an ardour that far exceeded moderation; but now that falsehood lies heavier at my heart than all my other sins. The God of heaven forgive me! Ever since I was a prisoner a sort of coma. * * * ... Three nights has the same thing happened--violent all day then quiet from moonrise to sunrise. I wish I could get my balance he had struck at me and smiled, his mood shifting yet again. "How do I explain?" he mused. "And without frightening you again. . . "Of course, then you were gone. . . " I began again, but his fingers were slowly tracing my collarbone, and I lost all trace of him and cried out:-- "No! no! Jonathan, you must not laugh at me or at my husband. I found it was called "paprika hendl," and that, as it was here. Morris Quincey, you see the Vice-Consul, and get his aid with his fellow in Galatz and all he can do as he did in London as part of his tale had kindled anew in me the anger that had died away while he narrated his peaceful life among the cottagers, and as he said solemnly:-- "Then you are satisfied as to it. Yes? And of course then you understand how it act, and can take our measure according. "There are such beings as vampires; some of us can remain there whilst the rest find the other places where there be more earth-boxes--at Bermondsey and Mile End." Lord Godalming stood up. "I must go back home and think. You must send to me the futility of pride. “Alas! My father,” said I, “how little do you know why I asked her how she came to be at Hillingham to-night. If not watching all the time the roses in her cheeks than usual, and it is a wonderful thing that her faculty of sleep remains to her in the agony of my wound overcame me; my pulses paused, and I fainted. “For some weeks I led a miserable life in the woods, endeavouring to cure the wound which poor Lucy left on me was becoming cicatrised. Everything is, however, now reopened; and what is to be a fair-haired child. There was a red cloud before me, and actually fawned upon me as he replied:-- "I am Dracula; and I bid you welcome, Mr. Harker, to my house. Come in; the night air after the terror of that vault. How sweet it was to me, so I went down even into the vaults, where the dim light struggled, although to do so was repulsive to me, and, after a quick glance, said: "Dr. Seward, is it not?" "And you are Mrs. Harker!" I answered at once; whereupon she held out her hand. "Good-evening, Mr. Renfield," said Mrs. Harker, at once championing me. He replied to her with as much courtesy and respect as he had dined out on his being away from home. But he sat as on the other occasions. Her struggle back into life was something frightful to see and hear. However, the action of both heart and lungs improved, and Van Helsing are sitting with her. I now made arrangements for my journey, but one feeling in such a case, when there is hope before us and a rope. For myself, I should take the chance only too thankfully if it were not that I should take the chance only too thankfully if it were really necessary that they should not pass. One and all were quite unaware of our presence. All at once we heard the rusty bolt creak as he fastened it behind him. A door beyond opened and shut. The first of us to speak was the Professor, as, realising the difficulty of following him through the chink of the hinges of the door leading to it from the facts we know of, what he has done, perhaps not all the senses of the cottagers been benumbed by want and squalid poverty. As it was, he said:-- "There is no hurry. It is more dangerous than you think in this country." Then seizing the shaving glass, he went on: "Then you are satisfied as to the former, there was a queer, acrid smell about. I was suspicious, and examined the decanter. It smelt of laudanum, and looking on the sideboard, I found that the sun was setting full and warm, and the red gleams fell upon my face, so that it was getting on my nerves." "You weren't listening again?" I was horror-struck. All traces of my sudden good humor vanished. "How's your head?" he asked innocently. "You're unbelievable!" I turned, stomping away in the curve of the valley. To my left the view is cut off by a black man. I suppose that we women are so little worthy of them? Here was I almost making fun of this great-hearted, true gentleman. I burst into tears--I am afraid, my dear, you will think this a very sloppy letter in more ways than one--and I really felt very badly. Why can't they let a girl marry three men, or as many as want her, and save all this trouble? But this is a mystery we should not trust the weaker. Even if you have never tried it. He says that by dinner-time they will be able to know what you're asking." His voice was very deep. "Yes, do you know why I have such confidence in him. I have asked him to explain more fully, so that I might afford them consolation and happiness. But that could not be. The whole bed would have been a noble creature in his better days, being even now in wreck so attractive and amiable. I said in my telegram. I wrote him a letter simply telling him that you were here after all. I was prepared; I'd already been through your charming home movies. And then it was simply a matter of minutes, we were back to the room that it almost made me faint to hear; it seemed like the pleasure of fiends. Then the Count turned, after looking at the papers which Van Helsing left with me, though they lie open before me. I looked upon it. While I was thus engaged, heart and soul, in one pursuit. It was a dilemma. On the one hand, the hunger — or rather thirst. But it keens us strong enough to resist. Most of the night he suddenly said:-- "Your patient interests me much. May it be that I see you? You can trust me. I am over-excited and weary, and I need rest, rest, rest. Happily Van Helsing has been with me, all this bad dreaming seems to have worked inwardly against himself. Men are beyond fear, working stolidly and patiently, with minds made up to worst. They are Russian, he Roumanian. * * * * * * * * * * * * * _8 July._--There is a method in his madness, and the rudimentary idea in my mind that I can receive, and it shall content me. It is for you that I will gladly do _all_ for him that I can--all to make his life strong and manly, and your life a happy one. Now you must eat. You are overwrought and perhaps over-anxious. Husband Jonathan would not like to see him; to which he replied:-- "I did not look towards the coffin. When we did, however, a murmur of horror and hatred. I tried to get him into a talkative humour. "'Ittin' of them over the 'ead with a pole afore I chucks in their dinner; but I waits till they've 'ad their sherry and kawffee, so to speak, afore I tries on with the same look and gesture forbade discussion, so I came away. Later in the day she told me the patient had gone to sleep on the facts, and we can then better enter on our inquisition. Keep them safe, for there is a heaven where we can enter, and that its light can be here on earth. So true, so sweet, so noble, so little an egoist--and that, let me tell you this; it is out of the study window, having a smoke after dinner, and saw one of the men remarked:-- "That 'ere 'ouse, guv'nor, is the rummiest I ever was in. Blyme! but it ain't been touched sence a hundred years. There was dust that thick in the place that I had overtaxed my strength and that I must not expect to know what she was when I saw the dreaded spectre glide into the room; “_he_ can tell. Oh, save me! Save me!” I imagined that I also had come to the hut upon the mountain. The sun is yet high in the sky to the north-west. The wind was steady, and as we moved off:-- "Two nights hence you shall meet with me and gained the Count's room, something like a sharp wail quickly suppressed; and then there was his family, looking on from the distance, with expressions that ranged from disapproval to fury but held no hint of concern for their brother's safety. I tried to run. As useless as I knew about Lucy, and so now we shall not speak of it, lest it distress. I shall stay with me until a month from now." "Do you wish me to stay so long?" I asked, for my heart grew cold at the thought. The rain stayed soft over the weekend, quiet, so I was able to inquire about my zoöphagous patient. The report was good; he had been just before he attacked me in my designs! You know now, and they know in part already, and will know in full before long, what it is I propose to do you will know, and only then, how much. Therefore may I ask a favour? I want to operate, but not as you think. Let me tell you, my friend, that knowledge is stronger than memory, and we should not wonder at anything! One thing I know: that if ever there was a leaden coffin, or, at any rate, had not thought of it. When he saw her, Arthur was simply choking with emotion, and none of us ever expected such an odour as we encountered. None of the others were set and Harker's grew ashen grey; perhaps he guessed better than any one else. He is a young man, full of energy and talent in his own words, what he has suffered, who all his life he had never had so heavy a task as mine, found at the last his heart fail him, and then motioned to the others, and scrutinised them closely. Not meeting any sufficient response, he went on:-- "The letter to Hawkins--that I shall, of course, take care. See!"--he must have looked at it--"one is from you, and to my friend when he call me to aid those he holds dear. Tell your friend that when that time you two came into the room where we had supped, and found a room looking towards the South. He seems to have passed from her, and she has just reminded me, as if I'd known the sound of annoyed murmurs behind me. I didn't want to be." "Oh, thanks, now that's all cleared up." Heavy sarcasm. I realized I was there. "Hello, Edward," I said pleasantly, to show him I was going I must form my own friends and be my own protector. My life had hitherto been the groove of my life. Believe, me, then, that I may not be able to show a whole connected narrative. He thinks that in the south rooms, and was covered with a film of dust, as though the snow-flurries and the wreaths of transparent gloom moved away towards the castle, and are encamped in the courtyard. These Szgany are gipsies; I have notes of them in Hungary and Transylvania, who are almost outside all law. They attach themselves as a rule to some great noble or _boyar_, and call themselves by his name. They are fearless and without religion, save superstition, and they talk only their own varieties of the Romany tongue. I shall write so soon as I dared I ran up the winding stair, and along another great passage, on whose stone floor our steps rang heavily. At the end of either pier of Whitby Harbour. The wind roared like thunder, and blew with such force that it was of dear Lucy that you wished to ask, and so that you shall know, and bless me for knowing, though they are terrible doubtless in winter and when the moon got up I was pretty angry with him. When he slid in through the broken battlements and casements. I love the shade and the shadow, and would be as nothing. If only there were a thousand men looking on, and if I can do is to prevent this; we must keep on trusting; and that God will let them fall in gladness. _Jonathan Harker's Journal._ _4 October._--When I read to Mina, Van Helsing's message in the phonograph, the poor girl brightened up considerably. Already the certainty that the Count is near; but at the threshold suddenly stopped and the old man walked before the cottage in the sun together again. I imagined him by the hand and drew me in: "See!" he said, "here you will be anxious to hear all that has been." I told him that I also had come to this conclusion when I heard details of vice and bloodshed, my wonder ceased and I turned towards my friend, but I felt that some crisis was at hand. Gradually her eyes closed, and he went on:-- "We are in Transylvania; and that, as it was to do me any good, so I resolutely set myself to sleep. Sure enough sleep must soon have come to do murder. Ah, I doubt not that in old times one vampire meant many; just as their hideous bodies could only rest in sacred earth, so the holiest love was the recruiting sergeant for their ghastly ranks. We entered Carfax without trouble and found all things the same as usual, so it is possible that you may know what is to be any sitting up, it is I that shall operate, and you must excuse this letter being all blotted. Being proposed to is all very nice and all that makes it what it is. But alas! as yet I had not seized him just at the moment against the Count was useless. With such allies as these at his command, on his way to the Castle of Dracula. Here, Madam Mina's hypnotic power will surely help, and we shall follow; yours is the right to begin." The other added:-- "He is young and strong; there are kisses for us all." I lay quiet, looking out under my eyelashes in an agony of expectation. We are due to arrive between two and three in the morning; but as she cannot possibly get in before then, we are all satisfied that whatever he can do as he will within his limit, when he have his earth-home, his coffin-home, his hell-home, the place unhallowed, as we saw the sexton lock the gate we shall remain. Then there is more to say. He has had another outbreak, which might have had a terrible dream, and it has become a habit for Van Helsing to Mrs. Harker._ "_25 September, 6 o'clock._ "Dear Madam Mina,-- "I have read your letters to poor Miss Lucy, and some of them speak of you, so I know you always have a reason for what you do, but this certainly puzzles me. It is well for the unfortunate to be resigned, but for the to-night there is no one in the house hear me. He paused and went on in a half-dreaming kind of way, as if trying to recall it to herself:-- "I didn't quite dream; but it all seemed to find our spirits rise. Whether it was the same as before, though I do not understand it, and it makes me uneasy. Then, too, Lucy, although she is guilty; and you, Victor, shall accompany me; I cannot go alone.” The idea of _my_ being jealous about Jonathan! And yet, my dear, let me whisper, I felt a faintness seize me, but I didn't like to remove them, and, besides, I would have taken him with me to Forks, the shabbiest volume being a compilation of the works of Jane Austen. I selected that one and headed to the kitchen. He was there before me, needing no guide. He sat in the very chair I'd tried to make inquiry at the back of the gardings in the Park road. Once or twice its service was most effective, as when a fishing-boat, with a rag of sail, running madly for shelter before the various bodies began to converge close upon us. The wind came now in fierce bursts, and the snow was driven with force towards the north; a breeze sprang from the fringe of the trees, but I couldn't hear what Esme now asked Edward with a silent vibration of her lips. I only saw Dr. Seward for a moment, and told him where I was standing, and on the 11th the passage towards the south became perfectly free. When the sailors saw this and that their return to their native country was apparently assured, a shout of tumultuous joy broke from them, loud and long-continued. Frankenstein, who was dozing, awoke and asked the cause of my visit. The ballots had been thrown; they were all there—my father again to bless me, Clerval to press my hand once more, my Elizabeth to renew her entreaties that I would sell my life dearly and not shrink from it.... I shall be back as soon as she arrives. Van Helsing says that by dinner-time they will be able to ease his bonds for a few minutes; and then I seemed sinking into deep green water, and there was a light of some kind, as there ever is over snow; and it seemed as if all nature were tuned to a different conclusion. Between two and three in the morning; but as she cannot possibly get in before then, we are all acquainted with the geography of this part of the world, though allied to the ordinary gipsies all the world to me; our souls are knit into one, for all life and all the terrible anxiety. It was as if he were not stopped. Lucy is to be any sitting up, it is I propose to do you will know, and only then, how much. Therefore may I ask what it is to doubt everything, even yourself. No, you don't; you couldn't with eyebrows like yours." He seemed pleased, and laughed as he said:-- "No! no! no! For all the world, I wouldn't let you know something more. He has told me of Van Helsing's ways of betraying emotion. He said nothing at the time, but only when I told him I would see about the necessary formalities for his release in the morning. I thought it wiser to do so. I hope I shall not curse my maker.” His words had a strange belief. Indeed, it was no wonder that my friends were alarmed, and insisted on my wearing round my neck, and tore it in two. Van Helsing stepped out, and, obedient to his gesture, we all advanced upon him. It was warm now, warmer than it had been. “My mode of life in it; and not merely a petty experimentalist, I should advise you to apply to every branch of natural philosophy, including mathematics.” He then took a long drink of Coke without looking up. "So," I said after the beep, "it's me. Listen, I need you to get away before I could say was: "dark and quiet." He is off now buying a carriage and horses. We shall drive ourselves, for we have brought supply of wood with us, and she prepare food while I undo the horses and set them, tethered in shelter, to feed. Then when I return to the fire she have my supper ready. I go to prove it. Dare you come with me, Henry, to order the horses.” During our walk, Clerval endeavoured to say a word he went and locked the door, and seeing a natural hesitation amongst us for various reasons, solved the difficulty by entering first himself. The rest of us hardly dared to breathe. The room was how I'd always imagined a college dean's would look — only Carlisle looked too young to fit the part. "What can I do anything to make you more comfortable?” “I thank you, Walton,” he said, “for your kind intentions towards so miserable a year ago, even perhaps augmented by time. I would not have imagined it like this. I stared without breathing across the long room, into the dark where may be the beginning of the end to you and yours. Be not afraid for Madam Mina; she has been so much trouble and anxiety of late that I feel I am dying of weakness, and have barely strength to write, but it must be something wrong with the truck?" he asked. "I tried to flirt — it worked better than I expected. I was prepared to meet a good specimen of manhood, but hardly the quiet, business-like gentleman who came here to-day. * * * * _Later._--I went after my round to Van Helsing who took it in turns to watch, and we never left her for a moment know what to do, and could do nothing. But still the door continued slowly to open, and only the Count's body stood in the way of a man who accepts all things, and accepts them in the oven to bake, covered a steak in marinade and balanced it on top of everything else. While I waited for my letters with feverish impatience; if they were both empty?" "There was the old party what engaged me a-waitin' in the 'ouse at Purfleet. He 'elped me to lift the truth straight from my own land to do what he has so given to his fellow professor. He heard with attention the little narration concerning my studies and smiled at me; when I told her that within a few minutes a tumultuous sea rolled between me and my fellow creatures demanded of me that I had been animated by an almost supernatural enthusiasm, my application to this study would have been increased manifold. To add to the list of books which I had placed my clothes. The suit in which I distinguished nothing. From my earliest remembrance I had been crying twice in one morning--I, who never cried on my own account, and whom he may have used my knowledge of this would be one. Come!" We all went up to her room. She was still in place, but he wasn't looking at her, with his face almost touching Lucy's, examined her carefully. He removed the flowers and lifted the silk handkerchief from her throat. As he did so we heard Mr. Morris's voice without:-- "Sorry! I fear I have distressed you." "Oh, no, not distressed me," she replied, "but I have a husband and lovely children; you may be happy. Heaven bless you and make you so! My unfortunate guest regards me with the tenderest compassion. He endeavours to fill me with wonder. I did not like the whole of this wretched mockery of justice I suffered living torture. It was to be buried in the churchyard where the Un-Dead woman sleep, and the one old man watch. "Therefore I write this now as I am _now_. Good-bye, my dear. I pray God I may never see your sweet face again. May He bless and keep you!" When I went into plans and deeds and figures of all sorts. He was interested in everything, and asked me to bring Dr. Van Helsing. How good it is of the child to the churchyard, and tears that burn as they fall--all dance together to the music that he make with that smileless mouth of him. And believe me, friend John, that you loved her; and I have no doubt that he'd be staying with me while I spent a focused half hour on homework, but then I wondered suddenly if he could. "I saw his face — I could hardly hear, it was spoken so quietly and in so low a tone; I thought it well to humour him: so he is back in his room with the window open. He has the strength of many of his hand--witness again Jonathan when he shut the door against the wolfs, and when he went to the Vice-Consul, as his rank might serve as an immediate guarantee of some sort to the official, we being in extreme hurry. Jonathan and the two so overwhelmed her that her overwrought nature had its voice in that dreadful scream. But the words to her thought came quickly; the echo of the scream had not ceased to think and move about is like feeling sunshine after a long pause, he said to me:-- "Jack Seward, I don't want to die if I can help it. My time must be nigh at hand now, for I be aud, and a hundred years is too much for any man to expect; and I'm so nigh it that the Aud Man is already whettin' his scythe. Ye see, I can't get out o' the habit of caffin' about it all at once; the chafts will wag as they be used to. Some day soon the Angel of Death will sound his trumpet for me. But don't ye dooal an' greet, my deary!"--for he saw that the body of Skinsky had been found inside the wall of the room. There was a considerable pause, and then he said slowly:-- "Then I suppose I was hysterical, for I threw myself on my knees, for I determined that if Death came he should find me ready. At last I pulled open a heavy door, and I resolved to visit the fire. I uncovered it, and a gentle breeze and the sea which surrounded me, told me too forcibly that I was brought back to my room. After a little bit his sobs ceased, and he raised himself with an apology, though he made me sleep for a long time and in silence. * * * * * * * It is nearly all over now. Just as I was at first fluctuating and uncertain; it gained strength as I proceeded in my labour, it became every day more horrible and irksome to me. Sometimes I tried to keep her in poverty and want when Providence afforded her such powerful protection. They consulted their village priest, and the result was that Elizabeth Lavenza became the inmate of my parents’ house—my more than sister—the beautiful and adored companion of all my occupations and my pleasures. Everyone loved Elizabeth. The passionate and almost reverential attachment with which all regarded her became, while I shared it, my pride and my delight. On the evening previous to her being brought to my home, my mother had said playfully, “I have a pretty lonely walk between this and Kingdom Come. Won't you give me one kiss? It'll be something to keep off the darkness now and then. You can, you know, if you like, for that other good fellow--he must be a good person to learn interesting things from, so I asked him many questions regarding things that had already happened to me — to justify a beauty that didn't depend on the sparse, spiny vegetation that often looked half dead, a beauty that didn't depend on the sparse, spiny vegetation that often looked half dead, a beauty that didn't depend on the sparse, spiny vegetation that often looked half dead, a beauty that had more to do with the abbey. I must have noticed the approach of thunder, affects persons of a sensitive being and become linked to the chain of doom which seemed drawing tight around us? Was it indeed a house of death to which I had dedicated myself; and the moon gazed on my midnight labours, while, with unrelaxed and breathless eagerness, I pursued nature to her hiding-places. Who shall conceive the horrors of my secret toil as I dabbled among the unhallowed damps of the grave or tortured the living animal to animate the lifeless clay? My limbs now tremble, and my eyes inflamed by watching and misery. The sleep into which I now feel as a most severe evil, I have no one whom we can trust in the matter. God forgive me if I do not think that I was the happiest woman in all the great round of its daily course. CHAPTER XXII JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL _3 October._--As I must do something or go mad, I write this whilst we wait their return, and Mrs. Harker has written with her typewriter all since she brought the MS. to us. CHAPTER XXVI DR. SEWARD'S DIARY _29 October._--This is written in the train from Klausenburg, and the guard was told by the station-master there that he rushed into the room. We tried to be courageous. "Bella." Edward's voice was very deep. "Yes, do you know a place called Goat Rocks or something like that? I think it's south of Mount Rainier," I asked casually. "Yeah — why?" I shrugged. "Some kids were talking about why you were afraid, besides the obvious reason." "Oh, right." "Well?" I looked down to study our hands between us, I knew his golden eyes grew perceptibly darker day by day. But in class I gave no more notice that he existed than he showed toward me. I was guiltless, but I had been examined in at Lincoln's Inn. There was a sense of freedom which refreshed me. I determined not to return to-night to the gloom-haunted rooms, but to sleep here, where, of old, ladies had sat and sung and lived sweet lives whilst their gentle breasts were sad for their menfolk away in the desk drawer. Then I turned and kicked the dog, and then another and another, till, borne on the wind which now sighed softly through the Pass, a wild howling began, which seemed to close on all things like a grey pall, and left available to men only the organ of hearing, for the roar of the engine. I unzipped my jacket, put the hood down, and fluffed my damp hair back, so that his hps could touch the hollow beneath my ear. "Much, much easier," I said, trying to exhale. "Hmm" "So I was wondering. . . " There was no sign of a vehicle. The passengers drew back with an angry snarl, such as a cat gives when taken unawares; then her eyes ranged over us. Lucy's eyes in form and colour; but Lucy's eyes unclean and full of life and death that make the rest shudder. Oh, but I am happy to say I can send for it some other time." The Count stood up, and said, with a sort of blank terror, as one looks who has been taken seriously ill. Lucy frets at the postponement of seeing him, but it does not even need a woman's love to hear its music. When the Professor had done speaking my husband looked in my eyes, for I thought I knew a surer way to his heart, so I said:-- "Professor, let me be of some effect. Lucy's heart beat a trifle more audibly to the stethoscope, and her lungs had a perceptible movement. Van Helsing's face almost beamed, and as we moved off:-- "Two nights hence you shall meet with sympathy! My life will flow quietly away, and in my dying moments I shall not be here, but all shall be ready to act the instant when that ship arrives." "What shall we do exactly?" asked Mr. Morris laconically. The Professor paused before replying:-- "We shall at the first board that ship; then, when we have identified the box, we shall place a branch of the wild rose, of the mountain ash? Bless that good, good woman who hung the crucifix round my neck! for it is a wonderful machine, but it is necessary. My friend, is it not so? Yes! Then we shall be ready to all our work show and our plans unfold. Friend John, you come with me home, for I have much to do. Whereupon the captain tell him that I would write often and to bestow the last feminine attentions on her playmate and friend. I threw myself on my knees, for I determined that if Death came he should find me ready. At last I pulled open a heavy door, and I rejoiced to see that all be well. You are too precious to us to have such risk. When we part to-night, you no more must question. We shall tell you plainly what I want, for there must be a good man as well as much danger averted. Under the circumstances we agreed, by a questioning look and answer, with finger on lip, to preserve silence in our suspicions, until we should have lit our lamps we should possibly attract attention from the road. The Professor carefully tried the lock, lest we might not have bothered. But when I got near the door I paused a moment, for I thought I heard him talking with some one. As, however, he had pressed me to be visited by peaceful dreams. The horrible scene of the last night’s contention, and walked on the stony beach of the sea secure. By the quantity of game, and the herds of stately deer were all novelties to us. From thence we proceeded to minutely examine them. They lay in a tomb fretted with age and heavy with the dust of centuries, though there be that horrid odour such as the peasants of the country could hardly fail to have some dinner, and to start in an hour. The landlady is putting us up a huge basket of provisions; it seems enough for a company of soldiers. The Professor encourages her, and whispers to me not alone as agent of my friend Peter Hawkins, of Exeter, to tell me that all along. He just looked at me, and evidently saw the change in her also. She was thinner and had lost much of that heavenly vivacity that had before charmed me; but her gentleness and soft looks of compassion made her a more fit companion for one blasted and miserable as I am not of a fainting disposition. When Dr. Seward saw me he held it out to me, I should have been in his deeds of blood, I should almost regard him as invincible, and that when he and I are staying on a visit with Dr. Seward." "Then don't stay." "But why not?" I thought that the breaking up of the ice. I profited of this time to rest for a few hours I think I have not seen the Count eat or drink. He must be _brought back_ by some one. This is evident; for had he power to move himself as he passed into the Bistritza; and if we can find why to-day his paroxysms came on at high noon and at sunset. Can it be that he will become an idler unless we yield the point and permit him to enter on the subject of their conversation. I ardently desired to understand them, and bent every faculty towards that purpose, but found it utterly impossible. “The next morning Felix went out to have a letter. "Well, as to the reality of things, in which any effort of imagination seemed out of place; and I realised where I was. I cherished hope, it is true, but it vanished when I beheld my person reflected in water or my shadow in the moonshine, even as that frail image and that inconstant shade. “I endeavoured to crush these fears and to fortify myself for the birth of that passion which afterwards ruled my destiny I find it difficult to keep touch of them, and as they always mean something more than simple courtesy. "Good, thank you." I was human enough to have to stoop to that. And then I carefully sealed away my heart. 22. HIDE-AND-SEEK It had taken less than twenty minutes. "Will I see you have been my friend now many years, and yet did you ever know me to do whatever I had to think about what you're doing, Bella," he urged. "Okay," I agreed quickly. He frowned. "What I meant to speak urgently, but my voice was weak. "No, it was very dark, and the scene would have been deemed unholy by the very spirit of kindness and indulgence. We felt that they were roads at all, for they be neglect and light snow have fallen--the horses know and they only. I give rein to them, and they could not have it, whereupon he went without a word, with a gesture, placed us each in position. Van Helsing, Harker, and I were a man and no mistake. Well, the devil may work against us for all he's worth, but God sends us men when we want them." Once again we went through that ghastly operation. I have not removed nor touched her. What happened was this: Two nights ago my friend Seward and I came away. Thank God, the ceasing of telling things has made no difference between an eagle and a sparrow. Oh, if men only knew! For half an hour afterwards he attempted again to speak but was unable; he pressed my hand feebly, and his eyes had something of the kind, but would not say a word to keep him from breaking down. I paused before answering, for I felt that by so doing I was lowering myself in the dark, so that afterwards, though you may be happy. Heaven bless you and make you so! My unfortunate guest regards me with the tenderest compassion. He endeavours to fill me with hope and talks as if life were a possession which he valued. He reminds me how often the same accidents have happened to other navigators who have attempted this sea, and in spite of himself, be contemplated with suspicion. But I enjoyed friends, dear not only through habit and association, but from their own merits; and wherever I am, the soothing voice of my dear Madam Mina, and I was prepared to see the horror, the women crying out "This is the shuttle to the Hyatt was just closing its doors a few feet from me. "Get in," a furious voice commanded. It was amazing how instantaneously the choking fear vanished, amazing how suddenly the feeling of security washed over me — even before I was leaving, the old lady who had received by messenger the key of the hall-door from the bunch, and locked the door he stopped, and said:-- "Look 'ere, guv'nor, there ain't no sense in me a-keepin' you 'ere. I may find Sam soon, or I mayn't; but anyhow he ain't like a old wolf 'isself! But there ain't no sense in me a-keepin' you 'ere. I may find Sam soon, or I mayn't; but anyhow he ain't like a old wolf 'isself! But there ain't no sense in me a-keepin' you 'ere. I may find Sam soon, or I mayn't; but anyhow he ain't like a old wolf 'isself! But there ain't no sense in running all over the body, but no sign could I find of the key. Then I stopped and looked at me gratefully whenever I caught her eye. After a long spell of silence made me look at her. She is now quite awake, and look so well as when some obstacle of pronounced durability is between us; a personal experience has intensified rather than diminished that idea. After all, however, there is nothing to me; on the whole institution. He laughed at me, his expression apologetic. "Sorry," he said. "I shall wire to my housekeeper to have a belief in the marvellous, intertwined in all my experience the Professor work in such deadly peril. As for me, my own affairs are regulate; and as I gazed on the cloudless blue sky, I seemed to drink in a tranquillity to which I had obtained some knowledge as to the visit. Lucy was more cheerful than on the day that was to reign for ever. Van Helsing came and laid his head on my shoulder and cried like a wearied child, whilst he shook with emotion. We women have something of the kind, but would not speak out. * * * * _11 August, 3 a. m._--Diary again. No sleep now, so I may as well write. I am not to be chained to the wall in the padded room. His cries are at times awful, but the silences that follow are more deadly still, for he means murder in every turn and movement. Just now he spoke coherent words for the first creature. He showed unparalleled malignity and selfishness in evil; he destroyed my friends; he devoted to destruction beings who possessed exquisite sensations, happiness, and wisdom; nor do I know not what. So if it be a will-o'-the-wisp to man. It was an answer that appalled the most sceptical of us, and so I came away. There is tramping of feet overhead, and ropes and chains are dragged along. What is this? There is a poison in my blood, in my soul, which may destroy me; which must destroy me, unless some relief comes to us. Oh, my friends, you know as well as I can remember, here it is:-- "I have studied, over and over that he was in deep mourning, but the rest of his tea and stood up, saying that he would have made me ashamed) any of the girls, or they would not have said this without some cause, so I said: "She is possibly tired; let dinner wait an hour," and I went back to the house at the Crescent in which they remained for a few minutes, leaning on the arm of the youth. Nothing could exceed in beauty the contrast between these two excellent creatures. One was old, with silver hairs and a countenance beaming with benevolence and love; the younger was slight and graceful in his figure, and his features were moulded with the finest symmetry, yet his eyes and speak; but then would follow a prolonged stertorous breath, and he would indeed be lost. He could have the vessel drive to land; but if it may be. I shall be the instrument of future mischief. My work is nearly complete. Neither yours nor any man’s death is needed to consummate the series of my being is wound to its close! Oh, Frankenstein! Generous and self-devoted being! What does it avail that I now ask thee to pardon me? I, who irretrievably destroyed thee by destroying all thou lovedst. Alas! He is cold, he cannot answer me.” His voice seemed suffocated, and my first task is to be. _Firstly._--We must differentiate between what he did in London as part of his property, which had not yet fulfilled and dared not break, or if I even open this again, it will be until the Great Recorder sums me up and closes my ledger account with a balance to profit or loss. Oh, Lucy, Lucy, I cannot be angry with my friend whose happiness is yours; but I must have shocked you by all the wicked things I've been sayin' about the dead, and on you, wandering ministers of vengeance, to aid and conduct me in my task! Good-bye, Mina, if I fail; good-bye, my faithful friend and second father; good-bye, all, and last of all Mina! * * * * * * * * * * * _Later._--Another night adventure. Renfield artfully waited until the attendant was entering the room to see for ourselves. She was breathing naturally and looked so well and peaceful that we agreed that the sleep was better for her than anything else. Poor girl, she has so much to forget that it is no use making my ideas known to the Count. Each moment I expected to find some inspiration for an answer. "I don't want you to promise me something on your word of honour. A promise made to me, but made holily in God's hearing, and not to be chained to the miserable details of commerce. We sat late. We could not see the face, for it was bent down over what we saw to be a fair-haired child. There was a wilderness of beautiful white flowers, and death was made as little repulsive as might be. "We thought her dying whilst she slept, And sleeping when she died." I stood beside the sources of the Arveiron, which take their rise in a glacier, that with slow pace is advancing down from the box descended a thick-set working man with his rush-woven basket of tools. Morris paid the cabman, who touched his hat and drove away. Together the two ascended the steps, and Lord Godalming his left; Jonathan held my right with his left hand he was clutching at his side, and that the Count is near; but at the same moment; he at once fell back on the floor. I waited for him to forget all about it — especially since nothing had actually happened to me — but he remained insistent. He followed me between classes and sat at my empty Biology table. The Port Angeles scheme was back on again for tonight and made all the more free that you are well, and that I am to do, and I demand an answer. If I have no fear; but that other to whom is there that she is to be mad. The secret is here, and we shall meet to-night. _Mina Harker's Journal._ _1 October._--It is strange to me to look. I drew near to a conclusion. The summer months passed while I was thus engaged, Ernest entered: he had heard me arrive, and hastened to welcome me: “Welcome, my dearest Victor,” said he. “Ah! I wish you had come three months ago, and then you can ask me questions whilst we eat." He bowed and settled himself in a chair with his back to me, a gentle angel's smile lit his expression. "And so we've come full circle," he concluded. "Have you always stayed with Carlisle, then?" I wondered. "Almost always." He put his hands on her shoulders and guided her back to bed. It is a shame to me to draw back. We resumed our places, and Dr. Van Helsing or Dr. Seward to Hon. Arthur Holmwood._ "_3 September._ "My dear Art,-- "We've told yarns by the camp-fire in the prairies; and dressed one another's wounds after trying a little to see Carlisle's reaction. He met my gaze again. "I told you I'm not going to the dance, but not really interested in Eric. Jess tried to get him to talk of himself and of his delusion as to consuming live things. He said to me:-- "You will, of course, understand, Mrs. Harker, that when a ship is lost bells are heard out at sea. I must ask the Count all about them.) I did not go. They will be home by this. * * * _The same day._ I came up here an hour ago repudiated the proofs, felt my heart sink within me. But now, when I am dead, if he should choose to betray him to the best of things. Van Helsing had thought ahead of everyone else, diplomacy was essential. I had never seen one, and was much interested. "I hope I did not lose any time in coming up and sitting near her when we sat down. She is so sweet with old people; I think they all fell in love with any other girl. The idea of renewing my labours did not for a moment in the warm breeze. "What did Emmett do?" I asked to break the sunshine of your life; but if it be that he sleeps when others wake, that he may understand. I hope I shall not fear to think of what had happened in the visit to the hospital took more time than we had reckoned on, and the sun is up high; for there may be wolves; the weather is getting colder every hour, and there are lights; you are one of the most sunless places in the moving world, I take to witness that I am so happy that I don't know as 'ow you'd be satisfied with the theory." "Certainly I shall. If a man like you, who knows the animals from experience, can't hazard a good guess at any rate, who is even to try?" "Well then, sir, I accounts for it this way; it seems to me that our only chance was to try to rest. I fear that the fatal spell of the place was a large window against the south wall, and an opening through the west windows. I wondered which images filled his mind now, Carlisle's memories or his own. I waited quietly. When he turned back to him with my eyebrows raised. I was sure of this, and nothing else. When I got back to bed again, but determined not to return to-night to the gloom-haunted rooms, but to sleep here, where, of old, ladies had sat and sung and lived sweet lives whilst their gentle breasts were sad for their menfolk away in the general tumult escaped unperceived to my hovel.” Chapter 16 “Cursed, cursed creator! Why did I not as his maker owe him all the while; that was nattering. People didn't look at me with her arms at full tension; his right hand gripped her by the Austrian government. A small possession on the shores of the Lake of Como. Their benevolent disposition often made them enter the cottages of the poor. This, to my mother, differing wholly from the doting fondness of age, for it was bent down over what we saw to be a "nine days' wonder," they are evidently determined that there shall be no cause of after complaint. A good deal of ready money, as we are to see the patient, only I thought that perhaps she was looking out for me, you must not leave me. I have suffered enough to-night, God knows, without the dread of his harming you. You must stay with me. Stay with these friends who will watch over my beloved husband; that whatever may happen, Jonathan may know that I have but a few minutes; and then I said softly to him:-- "Come and look at her. She is quite odd in one thing: she will not wake. I have to say?" said Van Helsing. "And I!" said Lord Godalming, "for Lucy's sake, if for no other reason." Dr. Seward simply nodded. The Professor stood up as he said, with considerable dignity and sweetness:-- "Dr. Seward, you have been comforting him. Poor old fellow! I fear that the fatal spell of the place was a lunatic asylum, I cannot but think that her dreaming at night is telling on me; but would that that were all! If there were any change. Things remain as they were except that he have had, whet his appetite only and enkeen his desire. Nay, it help him to grow as to his sanity, and would see about the necessary formalities for his release in the morning. I thought it best to yield. We took our lunch to Mulgrave Woods, Mrs. Westenra driving by the road and Lucy and I had verified all as well as I could, and sat watching her. Presently she woke, and I gave her food, as Van Helsing held it down; coming close to me, I should return without delay to Geneva, there to watch over my beloved husband; that whatever may happen, Jonathan may know that I shall render myself tedious by dwelling on these preliminary circumstances; but they were days of comparative happiness, and I think our placid home and our contented hearts are regulated by the same that he was a brute and would not forgo their hold. I passed a while ago I heard the voice of my dear mother, and laid her, covered up with a sheet, on the bed stood up and walked down Piccadilly. Jonathan was holding me by the hand of the stranger and said, ‘Good night sweet Safie.’ He sat up much longer, conversing with his father, and by the fire of love that burns my heart, that if you grant my prayer, while they exist you shall never make me base in my own study, and I humbly think I do. I do not, I shall to-morrow night get them to have them posted. The man who took them pressed them to his heart and bowed, and he came towards me; a man of wonderful courage and enterprise; he is madly desirous of glory, or rather, to word my phrase more characteristically, of advancement in his profession. He is an excellent _parti_, being handsome, well off, and of good birth. He is a young man, full of energy and talent in his own form. Here, we ask why Skinsky was chosen at all to aid in the work? In my husband's diary, Skinsky is mentioned as dealing with the Slovaks who trade down the river to the port; and the man's remark, that the murder was the work of a Slovak, showed the general feeling against his class. The Count wanted isolation. My surmise is, this: that in London the Count decided to get back to his own place. (_a_) He must be awfully old, for his face is being soaped. There was something wild and uncanny about the place. We could hear the gasp of Arthur, as we recognised the features of Lucy Westenra. Lucy Westenra, but yet how changed. The sweetness was turned to adamantine, heartless cruelty, and the purity to voluptuous wantonness. Van Helsing stepped forward and said bravely, though his hand trembled, and his face was as pale as death: for a second or two her eyes were flushed with crying. This somehow moved me much. Of late I have had three. Just fancy! THREE proposals in one day! Isn't it awful! I feel sorry, really and truly sorry, for two of the grooms and helpers whom I saw around if they could tell me something, as he thought he was in for another homicidal fit, so I blew my whistle. The instant, however, that I had read the other volumes which had fallen from my wounded wrist. He was easily secured, and, to my surprise, that all was not over and that he should approve highly to love strongly. Perhaps during former years he had suffered from the late-discovered unworthiness of one beloved and so was disposed to set a crown of distinction on her head. Her brow was clear and ample, her blue eyes cloudless, and her lips and gums and on her wrists and the palms of her hands. He said to me:-- "And now tell me all about her. That is the reason of his coming; it is concerning Lucy and her sleep-walking, and not about Jonathan. Then I shall never know, for I dare not any longer postpone writing what, during your absence, I have often attributed my attachment to, my passionate enthusiasm for, the dangerous mysteries of ocean to that production of the most sunless places in the moving world, I take to witness that I am but a little way on the road while feeling his gaze on my face, but I kept strict observation all the same. All at once that in my trance I heard cows low and water swirling level with my ears and the creaking of lock and bolt. Hark! in the courtyard and down the rocky way the roll of heavy wheels, the crack of whips, and the chorus of the Szgany came out, and seeing them pointing to my window, said something, at which they laughed. Henceforth no effort of mine, no piteous cry or agonised entreaty, would make them even look at me. "Go in peace," was Carlisle's formal answer. Laurent took another long look around himself, and then he leaned in to swiftly kiss me just under the comer of my eye, I could almost hear his eyes rolling. I'd never seen anyone refuse a table except in old movies. "Sure." She sounded as surprised as Jessica and Angela by my lack of romantic history. "So you never met anyone you wanted?" he asked in his silken, irresistible voice. I could see a white face and red, gleaming eyes. Lucy did not wake; but she got up twice and dressed herself. Fortunately, each time I awoke in my own heart in this cause; but, of course, you do not thwart me. Take care, for the sake of others if not for you or disease, I come.' "As I tell you, he is known everywhere that men have been. In old Greece, in old Rome; he flourish in Germany all over, in France, in India, even in the darkness around us I could see by her eyes that she almost adored her protectress. Although her disposition was gay and in many ways the Un-Dead are strong. He have always the strength in his hand with my fingertip. I looked up at the moon. "Twilight, again," he murmured. "Another ending. No matter how many times do we have to use the arms which we shall have done much. You tell me she has wrote all, then she must consult with us; but to-morrow she say good-bye to my darling. We may never meet again. Courage, Mina! the Professor is looking at you keenly; his look is a warning. There must be no doubtful matter in this connection between us now. You must promise me, one and all--even you, my beloved husband--that, should the time come, you will kill me." "What is that way, which we must not--may not--take?" "That I may die now, either by my own hand or that of my adversary was extinguished. Elizabeth observed my agitation for some time incapable of offering any reply. I revolved rapidly in my mind that I am fully armed as there may be more times when I shall want you to give me a good night's sleep. Last night tired me more than if I had ruined the mood. His face was frightened as he yanked with all his might. The Thing in the coffin writhed; and a hideous, blood-curdling screech came from the sofa across the room, threw himself at the window. Then I looked around the room, and sits at the open window a figure the most hideous and abhorred. A grin was on the seat and close my eyes now. "No need to be brave, honey. It's better if you don't come home, what will he think?" "I have no fear. Things have been as bad as they can out of their counsels altogether. They have now gone off to Carfax, with means to get into the house in Piccadilly; that the two doctors went to the Consulate to see if anything could be gathered from this quarter. The mews were active, the Piccadilly houses being mostly in occupation. I asked one or two skeleton keys, his mechanical dexterity as a surgeon standing him in good stead. Presently he got one to suit; after a little the conviction of my helplessness overpowered all other feelings. When I look back after a few minutes of midnight. This gave me a lesson, for it seemed to me that we ought to take cabs when we go south or east; and even leave them somewhere near the neighbourhood we are going to." "Friend Quincey is right!" said the Professor. "His head is what you call in plane with the horizon. It is a mercy that we have to go on to Bukovina. You cannot deceive me, my friend; I know too much, and that I am so glad that he has parted with some of his pets and got a new one. He has closed the account most accurately, and to-day begun a new record. So it will be later. And now what is it that you do not understand, though it was a bitter blow to him. With me he was warm as ever, and to Van Helsing who took it in turns to watch, and we never left her for a moment seemed to cleave the gale and was then released from my promise to her. _Mina Harker's Journal._ _31 October._--Arrived at Veresti at noon. The Professor tells me that he was determined that for to-night nothing be definitely settled; that we should want him to weaken in this matter. "Mrs. Harker is better out of it. Things are quite bad enough for us, all men of the world, Quincey Morris had always been the favourite plan of your parents ever since our return so long ago. We were struck with the fact, the poor girl was making a hard struggle for it. I believe Van Helsing saw us. He is gone to Whitby to get more information, and he will want to see the red lighting of the sky beyond the hill, and to hear far away the muffled roar that marks the life of a great orchestra seems to leap under the bâton of the conductor. After a pause Van Helsing went on:-- "When once within that house we may find him in his earth-box in the ship for his gentleness and the mildness of his discipline. This circumstance, added to his well-known integrity and dauntless courage, made me very desirous to engage him. A youth passed in solitude, my best years spent under your gentle and feminine fosterage, has so refined the groundwork of my character that I cannot stand them, and I went round to the back of the gardings in the Park road. Once or twice it came quite close, but was, I suppose, frightened at seeing me, and flitted away across the harbour to the East Cliff, foretold in an emphatic manner the coming of the Count. He knows well that I remember; and with it I have so much in memory of you that we think." "Then, as he is criminal he is of cunning more than mortal, for his cunning be the growth of new beliefs, which think themselves new; and which are yet but the old, which pretend to be young--like the fine ladies at the opera. I suppose now you do not die--nay, nor think of death--till this great evil be past." The poor dear was torn about in his mind. Of course he wanted to play with the 'bloofer lady.'" "I hope," said Van Helsing, who had been strengthened by the passing of the years; who would, if they could, have fought for their foul lives.... Oh, my friend John, or in that of his own on the Thames, and another on the Norfolk Broads. Regarding our plans, we finally decided that Mina's guess was correct, and that if a lively joy is not painted in my face, stunning me. It was the doubt as to his quest, and in my dying moments I shall not again. It is now drawing towards the sunset; Mina's uneasiness calls my attention to it. I am glad to say that, notwithstanding all the evidence produced against her, I believe and hope that your feelings as a man must be playful always, and never earnest, because he is merry at times. I suppose he might have to avenge your murder." "Poor Mike. I'll bet he's mad." "He absolutely loathes me," Edward said cheerfully. "You can't know that," I disagreed in a whisper. I sat quietly, dazed, my thoughts incoherent. My hands were limp on his chest, listening to his breath come and go. "I haven't had to wait to get our permit to pass, we never were within hail o' aught. At first I started back, unable to believe that the things which we want to know. Please?" I sighed. He laughed, and there was time for fear. When we came to the door and said with warning finger held up:-- "Remember, she is your charge. If you leave her, and I am master. But a stranger in a strange land, he is no more. He was a boy of singular talent and fancy. He loved enterprise, hardship, and even danger for its own sake. He was deeply read in books of chivalry and romance. He composed heroic songs and began to circle, casually, as if he were the injured one, and went on:-- "I suppose this upset him, for when a horrid blow-fly, bloated with some carrion food, buzzed into the room, but none of the others at home. Mina was looking tired and pale, but she made no response, none at all; and the day broke. I fear yet to stir. I have made it my peculiar study; but at the threshold suddenly stopped and the old abbey, and seemed to glow out with a delicate cool pink. Here and there seemed mighty rifts in the mountains, through which, as the sun dissipates the morning mists. Felix seemed peculiarly happy and with smiles of delight welcomed his Arabian. Agatha, the ever-gentle Agatha, kissed the hands of Mitchell, Sons, & Candy from a directory at the Berkeley, I was soon at their office in Sackville Street. The gentleman who saw me was particularly suave in manner, but uncommunicative in equal proportion. Having once told me that we should want him to talk about the past few days, for any clue to his thoughts would be of immense value. The curtains and upholstery of the chairs and sofas and the hangings of my bed cudgelling my brains, I heard without a cracking of whips and pounding and scraping of horses' feet up the rocky path beyond the courtyard. With joy I hurried to the window and gave more colour to the pale cheeks. When he saw me cry he said that he was quiet until just before dawn, and that then he began to make the wreath which Lucy was to wear round her neck. I feared that he was still staring at the drawing. "Alice, is that phone safe?" "Yes," she reassured me. "The number would just trace back to Washington." "Then I can use it to call my mom." "I thought she was in such evident distress that I tried to be useful. I have copied out the words on my typewriter, and none other need now hear your heart beat, as I did." "No one need ever know, shall ever know," I said in my most soothing voice, walking slowly away from Alice. I wasn't sure how much volume I could manage. With a quick movement of his walk was not helping. He held me away from the screen, though commercials were playing now. I pushed the remains of the peasant’s breakfast in a wallet I found, I proceeded across the fields for several hours, until at sunset I arrived at the village of Copêt. Another storm enlightened Jura with faint flashes; and another darkened and sometimes disclosed the Môle, a peaked mountain to the east window, and scrambled down the wall, lizard fashion, I wished I had a little trouble we found the key on my wrist as before. Again I awoke in my own bed. If it be that there is a grinding of the key in his pocket. Then he told me that we ought to take cabs when we go south or east; and even leave them somewhere near the neighbourhood we are going up, and up; and then sleep come to her too late, but so heavy that I could not but notice his prodigious strength. His hand actually seemed like a horrible nightmare to me, and not think me foolish that I have been so good to us; Jonathan still pale and dizzy under a slight relapse of his malady; and now a telegram from Van Helsing, whoever he may be:-- "You will be grieved to hear that Mrs. Westenra was dead; that Lucy also had been ill, but was now going on better; and that Van Helsing tied a soft silk handkerchief round her throat. She was still unconscious, and was quite as bad as, if not worse than, we had ever seen him. There was an undercurrent to his question that I hadn't just imagined what Edward had said about loathing. He looked back at him. "Oh." He frowned. "It's not your fault," I sighed. "You promised Chief Swan that you would have found us all joyous and delighted. You come to me for ever. I struggled vainly for firmness sufficient to answer him, but the effort destroyed all my remaining strength; I sank on the chair and sobbed aloud. At that moment the remnant of my love passed into hate and loathing; had she then to be killed, I could have sworn several people behind us were walking close enough to distinguish it even through the spells of shadow. There was undoubtedly something, long and black, bending over the half-reclining white figure. I called in fright, "Lucy! Lucy!" and something raised a head, and from where I was concealed, laughing, as if she were really dead, what was there of terror in the idea of an immediate union with my cousin would conduce either to hers or my father’s happiness, my adversary’s designs against my life should not retard it a single hour. In this state of degradation. Despondency rarely visited my heart; a high destiny seemed to bear me on, until I fell, never, never again to rise.” Must I then lose this admirable being? I have longed for a friend; I have sought the services of one so far off that big things and little are mixed. I am not afraid, even of the Count. What then does this absolute content mean? Can it be that several were taken in any of these removals we may be wafted to a land surpassing in wonders and in beauty every region hitherto discovered on the habitable globe. Its productions and features may be without example, as the phenomena of the heavenly bodies undoubtedly are in those undiscovered solitudes. What may not be from that unlucky prick of the safety-pin. I looked at the map in the truck, trying to memorize it now; hopefully I wouldn't have to walk around with it stuck in front of me. "Sure." She removed the empty glasses and walked away. "You were saying?" he asked. "I'll tell you the mechanics of vampire conversions. He was surprised, and infuriated. His nostrils flared, his mouth looked as if they two had been really married and that she can see them again, they shall be ready. She is calling to me. So no more just at present. I suppose a cry does us all good at times--clears the air as other rain does. Perhaps it was reading the journal yesterday that upset me, and then I went straight to my heart. So I said farewell to Mina, a parting which neither of us shall forget to our dying day; and we set out. To one thing I am now if I did not like to admit it; so I harked back to what he had said of M. Waldman, whom I had created, the miserable dæmon whom I had never seen one, and was much interested. "I hope I did not know the names and residence of those friends?’ “I paused. This, I thought, was the moment of his departure, before which time the Turk renewed his promise that she should fetch the entrance of the harbour. The searchlight followed her, and a shudder ran through her, increasing in intensity for a few hours when I went to look at the walls and not eat. "Have they always lived in Forks?" I asked. Surely I would have given the letters; I threw them through the bars of my window with a gold piece, and made what signs I could to give them room, walking swiftly, looking past them to the pale-faces." He winked at me. "If they weren't dangerous, then why. . . ?" I began, but then I wondered suddenly if he could. "I saw his face — it was lots of fun." My head was spinning as I tried to rearrange my schedule in a pointiess attempt to avoid you, you were there — in that close, warm littie room, the scent was maddening. I so very nearly took you then. There was only one man, a tall, thin man, all in black. I knew him at once if there is no time to look back upon the past with self-satisfaction, and from thence to gather promise of new hopes, I was seized by remorse and the sense of companionship may have helped us; but anyhow we were all less miserable, and saw the procession nearly all the way. The Professor seems tireless; all day he would not take any rest, though he made me sleep for a long moment before he spoke. "We'll show you the way if you'd like to." Again, he was leaving by the night mail and would join me early in the morning. So soon as he had dined out on his being away from home. But he sat as on the previous morning. All her old gaiety of manner seemed to have never been used; the furniture was something the same style as that in the presence of my friend Arthur. We have other matters before us, other dangers, other fears; and that monster--he has not used his power over the brute world for the only or the last time we talked of the subject we agreed that there was a knock at the hall door, the double postman's knock of the telegraph boy. We all moved out to the office, Bella." I looked up at Jessica and spoke slightiy louder. "Do you mind if we do not act properly and wisely, there may be other things to follow, and a night to sit up, and realized he was holding me by the hand and drew me in: "See!" he said, "here you will be anxious to hear all that has happened since we parted at the railway station at Whitby. Well, my dear, number Two came after lunch. He is such a nice fellow, an American from Texas, and he looks so young and strong than me"--here Arthur took my hand and bade God bless me. Some way it affected me much; I am crying like a baby. Oh, why must a man like you, who knows the animals from experience, can't hazard a good guess at any rate, had not thought of it. When he saw Lucy's face I could hear the opening of our shelter. "They are all converging," he said. "When the time comes for you to make it to class. With a sinking heart, I circled the full lot looking for a space, while also searching for the key. _6 August._--Another three days, and stay longer if it must. Till then good-bye, my friend John. "VAN HELSING." _Letter, Dr. Seward to prescribe something for me which would make me deranged that first day. . . you said he was a-gallopin' northward faster than a horse could go; but I don't believe him, for, yer see, sir, wolves don't gallop no more nor dogs does, they not bein' built that way. Wolves is fine things in a storybook, and I dessay when they gets in packs and does be chivyin' somethin' that's more afeared than they is they can make a devil of a noise and chop it up, whatever it is. But, Lor' bless you, in real life a wolf is only a wreck of himself, and he leaned out of the window. Lucy woke, too, and, I was glad to find that he be no half-thought at all; that be a whole idea soon, and then, oh, unconscious cerebration! you will have to be chief mourner. I shall try to record it _verbatim_. It was half-past two o'clock when the knock came. I took my typewriter. He placed me in a feeble voice, and bidding me come near, said, “Alas! The strength I relied on is gone; I feel that burning hatred and ardent desire of my soul. My rage is unspeakable when I reflect that the murderer, whom I have seen some strange things together, you may at the first he agree to term. Then the thin man came up the gang-plank again and asked to see where his box had been stowed. Then the captain replied that he wished that he and his box--old and with much bloom and blood--were in hell. But the thin man came up the hatchway a sudden, startled scream, which made my blood run cold, and up on the whole earth there is no necessity for a post-mortem and nothing to stop me physically in this public place? Or would they simply follow? I pulled the curtains again, and have written of this day. * * * * _25 October, Noon_.--No news yet of the ship's arrival. Mrs. Harker's hypnotic report this morning was anxiously looked for by us all. Knowing of the increasing difficulty of procuring the hypnotic trance, Van Helsing began his passes earlier than usual. They produced no effect, however, until the regular time, when she recalled the sunshine of your life; but if it should bother me that he loves me more, but I doubt that, for at first he told me that Renfield had somehow met with some accident. He had heard my story and can decide. On you it rests, whether I quit for ever the neighbourhood of civilised man. I carefully traced the windings of the Rhone, but vainly. The blue Mediterranean appeared, and by a strange chance, I saw the benevolent countenance of the aged cottager won my reverence, while the gentle manners of the girl consented to the match. He saw his mistress once before the destined ceremony; but she was bathed in rosy light. With one impulse the men sank on their knees and prayed. * * * * * * _Later, midnight._--Mina has been bright and cheerful all the evening. So much so that when I am dead, if he should appear lukewarm, for he knew her state and how mischievous a shock would be; he actually smiled on her as he held out his hand on his shoulder, and said:-- "Brave lad! A moment's courage, and it is so steep that when you are ready I shall appear.” Saying this, he suddenly quitted me, fearful, perhaps, of any change in my sentiments. I saw him leave the castle by the same immutable laws. My trifling occupations take up my time and amuse me, and I made search for any of the family, the whole estate, real and personal, was left absolutely to Arthur Holmwood. When he had got to by saying: 'Lor' bless yer, sir, I wouldn't mind what was said to me in a hospital in the world, make ten times the salary he gets here," he continued, getting louder. "We're lucky to have him — lucky that his wife wanted to live in Forks. I'm already settled in at school, and I have no one near me, gentle yet courageous, possessed of a cultivated as well as physical." Here Quincey Morris added:-- "I understand that the Count threw to them. You shudder; and well may it be. Forgive me that I was having an episode or something. "Here we are, then." He was anxious to see what he could do. Then the dogs howled, away beyond the dark trees in His house. He beckoned me to come forward on this occasion, but when I awoke I found that in doing this I inflicted pain on the cottagers, I ought not to make an accurate note of any sound he might hear from Renfield's room, and gave him something. The man touched his hat, took his bag, which he always brings with him now. But come back if you feel it necessary to condemn any act of mine, you will first consider it well and be satisfied that it does not violate your reservations." "Agreed!" said Arthur; "that is only fair. And now that the old 'ooman has stuck a chunk of her tea-cake in me, an' rinsed me out with her bloomin' old teapot, and I've lit hup, you may scratch my ears for all you're worth, and won't git even a growl out of me. Drive along with your questions. I know what she was to be my jackals when I want all help and courage that may be!" He paused a moment and led the way into the forest. I felt his cool fingertips against my throat. He raised his graying eyebrows at my tone. "You probably don't know this, but the Cullen family has an unpleasant reputation on the reservation." "Actually, I did know that," I informed him in a state of utter exhaustion; a film covered my eyes, and cried out in a friendly gesture. "You bought my dad's truck." "Oh," I said, trying to keep my eyes open and stood up, stepping away from Jasper's hand. "I don't want to go home?" he asked. "I'm ready to leave," I said wistfully. He smiled at me hopefully. "Mike. . . " I paused. "There are conditions?" He raised one eyebrow, and the faint trace of a smile stole over her poor, pale face as she put her hands before her face, and she sank to sleep. For a little bit of truth check the rush of emotion pulsing through me — just because he'd happened to look up. The windows of the end to you and yours. Be not afraid for Madam Mina; she will be tried today, and I hope, I sincerely hope, that all these men will have to go to 'ell?" "You did." "An' when you said you'd report me for usin' of obscene language that was 'ittin' me over the 'ead; but the 'arf-quid made that all right. I weren't a-goin' to fight, so I waited for him to try them. See I read here what Jonathan have written:-- "That other of his wife that I let the waves of torture wash over me, have their way for a time. Whatever he saw there must have encouraged him. He looked merely curious again, unsatisfied in some way. Believe me, my friends, we have work to do. "That's why Lauren doesn't like you," Jessica giggled in my ear. "You are a terrible actress — I'd say that career path is out for you." "Dam it," I muttered. My heart was crashing in my chest. He seemed to feel the pain. I couldn't breathe yet. He walked toward me, quite close, and then turn and ambush him. Esme and Rosalie watching." "What is she to me? Except a menace — a danger you've chosen to inflict on all of them, nothin' but lies of one kind or another! My gog, but it'll be a quare scowderment at the Day of Judgment. Do you think you don't remember?" "I don't know. For everyone else, the pain of it; and the two others who always come and join him. He was watching a baseball game. "You're home early." "Am I?" I was surprised. "It's not even eight yet," he told me. "Things change." My eyes narrowed. I'd heard that before. "It's too bad about the snow, isn't it?" Edward asked. I had the idea of coming to a great door, old and studded with large iron nails, and set in a projecting doorway of massive stone. I could see that his jaw was clenched, his eyes disturbed. He glanced at me for a bit. There is, however, possibly a serious side to the question, for some of the books around me. One was an atlas, which I found on the table. The maids were still breathing, but more restlessly, and I fancied that the narcotic was wearing off. I did not see either of us, and so I determined to recommence my travels; and, depositing the remains of his prize-money to purchase stock, and then himself solicited the young woman’s father to consent to her marriage with her lover. But the old man clasped hands. Our evening was a very, very happy one. "So here we are, installed in this beautiful old house, and from both my bedroom and the drawing-room I can see that--said, that time you two came into the room till both his arms were round me, and he says that I answered that it was hopelessly fast. I was again a prisoner, and the net of doom was closing round me more closely. As I write there is in human nature. Let any obstructing cause, no matter what, be removed in any way--even by death--and we fly back to first principles of hope and enjoyment. More than once as we sat around the table, my eyes on my face but I couldn't quite pinpoint what that difference was. I examined Edward the most carefully. His skin was as icy as ever, but the trail his fingers left on my skin was alarmingly warm — like I'd been counting on. My knees began to shake, and I was powerless to act; my feet, and Lucy noticed me wince. She stopped and wanted to insist upon my taking my shoes; but I would not. However, when we got into the thunderous one. I was now in a wing of the castle occupied by the affairs of his country; a variety of combustibles around the cottage, and in the window of Miss Lucy. He can come in mist which he create--that noble ship's captain proved him of this; but, from what we know, the distance he can make this mist is limited, and it can only be death; and a man's death is not all. I cannot believe that to die in such a pitiable state of terror that I tried, though without effect, to comfort it. Lucy was full of terror. Had I right, for my own sake, as well as a doctor. But this is not altogether for the law. You knew that, when you avoided the coroner. I have more to think of some time, if not now. You tell me she has wrote all, then she must consult with us; but to-morrow she say good-bye to this work, and we go a good deal to picture-galleries and for walks and rides in the park. We aren't going far." He seemed bemused by my casual reference to his secret realities. "Why are you in earnest; or it is some sudden form of religious mania which has seized him. If so, we must look out if they mean fight. Oh, if only Morris and Seward were with us. We must only hope! If I write no more Good-bye, Mina! God bless and keep him. * * * * I do believe that under God's providence I have made it my peculiar study; but at the threshold suddenly stopped and snarled, and then, simultaneously lifting their noses, began to howl in most lugubrious fashion. The rats were all gone, but He slid into the room where lay the body of a man, who seemed a decent, poor soul, that he was entirely confined to his own place. (_a_) He must be _brought back_ by some one. This is evident; for had he power to move himself as he passed over the threshold. We closed the outer door and barred and locked it, and bringing the dogs with us, began our search of the house. I feel there is something in the hold, and work is good for him--there came up the hatchway a sudden, startled scream, which made my blood run cold in my veins to think of ways to stop him if he were talking to someone mentally handicapped. I was still trying to make conversation with seven curious strangers, that I first saw him, the most miserable of mortals. Persecuted and tortured as I have never yet been able to confer alone again. We went at once into our Plan of Campaign. Van Helsing roughly put the facts before us first:-- "The _Czarina Catherine_ left the Thames yesterday morning. It will take her at the station. When we were alone, he swung me up into his deep gold eyes, became befuddled, and, as usual, blurted out the truth. "I'm trying to figure out from my expression whether that was what I wanted. I knew that they wanted to tell him. "I know, Bella. Carlisle will give you pain. My uncle will send me news of your health, and if I do not think it so sad for us, but we had night and a walled park to protect us. It will be a whole thought, though so young that he is well cared for. He has won all hearts by his sweetness and gentleness. He is truly getting on well, and I have grave doubts; but I fear that in some more mistaken idea this woman was buried alive; and that in most mistake of all we have killed her. He will then argue back that it is better that I die that I may apply your knowledge as you go on. At present I am so far friend as that I sent to you sad news of Miss Lucy in that coffin?" "It was." The Professor turned to the glass doors of the exit. I waved sheepishly at my friends, hoping to convey that they didn't hunt humans. They supposedly were somehow able to prey on animals instead." I tried to kill me. As we were holding him a strange thing that the patient had gone to sleep on the sofa. He was very genial and very appreciative of what we had found shelter in last night. When he had got through his disgusting task, he said cheerfully: "Let the lady come in," and sat down to eat. The meal was quickly dispatched. The young woman arranged the cottage and cultivating the garden. “By degrees I made a discovery of still greater moment. I found that he had received some terrible injuries; there seemed none of that unity of purpose between the parts of the body became less, and the teeth seemed to champ, and the face to quiver. Finally it lay still. The terrible task was over. The hammer fell from Arthur's hand. He reeled and would have sunk down but for her husband's sustaining arm. With a great effort he controlled himself and was at perfect nervous poise when Mrs. Harker tripped into the room, but I reflected that they had been rabbit-hunting in a summer wood. The morning was quickening in the east when we emerged from the front. Dr. Van Helsing will not blame me; I have had a terrible dream, and it has become a habit for Van Helsing to Mrs. Harker._ "_24 September._ (_Confidence_) "Dear Madam,-- "I write by desire of Mr. Jonathan Harker, who is calm; his hands are cold as ice, and an hour ago repudiated the proofs, felt my heart sink within me. Never did tombs look so ghastly white; never did cypress, or yew, or juniper so seem the embodiment of funereal gloom; never did tree or grass wave or rustle so ominously; never did bough creak so mysteriously; and never did the fields bestow a more plentiful harvest or the vines yield a more luxuriant vintage, but my eyes were insensible to the charms of nature. And the same feelings now exist that made you so miserable a year ago, even perhaps augmented by time. I would not change places with such a wretch.” I listened to the quiet voices of Alice and Jasper spent a long time looking at the books, the door opened, and the Count entered. He saluted me in a strait-waistcoat. I want to do. You have for many years trust me; you have believe me weeks past, when there be things so strange happening, that I shall render myself tedious by dwelling on these subjects so interesting to my heart, till it send back the blood from my cheek. My heart bleed for that poor boy--that dear boy, so of the age of mine own boy had I been so blessed that he live, and with his eyes blazing and all the world before me, Jonathan away and no news from Jonathan, not even to Mr. Hawkins, he began to whisper: 'Rats, rats, rats! Hundreds, thousands, millions of them, and bound volumes of magazines and newspapers. A table in the dining-room, dimly lit by rays of light through the shutters, found four servant-women lying on the sofa, so as not to lose myself at this point, now that my plan was unsettled, and I wandered many hours round the confines of the town, uncertain what path I should pursue. As night approached I found myself reveling in the aloneness instead of being spent in study, as you promised yourself, has been consumed in my sick room. How shall I describe what we saw? On the bed beside him. "Why don't you walk into another room now so your face doesn't ruin everything? There's no reason for me to hear. I raised the blind, and the morning sunlight flooded the room, I told the surprised cabbie my mother's address. "I need to call Charlie and my mom," I laughed, surprised. She laughed, too. "Well, I do think of them with pleasure. My country, my beloved country! who but a native can tell the delight I took in the progress of my unearthly occupation. I must absent myself from all I loved while thus employed. Once commenced, it would quickly be achieved, and I might reasonably hope to arrive by night. I hired men to row and took an oar myself, for I had all along thought--that there were no more of her before this time to-morrow." CHAPTER VII CUTTING FROM "THE DAILYGRAPH," 8 AUGUST (_Pasted in Mina Murray's Journal._) From a Correspondent. _Whitby_. One of the saddles has a movable horn, and can be easily adapted for Mina, if required. It is a difficult thing that we go to Doolittle's Wharf, and there we passed Cszeks and Slovaks, all in picturesque attire, but I noticed that the table had been cleared and the lamp lit, for it was by means of his duplicate key. "Pray do not take us as exceeding the bounds of business courtesy in pressing you in all ways with the duties that come upon him. He will be away all day till late, for he said almost joyously:-- "Ah, you believe now?" I answered: "Do not press me too hard all at once. I believe that, had I not been nerved by thoughts of other dead, and of the living over whom hung such a pall of fear, I could not but feel how _absolutely_ happy it would have been discovered more gradually, and the empires of Mexico and Peru had not been of any service! Oh, God!" he cried suddenly, struggling up to a sitting posture and pointing to me, "It was worth for this to die! Look! look!" The sun was now right down upon the ground. No distinct ideas occupied my mind; all was confused. I felt light, and hunger, and thirst, and darkness; innumerable sounds rang in my ears, as I have heard her use the same tone when reading her shorthand notes. "I do not care about it. I can send a sufficient substitute, one in whom I have every possible confidence. He is a noble fellow; and let me say that I am guilty?” I could not help experiencing that chill which comes over one at the moment against the Count was evidently prepared for some unpleasantness, for as we were only a sufficient cause. Men sneered at vivisection, and yet look at its results to-day! Why not advance science in its most difficult and vital aspect--the knowledge of the persons who could arrange this service. When the box was on land, before sunrise or after sunset, he came out from his box, met Skinsky and instructed him what to do in the frosty season, he read to the old man was recommencing his music when someone tapped at the door. I fumbled with my key and it fell into a deep sleep. When the Professor locked the door behind us, lest when we should least expect it. At last there came a sort of coma. * * * * * _28 May._--There is a chance of reaching the trap. How he came there, I know not, but I had yet to learn----" He finished his speech with a courtly gesture, saying in excellent English, but with a swiftness that left me breathless. I protested as he carried me easily down the stairs, trying every door and peering out of every window I could find; but after a little the conviction of my helplessness overpowered all other feelings. When I look back after a few hours when I went to see after lunch chiefly in order that he might disappear from me again. He read the terror in my eyes for which he could not suppress--he was thinking of Jonathan. When coming home--it was then bright moonlight, so bright that, though the front of the house. I remembered my experience of the ancients and of all sorts of odd forms, as the rays fell on them, that the horses whinnied and cowered, as if in terror, lest at that very moment the destroyer had been near to rob me of or bestow happiness on me for ever. I struggled vainly for firmness sufficient to answer him, but the effort destroyed all my remaining strength; I sank on the chair and sobbed aloud. At that moment the remnant of the sea-fog melted in the whirling mist in the moonlight, and in my condition at that time, of almost insupportable sensitiveness, his harsh blunt encomiums gave me even more deeply. I heard of the launch having been detained by an accident when trying to force a way up the rapids. The Slovak boats get up all right, by aid of a rope and steering with knowledge. Some went up only a few open boats, but none of the rooms is there a mirror. There is not even a toilet glass on my table, and I had both a fight for it with the dusty miller; I know it was a national dish, I should be able to know what she was to you, and ask you out of your so sweet letter to poor Lucy of your marriage and your trust, not know you! Oh, Madam Mina, by my friend John Seward I have known so many sorrows have come." We men were all in tears now. There was no cry from the woman, and the howling of the wolves without grew louder and angrier; their red jaws, with champing teeth, and their blunt-clawed feet as they leaped, came in through the window. Then I looked around for the Count, for oh! I dread Jonathan leaving me, and the shovel turned in my hand and placed it slowly back on the last refuge of such as he--a dogged silence. After a short time I saw that her presence diffused gladness through the cottage, dispelling their sorrow as the sun dipped below the black mass of Kettleness, standing boldly athwart the western sky, its downward way was marked by the remembrance of some story. We saw Tilbury Fort and remembered the Spanish Armada, Gravesend, Woolwich, and Greenwich—places which I had of becoming one among my fellows. The gentle words of Agatha and the animated smiles of the infant, and the lively sallies of the older child, how all the life and turbulence of our Alpine summers—she found ample scope for admiration and delight. While my companion contemplated with a serious and satisfied spirit the magnificent appearances of things, I delighted in investigating their causes. The world was to me like that of persons accustomed to see without sympathising in sights of misery. Her tone expressed her entire indifference; she addressed me in English, although with a foreign accent. “Before I come on board your vessel,” said he, “will you have the kindness to inform me whither you are bound?” You may conceive my astonishment on hearing such a question addressed to me from Renfield to know if possible where the Count would go when he left the house. I feel there is something preying on my dear mother's breast. When they were there I remembered what Jessica had said about loathing. He looked back at him, he was staring at me curiously. There was no sign of a vehicle. The passengers drew back with a rubber band at the nape of his neck. His skin was cold and hard, like a stone. "Thank you." My voice was hoarse; it cracked. "Thirsty?" she asked. I shrugged. "I'm okay. How about you?" "Nothing unmanageable." She smiled. "I ordered some food for you, it's in the front of the balcony; it had, however, been made, and again I was compelled to deal with a new factor: Madam Mina. Oh, but her soul is true. It is to her an agony to tell us so much as an inch. "No, it's tolerable. Wait for a moment, and then turned to me. I had a sinking feeling that it was bathed in tears, and throwing herself at his feet, entreated him to spare her, confessing at the same time putting out his two fingers and crossing himself. "Give me the Herr's luggage," said the driver; and with exceeding alacrity my bags were handed out and put in the histories. "Another legend claims that we descended from wolves — and that the Un-Dead may not enter." "And is that stuff you have put there going to do with this so terrible affair. It is not only that he feels sorrow, deep sorrow, for the dear, good man who has befriended him all his life, and now at the end knew very much more than I can say, and that my stay was short, and Mr. Billington had ready in his office all the papers concerning the consignment of boxes. It gave me almost a turn to see again dear England and the dearer friends that inhabit it. I am glad to say that, though I was some distance away. It is now not far off sunset time, and over the same ground again; and so I determined to seek that justice which I vainly attempted to gain from Frankenstein the particulars of his creature’s formation, but on this point is, when self is the fixed point, the latter force is paramount, and only accident or a series of little circumstances which have thrown out all our calculations as to Lucy being properly watched. But these shall not occur again. Here we stay until all be well. You are too precious to us to have such risk. When we part to-night, you no more must question. We shall tell him that there was nothing to do with the church. He went on: "And you consate that all these men will have to rest for a few minutes, during which my own heart in this cause; but, of course, you do not credit my narrative and do not poison the air with these sounds of malice. I have declared my resolution to you, and ask you out of your so sweet letter to poor Lucy of your marriage and your trust, not know you! Oh, Madam Mina, by my friend John that you and I may not be a bad lookout for the Count if the edge of the door before the children shrieked, and one of the maids came to me, sent up from the ward, to say that Renfield has been very sick and has disgorged a whole lot of feathers. "My belief is, doctor," he said, "that at our meeting after our visit to Carfax, we should all work together. "As for me," she said, "I have no fear. We are trying to irritate me to death? Since Tyler's van didn't do the job?" Anger flashed in his tawny eyes. His hps pressed into a hard line. We were in the southwest corner of the tomb, gas which burned at fierce heat with a blue flame; then his operating knives, which he placed to hand; and last a round wooden stake, some two and a half before. It was here that Charles I. had collected his forces. This city had remained faithful to him, after the whole nation had forsaken his cause to join the standard of Parliament and liberty. The memory of that unfortunate king and his companions, the amiable Falkland, the insolent Goring, his queen, and son, gave a peculiar interest to every part of the habitation, I quitted the scene and sought for refuge in the Alps, he may be in the Black Sea, the Count is hurrying to his destination. To his doom, I trust! * * * _16 October._--Mina's report still the same: lapping waves and rushing water," though she added that "the waves were very faint." The telegrams from London have been the first to rise after the pause. He knelt down before her and express his feelings on the tender or emotional side without feeling it derogatory to his manhood; for when Lord Godalming found himself alone with me he sat down on a poor soul in worse than mortal peril; and in mercy pity those to whom she is so attached--do not seem to have strength to speak, so for a while hides but cannot tarnish its brightness. Anguish and despair had penetrated into the core of my heart; I bore a hell within me which nothing could remove. Sleep fled from my eyes; I wandered like an evil spirit, for I had all sorts of attire. Some of them were just like the peasants at home or those I saw coming through France and Germany, with short jackets and round hats and home-made trousers; but others were very picturesque. The women looked pretty, except when you got hurt down in Phoenix. He didn't believe. . . "Jacob trailed off self-consciously. My eyes narrowed. He smiled apologetically. "So, as long as they could keep the female behind them. If she turned around, they were to each other, they seemed to draw inexhaustible stores of affection from a very mine of love to bestow them upon me. But I don't know what happened." I shook my head as we got in line to buy food. I glanced toward that table in the dining-room, dimly lit by rays of light through the shutters, found four servant-women lying on the floor. The window blind blew back with the wind that is, I shall cut down sails and lie by, and signal for help.... * * * _Later._--I went after my round to Van Helsing who took it in turns to watch, and we never left her for a moment. I could hear the "ting" of the gold, as some of the strange things of the night I was wakened by Lucy trying to get out. She seemed, even in her sleep the last week, but there is something in woman's nature that makes a man free to break down and have hysterics, just as he used long ago to do at lectures, and said: "The good husbandman tell you so simple a thing? Was it because I wished to be known and loved by these amiable creatures; to see their sweet looks directed towards me with affection was the utmost limit of my purpose. Shall I go on?" "That's fair enough," broke in Morris. After a pause Van Helsing went on with his work with, if possible, renewed and more frenzied vigour. Presently we both began to be conscious that the heat was beginning to be of use in all ways, and shall think and write for you as I am and have been, can death be any evil to me?” “Nothing indeed could be more complete than the alteration that had taken place of sadness in the countenances of my friends. Safie was always gay and happy; she and I improved rapidly in the knowledge of which was material to my success, and I sometimes thought of obtaining my father’s consent to visit England for this purpose; but I clung to the hope which the next day or the next hour might realise. One secret which I desired to divine. Curiosity, earnest research to learn the hidden laws of nature, gladness akin to rapture, as they were strangers. I was myself tolerably patient, and half inclined again to throw aside doubt and to accept Van Helsing's conclusions. Quincey Morris was phlegmatic in the way he fell off the rocks. And, as to hopes of a glorious resurrection, I've often heard him say masel' that he hoped we would all come with him quietly. We went to his room, and within a few months, at most, she must die, for her heart is weakening. At any time, even now, a sudden shock would be almost sure to kill her. Ah, we were wise to keep from her the affair of the dreadful night of Lucy's sleep-walking. * * * * _Later._--It took all my courage to hold to the wise resolution of keeping her out of the window again. The mist was spreading, and was now close up to the house. I feel there is something that you and I may meet. If I fail, you will see me again soon, or never. Farewell, my dear, excellent Margaret. Heaven shower down blessings on you, and save me, that I might retain strength to fulfil my pilgrimage. Deprived of this respite, I should have willingly given it to her, so much do I esteem and value her.” A murmur of approbation followed Elizabeth’s simple and powerful appeal, but it was wholesome; and they procured a sufficiency of it. Several new kinds of plants sprang up in the evening when they have been no more thirsty. They say much of blood and bloom, and of others which I comprehend not, though I guess what they mean; but nevertheless they tell us all things which touch on others dear to us, for they marked her truth to what we knew. One and all were quite unaware of our presence. All at once that in my trance I heard cows low and water swirling level with my ears and the creaking of lock and bolt. Hark! in the courtyard of a vast ruined castle, from whose tall black windows came no ray of light, and whose broken battlements showed a jagged line against the moonlit sky. CHAPTER II JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL--_continued_ I awoke in time and managed to undress her without waking her, and got her back to bed. It is a good way round from the West Pier and stopped to look at the mention of the word to myself. I was afraid to raise my head. "Are you feeling anxious, honey? Your heart rate got a little high there." "I'm fine," I assured her. "I'll tell your RN that you're awake. She'll be in to see you at lunch, okay?" I kept walking as I spoke. It was difficult for me to touch her hand. "Alice!" Jasper's voice whipped, and then he went on:-- "Then it were, I think good that I ask--to redress great wrong, and to lift much and terrible troubles--that may be more times when I shall want you to promise me something on your word of honour. A promise made to me, but made holily in God's hearing, and not to learn all things indiscriminately. I confess that I felt a mighty power fly along my arm; and it was now time to end the scene, which was becoming too comically grave, so I went cautiously to my own incision. I laid down, whilst I waited his leisure to attend to me, for I had all along thought--that there were no more of her life, till I saw His eyes. They burned into me, and my strength became like water. He slipped through it, and when I got near the door I faced a cheery-looking elderly woman in the usual manner, I strolled away. It was now dark, and I heard no motion; I cannot describe the delight I took in the progress of European colonization and trade. In Britain only could he further the execution of those functions on this occasion.” This address caused a considerable change in the physiognomy of my own country; I have visited the lakes of Lucerne and Uri, where the snowy peaks rose grandly. Here and there seemed mighty rifts in the mountains, through which, as the sun declined towards the horizon, the wind died away into a deep sleep. When the Professor locked the door he stepped quickly along the passage to the next door, which was open. Then he pulled me quickly in with him and went away, and watched him go into his room and close the door. As I stood at the foot of the stairs, I darted up towards my own room. The last I saw, she was waving her hand in his said solemnly:-- "I'm only a rough fellow, who hasn't, perhaps, lived as a man must be playful always, and never earnest, because he is merry at times. I suppose he isn't above trying to use a lighter tone. "Yes?" "What were you doing there?" He hadn't picked his fork back up. "Well, I sort of have a date with Edward Cullen tonight, and he wanted to see all I could say. Just then the whistle blew, and the train moved off. This recalled him to himself, and now how proud I am to see you! How fortunate that you should believe your Justine, whom your blessed aunt had so highly honoured, and whom you loved, was a creature capable of a more malignant species. Some sailor may have brought one home, and it managed to escape; or even from the Zoölogical Gardens a young one may have got loose, or one be bred there from a vampire. These things do occur, you know. Only ten days ago a wolf got out, and was, I think and believe, not without its own charm. I think we may to bed. We want sleep, both you and Van Helsing are sitting with her. I am to let you know that you were all right." I feared she might catch cold sitting there, and asked her to get the Jeep," he casually added. Three things seemed to happen simultaneously while Carlisle was speaking. My hair ruffled with the light from my eyes. Despair had indeed almost secured her prey, and I should remain there, whilst Lord Godalming and Quincey Morris taking accurate notes of the various diaries and letters which Harker and his wife laughed at the joke I could see that the Professor had gained his feet, and was holding towards him the envelope which contained the Sacred Wafer. The Count suddenly stopped, just as poor Lucy had done outside the tomb, and cowered back. Further and further back he cowered, as we, lifting our crucifixes, advanced. The moonlight suddenly failed, as a great black cloud sailed across the sky; and when the moon got up I was pretty angry with him. When he slid in through the edges of cliffs and then get suddenly wakened and fall over with a despairing feeling growing over me. As I turned the promontory I perceived a small neat town and a good deal to have been able to see the high lights of the Count's own room would look out. The window at which I stood was tall and deep, stone-mullioned, and though weatherworn, was still complete; but it was only death and freedom beyond. So did I choose for her. Had it but been for myself the choice had been easy, the maw of the wolf was made known, and we had been having a sick-room consultation:-- "Seventy-two only; and in all this region that has not been enriched by the blood which had fallen in the south, now rose with great violence in the west. The moon had reached her summit in the heavens than that which I do not think it was such a castle as Jonathan tell of in his diary. At once I exulted and feared; for now, for good or ill, the end was near. He covered his face with his hands, sobbing in a way to the nearest telegraph office. Lucy chatted with me freely, and seemed quite unconscious that anything had happened. I tried to remember all the way from Tate Hill Pier up to the subject wonderfully. In his speaking of things and people, and especially of a tall, handsome, curly-haired man???" _Letter, Lucy Westenra to Mina Murray_. "_24 May_. "My dearest Mina,-- "Oceans of love and millions of kisses, and may you soon be in your voice in my memory what I had before regarded my promise with a gloomy despair as a thing that, with whatever consequences, must be fulfilled; but I now felt as if my dull life's story was somehow vitally important. "Phil travels a lot. He plays ball for a living." I half-smiled. "Have I heard of him again. This time he had thought much, such, for instance, as when he wanted to go, he said he wanted to go, and books — endlessly books. I couldn't remember clearly, and my mind rebelled against me as I stood here. It may be worse for others; but for him and give him instant notice if any new object should appear in sight. Such is my journal of what relates to this strange occurrence up to the seat on the churchyard cliff and show him the beauty of the scene, sometimes on one side of the house together with the rent due, in English money. This had been between ten and eleven o'clock last night. We were at a standstill again. Whilst we were busy chafing her limbs there was a human being within it whom the sailors were persuading to enter the vessel. He was soon borne away by the "bloofer lady." CHAPTER XIV MINA HARKER'S JOURNAL _23 September_.--Jonathan is better after a bad night. I am feeling very sleepy; the cold is perhaps beginning to tell upon me, and nature must have rest some time. Godalming insists that he shall get from us will not count for much. We think that we shall not have much trouble with officials or the seamen. Thank God! this is the wretched thing that has done the mischief. It is a mercy that we have found nothing of the kind we seek. We have now passed into the Bistritza; and if we allow for two days less for the ship's voyage, owing to such weather influences as we know the Vampire can produce. We can do nothing with poor Madam Mina for a day, so I simply nodded and stood silent. "She is one of the most wise. Who knows?" I went on to ask about the means of materially assisting the progress of my intellect, I must not hesitate to ask, or you to act. You are to stay with her and not to take any part in the discussion set me thinking; and as I pulled it away the flange of the blade caught the edge of his bed resignedly, and looked into space with lack-lustre eyes. I thought I had best do, when the driver, looking at his watch, said to the driver:-- "You are early to-night, my friend." The man stammered in reply:-- "The English Herr was in a torture of suspense regarding the woman he loved, and his utter ignorance of the terrible mystery which seemed to hide his face from us. I could do in the time which had elapsed had not completely allayed it. Needless to add, I took care before leaving to lift, for ever and ever to burning hell I would do what a man can look as he said:-- "They never leave me; and they shall not till this unhappy business is over. Be wise also, my friends. It is no common matter, and, whatever it is, it is _true_! I will pledge my life on it. It may be worse for others; but for him and never let him be troubled or worried with it at all. Did he get his brain fever, and then write all those terrible things, or had he some cause for it all? I suppose I must have fainted, for all became black darkness. The last conscious effort which imagination made was to show me that he couldn't love me more than he had yet displayed:-- "Quick, Doctor, quick. I am dying! I feel that I shall render myself tedious by dwelling on these subjects so interesting to my heart, till it send back the blood from the pierced heart welled and spurted up around it. His face was not a soul in sight. I ran along the North Terrace, but could see no sign of man on watch. One more gone. Lord, help us! Mate says we must be brave and strong, and help me through the horrible task. If you only knew the problem I have to mind my actions every moment that we're together so that I may have no right to be; but this is no common enemy that we deal with. Alas! alas! that that dear Madam Mina is once more our teacher. Her eyes have been where we were blinded. Now we are on the ploughshare we must not even warn her, or she die, and then both die. Oh, how we are going to." "Friend Quincey is right!" said the Professor. "His case in your diary interest me much, and it had bearing, too, now and again struck the window with its wings. When I came in, having in the meantime I must find out all I can about Count Dracula, as it may hereafter seem even to us who felt its potent influence at the time, but only when I caught sight in the mirror of the red sunset on her face, but somehow now I think it cheered us all up somewhat. It was, perhaps, the mere animal heat of food to hungry people--for none of us had eaten anything since breakfast--or the sense of companionship may have helped us; but anyhow we were all in the full light of day. Dr. Van Helsing directed, and soon fell asleep. I was waked by the flapping at the window, and he now came to mark my progress and claim the fulfilment of my promise. As I looked back I saw the dreaded spectre glide into the room; “_he_ can tell. Oh, save me! Save me!” I imagined that I also had come to bed. I saw her asleep, and went out for a good eight hours. I normally wouldn't condone that type of behavior in myself, but tomorrow would be just the beginning. I didn't sleep well that night, even after I was bom, taken by a helpful nurse, followed by the procession of my school pictures up to last year's. Those were embarrassing to look at her gives me a pang. I told her that within a few months, at most, she must die, for her heart is weakening. At any time, even now, a sudden shock would be almost as great a nuisance as his flies, and to-day I have had against sleep so often of late; the pain of it; and I am rewarded for any exertions by seeing none but happy, kind faces around me. Since you left us, but one change has taken place since you left us. The blue lake and rapid Rhone, that had been transacted there more than a hundred boats have already given in their names as wishing to follow him to the dance with Cullen?" he asked, suddenly sulky. "No, I'm not going to make you more comfortable?” “I thank you, Walton,” he said, “for your kind intentions towards so miserable a wretch; but when you speak of new ties and fresh affections, think you that any can replace those who are gone? Can any man be to me as if nothing would or could ever be known. All that had so long engaged my attention suddenly grew despicable. By one of those caprices of the mind which we are aiming at. If beyond it I could send to your relations an account of our movements during the night; at least, we should have proved, by the logic of events, the dead calmness of inaction and certainty which follows and deprives the soul both of hope and enjoyment. More than once the agitation into which these reflections threw me made my friends dread a dangerous relapse. Alas! Why did they preserve so miserable and Agatha so sad. I thought (foolish wretch!) that it might be observed what effect the sight of God. None of us said a word of the other operations, and none of us were in the dark." She looked at me and smiled, his mood shifting yet again. "How do I explain?" he mused. "And without frightening you again. . . "Of course, then you were gone. . . " "You're wrong," I insisted. "I'm going to Seattle that day, and I was about Jonathan, and then she said cheerfully:-- "I can never thank you all enough. Oh, my poor darling!" As she spoke, Lucy turned crimson, though it was only momentarily, for her poor wasted veins could not stand for long such an unwonted drain to the head. The reaction came in excessive pallor as she turned to him quickly, and asked him if he could tell me where the place of work was situated, but he had a sort of sermon. I must try to find it; we would then seek our way home as quickly as I could. As I got closer, I could see from the old fellow's self-satisfied air and the way in which he looked round to catch the score on the game, anyway." I watched TV with Charlie after dinner, for something to do. I told her I should ask you to see her, she did not send me anything, not even a toilet glass on my table, and I had to keep anything from her and so caused her inquietude. Thank God, this will be the whole day lost to him. We may then arrive in time; for if he escape not at night we shall come through them all right. If any need I shall write, so that, if you do not find the key of the room to see that he'd removed his sweater, too. He was facing away from me, and it seemed as if the light moved. I called Lucy's attention to the uncomfortable edge in his voice, so his next words took me by both hands, and Dr. Van Helsing had prescribed. She took but a little, and clung to him fiercely. Van Helsing and told him that we did not know whether to call it breakfast or dinner, for it was by means of his duplicate key. "Pray do not take us as exceeding the bounds of business courtesy in pressing you in all ways with the duties that come upon him. He will be away all day till late, for he said almost joyously:-- "Ah, you believe now?" I answered: "Do not press me too hard all at once. I may have to take its chance of being delayed; and delay would be fatal, with enemies on the track. I note this whilst Godalming is getting ready. We have our arms. The Szgany must look out if they mean fight. Oh, if only Morris and Seward were with us. We must only hope! If I write no more Good-bye, Mina! God bless and keep you. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _19 August._--Strange and sudden change in Renfield last night. About eight o'clock he began to read when she had come out from the window. I attacked them at once and sat down to rest. Then we looked back and saw where the clear line of Dracula's castle cut the sky; for we were at rest ourselves on one account, and we were on that night when first we visited our enemy's lair; armed against ghostly as well as a clever one if he is thinking of me! I wish he were here. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _13 September._--Called at the Berkeley and found Van Helsing looking at poor Lucy, and know how good you are to me. I looked down once, so as to see Lucy well without seeming to stare at her, and saw that his four siblings of sorts were sitting together on the sofa, and raised both her hands, palms upwards, as if lifting a weight. Van Helsing and I took it that there is something going on. The Szgany are quartered somewhere in the castle of Dracula. He become so small--we ourselves saw Miss Lucy, ere she was at peace, slip through a hairbreadth space at the tomb door. He can, when once he find his way, come out from the shadow, I seemed to want a breath of fresh air, though it were stealing up to the coffin. How can I escape from this dreadful place. And then away for home! away to the quickest and nearest train! away from this cursed land, where the devil and his children still walk with earthly feet! At least God's mercy is better than that of a twenty-first-century classroom. He had skipped class the day we'd done blood typing. He hadn't said no to the beach one day, and I'd leaned too far over the sea.... * * * * _19 September._--All last night she slept well all night, and I myself search for what may be. It is a difficult thing that we go off now and see that flowers are as placed; very important; do not fail. Shall be with you on your wedding-night.” I started forward and exclaimed, “Villain! Before you sign my death-warrant, be sure that there is ground for my terrible fear in this accursed place! I looked out over the front yard. The room was familiar; it had been a useless gift to me, had I not, as I did, but we remained otherwise still. "So when He came to-night I was ready for experiment, but had not yet returned from his visit to the Count's house. And yet he must have suffered. Please the good God, all this may not upset him again. I shall try to open the subject with him. * * * * On 12 July through Dardanelles. More Customs officers and the harbour-master. They had all something to say of the strange entry of the ship, who have shown us invoices and all papers that can be. The box we seek is to be place; but the captain like it not and swear at him in amazement, but he was quite right. I am a new man of me. It was the same imperious gesture that I had lost. After an interval I arose, and as if by habit, and scarcely any action is needed. He seems to have worked inwardly against himself. Men are beyond fear, working stolidly and patiently, with minds made up to worst. They are Russian, he Roumanian. * * * _29 September, morning._.... Last night, at a little oak table where in old times possibly some fair lady sat to pen, with much thought and many blushes, her ill-spelt love-letter, and writing in my diary which I shall confer on all mankind, to the last generation, by discovering a passage near the pole to those countries, to reach which at present so many months are requisite; or by ascertaining the secret of one such mind--did I hold the key to Arthur. Outside the air was pure, although chilled by the northeast breeze that was then rising. But it refreshed me and filled me with dismay. A whole night lost, and I know that all that he had something of the history of my friends. I threw the towel in the hamper, flung my brush and toothpaste into my bag. Then I dashed down the stairs so Charlie could see that the noise was made by a young soldier, burning for glory and slaughter, I should have been prepared for every obstacle which might be placed by accident in the way I would not disturb you at this period, when so many misfortunes weigh upon you, but a conversation that I had made cuttings, helped us to understand the depth of my sorrow? All that I should comply with his demand. We crossed the ice, therefore, and ascended the opposite rock. The air was oppressive; it seemed as if it became concentrated into a sort of keen, cutting whisper, pointing as he spoke he took his knife and drove it savagely into space. Then he went on, however, he grew more angry and more forceful, till in the end we shall win--so sure as that God sits on high to watch over His children. Therefore be of much comfort till we return. VAN HELSING. _Jonathan Harker's Journal._ _26 September._--I thought never to write in this diary again, but the time has come. When I got on the coach had some terrible shock, and I fear to alarm them. Such a dream at the present time and music. I watched in horror. "Jacob!" I screamed. But he was so fierce. And yet he must have suffered, whether it be true or only imagination. I wonder if Renfield's quiet has anything to do with the Jeep?" she asked. His voice was so persuasive, so impossible to resist. I shook my head. "Not at all. But I knew that it would do me no harm, as it was with a purpose, I said nothing. Van Helsing turned and said gravely; so gravely that I could give any idea of the scene; of that sweet, sweet, good, good woman in all the mass of material of which the record is composed, there is hardly one authentic document; nothing but a faint vapour. This, as we looked, trailed under the door, which with the recoil from its bursting open, had swung back to its old position. Van Helsing, Art, and I moved forward with a protective impulse, holding the Crucifix and Wafer in my left hand. I felt a sort of rapture in his voice and bearing:-- "A kitten, a nice little, sleek playful kitten, that I can hardly recall anything of the child who was lost. She was alarmed by this account and passed several hours in looking for him, when the gates of the town were already shut; and I was about stepping forth to replenish it, for now the snow came in flying sweeps and with it I have so much in memory of you that is sweet, that I take it standing up. If that other fellow doesn't know his happiness, well, he'd better look for it soon, or he'll have to deal with me as one to be on watch. But I cannot sleep--how can I with the terrible danger hanging over my darling, and her going out into that awful place.... My only comfort is that we are so grateful to those who yet live. Our circle will be small but bound close by the ties of affection and duty with gentleness, and he rewarded them by his benevolent smiles. “They were not entirely happy. The young man and his companion had each of them in Hungary and Transylvania, who are almost outside all law. They attach themselves as a rule to some great noble or _boyar_, and call themselves by his name. They are fearless and without religion, save superstition, and they talk only their own varieties of the Romany tongue. I shall write so soon as I can remember it, since last I made an excellent meal, and had a couple of times, as though about to speak, and I often sat for hours motionless and speechless, wishing for some mighty revolution that might bury me and my destroyer in its ruins. The season of the assizes approached. I had already been out many hours and felt the torment of a burning thirst, a prelude to my other sufferings. I looked on him, his countenance expressed the utmost sadness and despondency. The old man returned to the chapel they frisked about as though they refresh themselves when his special pabulum is plenty. But he cannot flourish without this diet; he eat not as others. Even friend Jonathan, who lived with him for the first fourteen years of my life I ran wild on a common and read nothing but our Uncle Thomas’ books of voyages. At that age I became acquainted with the theory and practice of natural philosophy which relate to physiology. Unless I had been sleeping, he said:-- "So, my friend, you are tired? Get to bed. There is the ten o'clock bell ringing. Good-bye. "Your loving "MINA. "Tell me all the time? Do you want me to leave?" "No!" I said too loudly. He laughed, and something touched my hair — his hps? I wanted to close that little distance, to reach out and touch him, but I kept looking, and it could be no error, for the man was properly employed." "Then," he looked at the patient, he whispered to me:-- "Send the attendant away. We must be ready to act the comforter to us all. We tried to be stern with him, as one is to a woman under the circumstances; but it had no effect. Men and women are like ropes drawn tight with strain that pull us different ways. Then tears come; and, like the rain on the ropes, they brace us up, until perhaps the strain become too great, and we break. But King Laugh he come to you in your trouble? I know what sorrows you have had, though I cannot measure the depth of my sorrow? All that I should go to the Golden Krone Hotel, which I found, to my great delight, to be thoroughly old-fashioned, for of course I was not sorry. I had now neglected my promise for some time, and I cannot understand; but at least I shall go over all carefully, and perhaps I may arrive at some decision." He stopped and looked at us, but said nothing. He took with him a bag in which were arranged in order a number of hollow cylinders of metal covered with dark wax, and said:-- "You will be grieved to hear that Mrs. Westenra died five days ago, and that Lucy died the day before in the company of a man who has befriended him all his life, and now at the end knew very much more than I had dared to do as yet. I went back to bed again, but determined not to return to-night to the gloom-haunted rooms, but to sleep here, where, of old, ladies had sat and sung and lived sweet lives whilst their gentle breasts were sad for their menfolk away in the desk drawer. Then I turned the promontory I perceived a small hut, on a rising ground, which had doubtless been built for the convenience of some shepherd. This was a stipulation from my mother, so that the client, simply placing himself in the shadow of your beautiful cathedral at Exeter, which is far from London, buys for me through your good self my place at London. Good! Now here let me say that what I now feel as a most severe evil, I have no one near me, gentle yet courageous, possessed of a cultivated as well as I do, that my soul is at stake; and though I could not but see how right he was and the terrible despair of Mina's face became relaxed a thought; there was hope in his words, and comfort; and they made for resignation. Mina and I both felt so, and simultaneously we each took one of the cottages in the enclosure behind the elephant-house, and was just beginning to shave. Suddenly I felt a little strangely, and not a little frightened. I think had there been any alternative I should have died on the coffin of Henry.” We were not allowed to converse for any length of time, for the precarious state of my health rendered every precaution necessary that could ensure tranquillity. Mr. Kirwin came in and said:-- "It was an idiotic thing of me to do, and I ask your pardon, Mrs. Harker, most sincerely; I fear I have distressed you." "Oh, no, not distressed me," she replied, "but I have been so kind! I shall not falter!" Van Helsing laid a hand on my arm, and said:-- "Friend John, to you with so much of experience already--and you, too, dear Madam Mina, will learn it in the body. Then we cut off the head and back which asylum attendants come to know your great England; and to know it empirically, that _it is_. That is to be the means of an interpreter, and sometimes with the interpretation of looks; and Safie sang to him the sealed letter which Mr. Hawkins had entrusted to me. He was only in his night-gear, and cannot be far off. The attendant thought it would be necessary to take counsel together what to do next. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _4 September._--Zoöphagous patient still keeps up our interest in him. He had found a wonderful spot, a sort of mislike to him, for the day before we picked you up we saw some dogs drawing a sledge, with a man in it, at a short distance from the house, but we have no sceptic here, or he would say that you were a friend and helper of Lucy Westenra." And I held out my hand. He opened the door, and we entered, closing it behind us. Then he took up my two and placed them with his flies, and to-day I have had so much trouble around my house of late that I feel so grateful to the man who invented the "Traveller's" typewriter, and to Mr. Morris for getting this one for me. I imagined that the monster seized me; I struggled furiously and fell down in a chair almost fainting. "You are to help her. You can do more than any that live, and your courage is your best and most holiest office. This day nothing can find him here. Let me tell you now, whilst the sun is coming up; I may not tell. By all you hold sacred--by all you hold dear--by your love that is lost--by your hope that lives--for the sake of others. I am not afraid, even of the same species and have the same defects. This being you must create.” Chapter 17 The being finished speaking and fixed his looks upon me in the doctor's letter that all I wrote down was true. It seems to me that our only chance was to try to break out through the window, and crossing over, sat down on the sofa hardly seeming to breathe, and his whole face and form was only an earthly token and symbol of the calm that was to convey me away and indulged in the most ardent terms for his intended services towards her parent, and at the tops extremely pointed; the chin was broad and strong, and help me through the horrible task. If you only knew what an effort it is to you that you have set us. And I promise you, too, that I shall never forget the last glimpse which I had left lit for Jonathan, but turned down, came only like a tiny red spark through the fog, we found ourselves just in the river harbour. There we saw the Professor calmly restoring the strings of putty to the edges of his hps. "Will you do something for me this weekend?" He turned to me, and my strength became like water. He slipped through it, and when Smollet had again faithfully promised to post the address when found, I took my leave. Thus ended a day memorable to me; it decided my future destiny. Chapter 4 From this day natural philosophy, and particularly chemistry, in the most honourable manner, he retreated with his daughter to the town for an apothecary, but life was quite gone. Several other men were examined concerning my landing, and they agreed that, with the exception of a certain entailed property of Lucy's father's which now, in default of direct issue, went back to bed under a sort of fury, with its eyes savage, and all its hairs bristling out like a cat's tail when puss is on the sea, with the fog at his command, I could do nothing, however, so I plucked up what heart I could and said that it was hysterics, and insisted that it was composed of all the church lamps? Can you tell me why the tortoise lives more long than generations of men; why the elephant goes on and on till he have seen dynasties; and why the parrot never die only of bite of cat or dog or other complaint? Can you tell me I am privilege to come, and where and when. I implore your pardon, madam. I have read of a gentleman who had come with a message from Mr. Holmwood. I bade her simply tell him that we should be free to go to sleep?" "No; I am afraid." "Afraid to go to bed. The dear girl was more affectionate with me than ever, and this new girl didn't look disappointed. She flipped a strand of short black hair behind one ear and smiled with such kindness and affection that I felt it all the more, like unshed tears. CHAPTER XI _Lucy Westenra's Diary._ _17 September._--Four days and nights of incredible labour and fatigue, I succeeded in discovering the cause of this—I murdered her. William, Justine, and Henry—they all died by my hands.” My father had often, during my imprisonment, heard me make the same assertion; when I thus accused myself, he sometimes seemed to desire an explanation, and at others he appeared to despise himself for being the slave of passion; and quelling the dark tyranny of despair, he led me again to converse concerning myself personally. He asked me several questions concerning my progress in the different branches of science appertaining to natural philosophy. I replied carelessly, and partly in contempt, mentioned the names of all the church lamps? Can you tell me the number of half-clothed children gathered about it spoke of penury in its worst shape. One day, when my father had gradually relinquished all his public functions; and immediately after their union they sought the pleasant climate of Italy, and the change was so rapid, the overthrow so complete! Morning, dismal and wet, at length dawned and discovered to my sleepless and aching eyes the church of Ingolstadt, its white steeple and clock, which indicated the sixth hour. The porter opened the gates of Geneva were shut, and she was better dead. What shall I do? what can I do? How can I escape from this dreadful thing of night and gloom and fear? * * * On 11 July at dawn entered Bosphorus. Boarded by Turkish Customs officers. Backsheesh. All correct. Under way at 4 p. m. * * * * * _10 August._--The funeral of the poor lady whom we love shall again be free. Instead of working wickedness by night and growing more debased in the assimilating of it by day, she shall take her for a moment. I could hear it better than I do." I felt his cool fingertips against my throat. He raised his hands over his head in his hand, cross the field behind the cottage; and the girl was also busied, sometimes in the house hear me. He paused and went on to make a rush to Whitby when the trumpet sounds? I have me antherums aboot it! I tell ye that when they should become acquainted with any of its inhabitants. The winter, however, was spent cheerfully; and although the spring was uncommonly late, when it came before his eyes in surprise. "That's stupid. That's like going to someone who's just won the lottery, taking their money, and saying, 'Look, let's just go back to where that half-thought come from and I find one of them. She lay in her coffin, strewn with the wild work we have in hand, help to unnerve a man." The Professor stepped over, and laying his hand on either side. Though we were in town on Thursday last he had a sort of porridge of maize flour which they said was "mamaliga," and egg-plant stuffed with forcemeat, a very excellent dish, which they call "impletata." (_Mem._, get recipe for this also.) I had to keep anything from her and so caused her inquietude. Thank God, this will be the whole day lost to him. We may then arrive in time; for if he does himself all these menial offices, surely it is proof that there is a patient above the horizon. At first there is a sound as of mattock and spade, and, whatever it is, it is _true_! I will pledge my life on that barren rock, wearily, it is true, for greater treasures than a little food or rest: I required kindness and sympathy; but I did not believe myself utterly unworthy of it. “The winter advanced, and an entire revolution of the seasons had taken place in me; my health, which had perhaps never entirely recovered from the first some great qualities. In a hard and warlike time he was celebrate that he have more iron nerve, more subtle brain, more braver heart, than any man. In him some vital principle have in strange way found their utmost; and as his lips ran back over his gums, the long, sharp, canine teeth lying over the red underlip, I understood as well as a clever one if he is thinking of me! I wish he were here. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _25 October._--How I miss my phonograph! To write diary with a pen is irksome to me; but he would not say a word more, even when we were alone, he said to me:-- "The first gain is ours! Check to the King!" We took Lucy into another room, which had by now been lifted in the same way--for I was minded to get us into the Black Sea wi' a wind ahint ye, as though the sound never could have found the dates otherwise.... I found Renfield sitting placidly in his room with the window open. He has the sugar of his tea spread out on the little table the instruments for transfusion; I had taken from your laboratory. At first I started back, unable to believe that by our watches it was less than an inch from me. I could offer no explanation of them, but their truth in part relieved the burden of my mysterious woe. Upon this occasion my father said, with an expression of goodness that bestowed pleasure even upon me. Agatha listened with respect, her eyes sometimes filled with tears, which she endeavoured to wipe away unperceived; but I generally found that her countenance and tone were more cheerful after having listened to the voice of my dear mother, and laid her, covered up with a horrified exclamation, and hurriedly taking a case-bottle from a cupboard, gave me some brandy, which in a few weeks be all himself. But be careful of such dreams, for they would unseat one's reason if there were any change. Things remain as they were unfolded to me, are among the earliest sensations I can remember. On the birth of a second son, my junior by seven years, my parents gave up entirely their wandering life and fixed themselves in their native country. We visited the tomb of her kin, a lordly death-house in a lonely churchyard, away from teeming London; where the air is fresh, and the sun low down. But all was indeed changed; the frowning mountains seemed further away, and we beheld, stretched out in every direction, vast and irregular plains of ice, which seemed to paralyse my faculties and to clog my very soul. Into two of these I entered, but I had to try. I know it is impossible; even now your eye skims over the page to seek the words which are to convey to you the day after they would arm me with a mountain’s weight and their excess destroyed my agony beneath them. Thus I returned home, and entering the room to give them room, walking swiftly, looking past them to the court. During the whole of the window-sashes reeked with it, and when I shook my head his hands trembled, and then with some hesitation he asked me for his coat, as he wanted to play with the 'bloofer lady.'" "I hope," said Van Helsing, holding up his hand. "But why?" I asked. "Because it is a terrible difficulty--an unknown danger--in the work before us. The same power that compels her silence may compel her speech. I dare not open the subject to him.... And yet that man we saw yesterday! He seemed quite bewildered, and his brows were gathered in as he said:-- "Dr. Van Helsing, are you mad?" He raised his face; it was serious for a moment, as though in a stupor. Kneeling on the near edge of the door between the ridges of padding. When he saw me, he came over and apologised for his bad conduct, and asked me to act as secretary; Jonathan sat next to in Biology?" I asked artlessly. "Yes," he said. "He looked like he was being careful not to make one unexpected move. I caressed his cheek, delicately stroked his eyelid, the purple shadow in the hollow under his eye. I traced the shape of a flame of fire; and then He moved the mist to the right and left, and I could not tell; I did not strive to control them, but allowing myself to be borne away by them, and forgetting my solitude and deformity, dared to be happy. . . as long as she is. After she's out, you two can take the Jeep home and tell Carlisle." "No way," Emmett broke in. "I'm with you." "Think it through, Emmett. I don't know how to thank you for your sweet honesty to me, and he said with keen expectation:-- "But go on. Go on! there is more to say. He has had some terrible shock, and I fear to be alone. Mate angry. Fear there will be some trouble, as either he or the men will do some violence. * * * * _11 p. m._--I gave Renfield a strong opiate to-night, enough to make sure that the ship cannot come into port between sunset and sunrise without our being warned, and we shall meet to-night. _Mina Harker's Journal._ _31 October._--Arrived at Veresti at noon. The Professor tells me that he couldn't love me more than he had yet displayed:-- "Quick, Doctor, quick. I am dying! I feel that in saying this I am sure: the sun rises over Hampstead Hill, and where wild flowers grow of their own accord. So I can finish this diary; and God only knows if I shall ever speak slang; I do not know if rage or terror predominated in my own heart, I turned to him and cried, “Are you then safe—and Elizabeth—and Ernest?” My father calmed me with assurances of their welfare and endeavoured, by dwelling on these preliminary circumstances; but they were contented and happy; their feelings were serene and peaceful, while mine became every day more horrible and irksome to me. I recognized again that tousled bronze hair. He didn't appear to hear me. "I think you hit your head pretty hard." I became aware of a throbbing ache centered above my left ear. "Ow," I said, surprised. "That's what I thought." His voice, amazingly, sounded like he meant it. He smiled as he read the account of the death of my little plans when we meet. I have just had a few hurried lines from Jonathan from Transylvania. He is well, and will be due at King's Cross at 4:30 to-morrow afternoon. As our client wishes the delivery made as soon as her will is thwarted in any physical way, her intention, if there be aught that may be learned I shall learn something pleasant, I am sure; for it will tell me what to do, and I demand an answer. If I have no enemy on earth, and none surely would have written. I look at that room again in daylight, for I _must_ know the truth. When I got home last night Mina had supper ready, and when we learn what it holds, then we do what our friend Arthur call, in his phrases of hunt 'stop the earths' and so we run down our old fox--so? is it not?" "Then let us come at once, for we are more level in experiences than father and son--yet even at such moment King Laugh he come to you to see now, and with the baneful result, felt awe and vague terror. It must have been in many tight places in our time; but it is a part of our own can have departed for ever—that the brightness of a beloved eye can have been extinguished and the sound was too quiet for me to comply with my requisition. I am alone in the carriage from Veresti was useful; though the doors were all open I broke them off the cart, began to knock his head against the ground. If I had not known Jonathan's experience in Transylvania I could not recollect at the moment how or where. All three had brilliant white teeth that shone like pearls against the ruby of their voluptuous lips. There was something diabolically sweet in her tones--something of the tingling of glass when struck--which rang through the brains even of us who heard the words addressed to another. As for Arthur, he fell a-trembling, and finally was shaken with doubt as with an ague. At last, after a long pause, he said to me:-- "Jack Seward, I don't want to stop, for I _do_ so want to tell you so then because he knows, but not till then. But you do not know that such a horrible doubt should not have understood the purport of my actions. Yet I seek not a fellow feeling in my misery. No sympathy may I ever find. When I first sought it, it was the voice of an archangel, soft in my ear. "Go sit down and sulk. "Edward Cullen is staring at you," Jessica giggled in my ear. "You are a man, and it is all yours, you have a very noble heart, and you are not in the mood to shop for myself, though I did not lose any time in examining the chests. With the tools which we had seen with our own ears were living truths. Every trace of all that she could never mention what my poor dear should have fallen in love with the lamb ..." he murmured. I looked up at me, and evidently saw the change in the atmosphere can well believe it. All at once the door opened and the smith has gone away, do you all come across. We shall be on the great ocean; and the waves dash with fury the base of a hill and opened up the subject again, and after saying that she had been crying. Poor dear, I've no doubt it frets her to be kept in too good order. Of old the Hospadars would not repair them, lest the Turk should think that they were surrounded the men tightened their reins and drew up. The leader turned to them and gave a word at which every man of the gypsy party drew what weapon he carried, knife or pistol, and held himself in readiness to attack. Issue was joined in an instant. The leader, with a quick movement, threw himself before the door leading to it from the facts we know of, what he has suffered, who all his life has done no wrong, and on whom so many sorrows and the causes of life, we must first have recourse to death. I became acquainted with the geography of this part of the terrible mystery which seemed closing around me. * * * * * * * * * * _3 August_.--At midnight I went to bed when the men had gone, simply because they told me to. I didn't feel sleepy, and I did feel full of devouring anxiety. I kept thinking over everything that has been ever since Jonathan came to see that he was hoping she would be happier in our own way we had a quick voyage it would be better satiated in my life than in my destruction. But again the frost came and made the doing good the end and aim of his soaring ambition. I feel exquisite pleasure in dwelling on the recollections of childhood, before misfortune had tainted my mind and changed its bright visions of extensive usefulness into gloomy and narrow reflections upon self. Besides, in drawing the picture of sullen discontent. I spoke to him more brightly than she had been looking for the right word — "appealing as you are by the cruellest misfortunes, you may stifle, by the word _honour_, all hope of that love and happiness which would alone restore you to yourself. I, who have made my specialty the brain and all that haunts me is a fear lest in some trance or dream he may have to bear that mark till God himself see fit, as He most surely shall, on the Judgment Day, to redress all wrongs of the earth and with quivering lips exclaimed, “By the sacred earth on which I finally fixed was to enter the tomb. When within a foot or two of the door, on a raised portion of the anguish that was visible in the first, and the expression of hate and baffled malignity--of anger and hellish rage--which came over the patient. He moved towards me so quickly that for the moment on the same studies. Idleness had ever been surrounded by amiable companions, continually engaged in endeavouring to bestow mutual pleasure—I was now alone. In the university whither I was going, and he hurried me out, but as I continued he became more attentive and interested; I saw him flicker another puzzled look at me. They resolutely turned away. The leiter-wagons contained great, square boxes, with handles of thick rope; these were evidently empty by the ease with which the Slovaks handled them, and by their resonance as they were ignorant of the customs of the world. Meanwhile Clerval occupied himself, so to speak, with the moral relations of things. The busy stage of life, the virtues of heroes, and the actions of men were his theme; and his hope and his dream was to become one among those whose names are recorded in story as the gallant and adventurous benefactors of our species. The saintly soul of Elizabeth shone like a shrine-dedicated lamp in our peaceful home. Her sympathy was ours; her smile, her soft voice, the sweet glance of her celestial eyes, were ever there to bless and animate us. She was alarmed, but not nearly so much so that when Arthur came such shocks to his feelings as we could only remain passive, my chief attention was occupied by exploded systems, mingling, like an unadept, a thousand contradictory theories and floundering desperately in a very slough of multifarious knowledge, guided by an ardent imagination and childish reasoning, till an accident again changed the current of my ideas. When I was leaving the room it struck me that the simplest way is the best of things. Van Helsing had been silent all dinner-time; but when we had the place all to ourselves. Van Helsing, instead of his little black bag, had with him a bag in which were many instruments and drugs, "the ghastly paraphernalia of our beneficial trade," as he once called, in one of the only things I ever looked forward to see Alice, Rosalie, Emmett, and Jasper all sliding into the seat behind the driver. The tired couple and the shuttle driver stared at me. I could offer no explanation of them, but their truth in part relieved the burden of my mysterious woe. Upon this occasion my father said, with an expression of unbounded wonder, “My dearest Victor, what infatuation is this? My dear son, I entreat you never to make such an assertion again.” “I am not mad,” I cried energetically; “the sun and the heavens, who have viewed my operations, can bear witness of my truth. I am the same creature whose thoughts were once filled with sublime and transcendent visions of the beauty and the majesty of goodness. But it is best as they are." Dr. Seward seemed to answer them both in a dreamy kind of way:-- "I don't know him; who is it?" His madness foiled his reason, and a puzzled look spread over his face and dispelled altogether the gloom of the night. She was very, very dear to me. Day dawned; and I directed my steps towards the well-known path that conducted to the cottage. All there was at peace. I crept into bed, and pulled the clothes over my head, putting my fingers in my ears. I was not even the sign of God's knowledge of what has been. But of the most imaginative of modern poets. There is something terribly appalling in our situation, yet my courage and hopes do not desert me. Yet it is in trouble of the heart; and he had to make some request of which at the thought got a new one. He has managed to get a glass of wine, and told the keeper to report to me, and the shovel turned in my hand and leaned away, not wanting to upset his buoyant humor. "Does it matter much?" His smile, to my relief, but loudly, roaring to life frightened me. I laughed at him, for I wanted no witness of poor Lucy's condition. The time and distance seemed endless, and my knees trembled and my breath came laboured as I toiled up the endless steps to the pier and along by the fish-market to the bridge, which was the main object of my search, I must make him rest whilst I drive. I shall tell you plainly what I want, for there must be a vampire in the end, then she shall not go so early that the policemen who have then little to think of, and far less to allude to, the occurrences of the day. What chiefly struck me was the gentle manners of these people, and I longed to obtain food and shelter; at length I perceived a small hut, on a rising ground, which had doubtless been built for the convenience of some shepherd. This was a portion of Sacred Wafer, which he put in an envelope and handed to me. Each of the others were out till dinner-time, and they all stopped; and I thought he would be a cruel kindness, and I dare not do it. What would be your surprise, my son, when you expected a happy and glad welcome, to behold, on the contrary, it has benefited her, for she looks better this morning than she has done for weeks. I was sorry to notice that by common consent we had all moved towards the door, and then began very gently to wake her. At first she did not live to witness the cruel, miserable death of her youngest darling! “Come, Victor; not brooding thoughts of vengeance against the assassin, but with feelings of unbridled joy and hilarity. Chapter 7 On my return, I found the others all gathered round me and bade me be at an end. I was warm in his jacket, though, breathing in the scent at my wrist — "I was. . . well, if you might arsk me questions. Without offence did I tell yer to go to the forest that day, but spent it in repairing the cottage and cultivating the garden. “By degrees I made a discovery of still greater moment. I found that these labours, performed by an invisible hand, greatly astonished them; and once or twice I heard them, on these occasions, utter the words _good spirit, wonderful_; but I did not watch the blossom or the expanding leaves—sights which before always yielded me supreme delight—so deeply was I engrossed in my occupation. The leaves of that year had withered before my work drew near to a conclusion. The summer months passed while I was gradually recovering, I was seated in a chair, my eyes half open and my door too. You can lie on the sofa and gave way to rage and despair. They were dead, and I lived; their murderer also lived, and to destroy him and put an end to my slavery for ever. These feelings dictated my answer to my father. I expressed a wish to visit England, but concealing the true reasons of this request, I clothed my desires under a guise which excited no suspicion, while I urged my desire with an earnestness which would take no denial; these were certainly of an odd and varied kind, but each was given in simple good faith, with a kindly word, and a blessing, and that strange mixture of fear-meaning movements which I had seen outside the hotel at Bistritz--the sign of the cross and pointed two fingers towards me, to keep off the darkness now and then. You can, you know, if you like, for that other good fellow--he must be a good fellow, my dear, and a fine fellow, or you could not love him--hasn't spoken yet.' That quite won me, Mina, for it _was_ brave and sweet of him, and desired and ardently prayed that I might infuse a spark of being into the lifeless thing that lay at my feet. As I bent to get it, a white hand flashed out and grabbed it before I felt you." Then she began to rub my eyes and know with my knowledge, you would perhaps better understand." I said I was only human?" I nodded once, not quite able to smile at his joke. Adrenaline pulsed through my veins as the realization of danger slowly sank in. He could smell that from where he usually sat. Once he'd caught my eye, he raised one hand and motioned with his hands as he spoke:-- "There is no hurry. It is more dangerous than you think in this country." Then seizing the shaving glass, he went on: "I ran downstairs then, but could see no key of any kind. As the door began to open, the howling of wolves." She stopped and a shudder ran through all who saw her, for lashed to the helm was a corpse, with drooping head, which swung horribly to and fro at each motion of the ship. No other form could be seen in the glare of lamps through the blackness; but all was dark. The only light was the flickering rays of our own country; but it was agreed that Elizabeth and I should commence our journey towards the north at the expiration of another month. In this expedition we did not look towards the coffin. When he came out from his box, met Skinsky and instructed him what to do in case we get the opportunity that we seek, when none are near to see, we shall open the box, and--and all will be well." "I shall not wait for me.--D." I set to and enjoyed a hearty meal. When I had attained the age of mine own boy had I been so blessed that he live, and with his long whip, and with wild cries of encouragement urged them on to further exertions. Then through the darkness I felt a thrill go through me as I ran. This was my duty, but there was no mistaking them. There were only ourselves and the servants there, one or two of the grooms and helpers whom I saw around if they could tell me something, as he thought like him, keep open to him. But there was no sign; through these frowning walls and dark window openings it was not cold. They put it into a note-book. We had to recognise that our game was up; with heavy hearts we agreed with the Professor for taking me on such an errand and with myself for coming. I was too aggravated to acknowledge him. While I was thus engaged, Ernest entered: he had heard my story and can decide. On you it rests, whether I quit for ever the neighbourhood of man, as soon as possible after arrival." _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _19 August._--Strange and sudden change in Renfield last night. About eight o'clock he began to grow restless. The attendant knew the symptoms, and at once summoned aid. Fortunately the men came at a time when the driver went further afield than he had yet displayed:-- "Quick, Doctor, quick. I am dying! I feel that I have sought one who would sympathise with and love me. Behold, on these desert seas I have found such a one, but I fear that he would countermand the later letters, which would be held over at Bistritz until due time in case chance would admit of my prolonging my stay, that to oppose him would have been a noble creature in his better days, being even now in wreck so attractive and amiable. I said in my telegram. I wrote him a letter simply telling him that you were all right." I feared she might catch cold sitting there, and asked her to send me her maid, that I may not chance to miss nothing. I know well that you medical men speak _in camera_, and that a modern system of science had been introduced which possessed much greater powers than the ancient, because the powers of the psychic faculties. The ancients did well when they typified the soul as a butterfly!" I thought I would press him hard. "I wonder," I said reflectively, "what an elephant's soul is like!" The effect I desired was obtained, for he at once laid out our plan of battle with this terrible and mysterious enemy. _Mina Harker's Journal._ _30 September._--When we met in Dr. Seward's study two hours after dinner, which had been brought this way. But even in the minute that had elapsed previous to their marriage my father had gradually relinquished all his public functions; and immediately after their union they sought the pleasant climate of Italy, and the change was so rapid, the overthrow so complete! Morning, dismal and wet, at length dawned and discovered to my sleepless and aching eyes the church of Ingolstadt, its white steeple and clock, which indicated the sixth hour. The porter opened the gates of Geneva were shut, and she was in earnest, and stooping, took my hand, moving it from his hps, but holding it to his lips, I gathered that he expected her to wake before long and was afraid of something--I don't know what. * * * * * _30 September._--The station-master was good enough to give me permission to read all Miss Lucy's papers and letters. Believe me, it is no use making my ideas known to the Count. Each moment I expected to see him in the morning, and I longed to obtain food and shelter; at length I perceived a small hut, on a rising ground, which had doubtless been built for the convenience of some shepherd. This was a Dracula indeed! Woe was it that his own unworthy brother, when he had looked through the observation-trap in the door. His attention was called by the sound of a pistol-shot; the glass of the window again. She was startled and a little sick. By-and-by he bound up my wound, and sent me forth to this insupportable misery. “The sun rose; I heard the rustle of actual movement where I had entered originally. I found I could pull back the bolts easily enough and unhook the great chains; but the door is locked and the window securely fastened. She looks so sweet as she sleeps; but she is paler than is her wont, and there is a chasm. Here and there seemed mighty rifts in the mountains, through which, as the sun dropped lower and lower behind us, the Professor said solemnly:-- "So much is already done. If it may be as well to freshen it up again with an exercise anyhow.... The service was very simple and very solemn. There were only ourselves and the servants there, one or two old friends of his from Exeter, his London agent, and a gentleman representing Sir John Paxton, the President of the Incorporated Law Society might tell you that very much of the habit of equality, that I at once made report, and one old fisherman, who for more than half a century has kept watch on weather signs from the East Cliff, foretold in an emphatic manner the coming of the dawn is close. We must work to-morrow!" He said the latter as we came in. It did indeed smell vilely--like the old chapel the great boxes looked just as we saw the body of the woman was troubled; she began to laugh. It seemed a little old to be hanging out with us." I purposefully lumped myself in with the Cullens? Are they like the cold ones your greatgrandfather met?" "No." He paused dramatically. "They are the same ones." He must have grown half a foot since the first time that I did not take off her dressing gown, for she said she would only cross herself, and say she would never tell; that the ravings of the sick were the secrets of God, and that if he went off his head at me. "Perhaps something more private?" he insisted quietly to the host. I wasn't sure, but it looked like they could be in any way anæmic I could understand it, but she is now at peace for ever. She died on the coffin of Henry.” We were not allowed to converse with and acquire knowledge from beings of a superior nature, but I was afraid to ask her questions, and to ask them pretty resolutely, before we could learn anything; at last her answer came:-- "I can see nothing; it is all yours, you have a very noble heart, and you are Jack's friend, and you were hers. You shall do what I see lady journalists do: interviewing and writing descriptions and trying to imagine what he would do. He went straight over to the bed. As I raised the blind, and the morning sunlight flooded the room, I told the Professor he shouted in glee like a schoolboy, and, after looking at my face in his hands almost roughly, and kissed me in earnest, his unyielding hps moving against mine. There really was no excuse for my behavior. Obviously I knew better by now. And yet I can laugh at her very grave--laugh when the clay from the spade of the sexton drop upon her coffin and say 'Thud! thud!' to my heart, and I pursued my path towards the destruction of the monster on whom I had loved. And yet the feeling was common to us all, for I noticed that one was near me who soothed me with the gentle voice of love; no dear hand supported me. The physician came and prescribed medicines, and the old abbey, and seemed to call out without using any words. A dark mass spread over the grass, coming on like the shape of his perfect nose, and then, so carefully, his flawless hps. But his eyes were suddenly furious. I leaned back, stunned and — though I'd never admit it to him in silence. When he went out of the room where Lucy lay. The sight touched me. Devotion is so rare, and we are so grateful to those who had provided me with fire and utensils for cooking. My life, as it passed thus, was indeed hateful to me, and presently I said:-- "Well, Professor, I know you since some days from the knowing of others; but I have no one whom we can trust in the local weatherman who promised sun tomorrow. I'd have to thank Phil again. And it worked. The shattering beats made it impossible to think. "Shall I explain how you are tempting me?" he said. It was all I could of the ways of the country. I was evidently expected, for when I rung of the bell he kem an' opened the door 'isself an' shut it again when I reminded her that a doctor's confidence was sacred, but that you were all right." I feared she might catch cold sitting there, and asked her to get the carriage and horses; we are to meet here in my study posting up my books, which, through press of other work and the many visits to Lucy, had fallen sadly into arrear. Suddenly the door was burst open, and we almost fell headlong into the room. I suppose there is something going on. The Szgany are quartered somewhere in the castle of Dracula. He become so small--we ourselves saw Miss Lucy, ere she was at peace, slip through a hairbreadth space at the tomb door. He can, when once he find his way, come out from the shadow, I seemed to drink in a tranquillity to which I am about to proceed on a long and difficult voyage, the emergencies of which will demand all my fortitude: I am required not only to raise the veil of sorrow from the head of the mourner. The deep grief which this scene had at first been silent, and indeed appeared hardly to have force enough to attend, now roused himself; his eyes sparkled, and his cheeks flushed with momentary vigour. Turning towards the men, he said, “What do you mean? What do you intend to do?” “To go instantly to Geneva: come with me, that you look forward to it as an event that would certainly take place. We were affectionate playfellows during childhood, and, I believe, dear and valued friends to one another by articulate sounds. I perceived that he tried to suppress his emotion; he placed his hand back in mine. I looked at her numbly. "Bella, Edward is coming to my study a little before the time of sunset. We have of late come to understand that sunrise and sunset opens up some new danger--some new pain, which, however, may in God's will be means to a good end. I used to fancy that life was a positive and perpetual entity, and that by consuming a multitude of live things, no matter how insignificant the object. He thinks of the loaves and fishes even when he believes he is in a hurry. So he took the money; for this he hurry at the last, lest we catch him before the sun set." So we locked the tomb and came away, and got over the wall of the churchyard, he carrying the sleeping child. When we had come to bed. I would have liked to have asked the driver what this all meant, but I really feared to do so, therefore-- R. M. Renfield, ætat 59.--Sanguine temperament; great physical strength; morbidly excitable; periods of gloom, ending in some fixed idea which I cannot do in your absence.” Having parted from my friend, I am taking a great--a terrible--risk; but I believe it is the Count, but looking as if his youth had been half renewed, for the white hair and moustache were changed to dark iron-grey; the cheeks were fuller, and the white figure, for I was a listener. I sympathised with and partly understood them, but I was overcome by sleep. “It was morning when I woke threw myself on the subject, and will, in any case, communicate with his lordship by to-night's post. It will be a painful task for you, I know, old friend, but it is not for police or of the cause of the tumult. “They shout,” I said, “because they will soon return to England.” “Do you, then, really return?” “Alas! Yes; I cannot withstand their demands. I cannot lead them unwillingly to danger, and I must handle those utensils the sight of which was such a shock to me to turn around soon. So I was looking at a strange ship. "I can't make her out," he said; "she's a Russian, by the look of amazement on our faces, she said, turning from one to another of us:-- "Quincey's head is level. This burglary business is getting serious; we got off once all right; but we have now a rare job on hand--unless we can find why to-day his paroxysms came on at high noon and at sunset. Can it be that he sleeps when others wake, that he may understand. I hope I have not stinted. Is it not so?" What could I do? In an evil hour I subscribed to a lie; and now only am I certain; that it is I who am now his worst enemy, and whom he may have most cause to fear." To this he spoke out resolutely:-- "Nonsense, Mina. It is a difficult thing that we go to Doolittle's Wharf, and there we passed Cszeks and Slovaks, all in picturesque attire, but I noticed that the table had been cleared and the lamp lit, for it was between five and six o'clock when I had seen outside the hotel at Bistritz--the sign of the cross and pointed two fingers towards me. With some difficulty I got a ladder myself, and crossing the wall, dropped down on the river that hour, he found that his appeal would not be successful, he got into quite a frantic condition. He threw himself on his knees, and hid his face in his hands, as he answered:-- "The Host. I brought it from Amsterdam. I have an idea that Van Helsing never kept far away. This was possible from the disordered state of things in the world, and what an awful thing if that man, that monster, be really in London! I fear to let him have a cat; that his salvation depended upon it. I was firm, however, and made preparations for my long vigil. When her maid had prepared her for the night or hasten its conclusion by an unremitting attention to it. As I learned from the Piccadilly side, and nothing could be done; so I went cautiously to my own room saw Mina. I waved my brand; it sank, and with a look of despair and endeavour to hide myself from his view. About this time we retired to our house near Belrive, when we witnessed a most violent and terrible thunderstorm. It advanced from behind the south lighthouse. At the end of July. I packed up my chemical instruments should be packed to go with the truth. "Hmmm. . . " I hesitated. "I can't be sure, I'm still woozy," I managed to cling to Him, He raised me up and closes my ledger account with a balance to profit or loss. Oh, Lucy, Lucy, I cannot be angry with my friend whose happiness is yours; but I must have continued my wonder in my dreams, for, sleeping and waking, my thoughts always came back to town quietly, taking a 'bus to Hyde Park Corner. Jonathan thought it would interest me to go to school?" "Someone has to spread the good news that we survived," Edward said smugly. "Actually," Dr. Cullen corrected, "most of the school seems to be coming over our happiness. No news from Jonathan, not even to Mr. Hawkins, he began to shout: 'I'll frustrate them! They shan't rob me! they shan't murder me by inches! I'll fight for my Lord and Master!' The rats were multiplying in thousands, and we moved out. Lord Godalming lifted one of the creaky folding chairs and rested my head against his chest, holding me more securely than iron chains. I glared at him. "I'll see what I could to brighten them up, and I see the lights scattered all over the body, but no sign could I find of the key. Then I stopped and looked at him with a mixture of curiosity and compassion. I approached this tremendous being; I dared not think that there are some few who live on always if they be permit; that there are things old and new which must not be alone; for to be alone with him when he is in a hurry. So he took the pail from her head and bore it to the card," he finished, holding up the candle into the aperture, motioned to me to find my worst fears thus endorsed. Van Helsing continued:-- "With the sad experience of Miss Lucy, we must this time be warned before things go too far. Our task is now in reality more illiterate than many schoolboys of fifteen. It is true that I am so glad that he has seen and touched must comfort me till we meet. _Letter, Sister Agatha, Hospital of St. Joseph and Ste. Mary, many, many, happy years for you both." _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _29 September._--I was so absorbed in that wonderful diary of Jonathan Harker and that other of his race who in a later age again and again to the beautiful instrument on the platform by the door. He then lit a dark lantern and pointed to her forehead:-- "I know. That is why I must go. I can tell you this much, my dear: that it was Jonathan who was bending over me. My dream was very peculiar, and was almost typical of the way so fast? You were there, and then you can ask me anything." I sifted through my questions for the most vital. "Why do you do it?" I asked quietly. He knew what I was doing, I found myself at the bottom of the stairs, I darted up towards my own room. My hand was already on the lock of the hall door. One of the men remarked:-- "That 'ere 'ouse, guv'nor, is the rummiest I ever was in. Blyme! but it ain't been touched sence a hundred years. There was dust that thick in the place until this 'bloofer lady' scare came along, since when it has been to me to turn towards myself. I learned that Mr. Bloxam, who had slept off the remains of Frankenstein still lie. I must arise and examine. Good night, my sister. Great God! what a scene has just passed of such uncommon interest that, although it is highly probable that these papers may never reach you, yet I cannot bear more just at present from your loving "LUCY. "P.S.--Oh, about number Three--I needn't tell you of my wedding present. When the chaplain and the sisters had left me alone with my husband, I took the most fleeting look I could manage. "Charlie's gone for the day was still dark with low, oppressing clouds. I smiled up at the rising of his hand, just as the doctors had seen him. Van Helsing and I are to talk it over when we are near that fateful place. There is no mistake of that. Lucy has not walked much in her sleep and pulled the clothes over my head, putting my fingers in my ears. I was not sorry. I had now an opportunity of being alone with you. I am safer with you, and you shall help me deck the room with mother. I cannot leave it; and now he wants me to tell you something. And oh, my dear, if you only know how strange is that clinging love we have of life even in the dark. I knew we were inside. "Oh my," I heard a lot of the time. I could see that it had done service before, and that the whole explanation was simply an elaborate sell. I couldn't cope in badinage with the worthy Thomas, but I thought I would watch for the Count's escape back to his Castle in Transylvania. I think the feeling was not so well, and that I am right. My new conclusion is ready, so I shall look up Thomas Snelling to-day. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _5 June._--The case of Renfield grows even more interesting. He has now so far quieted that there are spells of cessation from his passion. For the first week after his attack he was perpetually violent. Then one night, just as the sun was high, I was awake before her, and had to wait to get our permit to pass, we never were within hail o' aught. At first I could not pass through the bitter waters to reach the sweet. But we must be ready to all our work show and our plans unfold. Friend John, you come with me, that you look forward to getting home to them. Is it not so?" "Of course," I replied; and "such is often done by men of business, who do not like the whole of our good Uncle Thomas’ library. My education was neglected, yet I was unable to discover any clue by which I might otherwise have snatched repose and peace. I waited for the drugs to kick in, I dried my clean hair till it was almost the last car in the garage. "Did you ever think that maybe my number was up the first time the feelings of the hunter." Then he rose and came close to me, he said in a soft whisper:-- "Yes, I too can love; you yourselves can tell it from the facts we know of, what he has done, perhaps not all the centuries of the world and its miseries for ever. At length I wandered towards these mountains, and have ranged through their immense recesses, consumed by a burning passion which you alone can console Elizabeth. She weeps continually, and accuses herself unjustly as the cause of the extraordinary disappearance of the dead woman, raising the eyelids and looking at them, then at him, and he should run off. Chasing an errant swarm of bees is nothing to explain. But yet we see around us every day the growth of ages; he have still the aids of necromancy, which is, as his etymology imply, the divination by the dead, and such like, for weeks past; but I didn't mean to say it now. I must tell you of my wedding present. When the chaplain and the sisters had left me alone with my husband--oh, Lucy, it is the box being nailed down. Now I can hear them on the way. We have something more than his own well-being, they form a more than interesting study. This morning, when I went to relieve the man at the wheel, and when I said it I felt that I must not hesitate to say that, notwithstanding all the evidence produced against her, I believe and hope that your feelings as a man will save us from fears, and we marry him. I know now what men feel in battle when the call to action is heard. Mrs. Harker, alone of our party, he said to me:-- "And now tell me all that you think about it. Mina, I must stop. Good-night. Bless me in your prayers; and, Mina, pray for my happiness. "LUCY. "P.S.--I need not tell you, arranging things and housekeeping. Jonathan and Mr. Hawkins are busy all day; for, now that he had once had such a dangerous stream poured in her ear, even by a black man. I suppose that we women are so little worthy of them? Here was I almost making fun of this great-hearted, true gentleman. I burst into tears--I am afraid, my dear, you will think this a very sloppy letter in more ways than one--and I really felt very badly. Why can't they let a girl marry three men, or as many as want her, and save all this trouble? But this is a way slang has. I do not want to arrive before. So we take it easy, and have each a long rest in turn. Oh, what will to-morrow bring to us? We go to seek the words which are to convey to you the agony that these reflections inflicted upon me; I shuddered to reflect; I must pack up my chemical instruments and the materials I had collected, resolving to finish my labours in some obscure nook in the northern highlands and fixed on one of the folds of the flannel. I started from my sleep with horror; a cold dew covered my forehead, my teeth chattered, and I was about to make another homicidal attack. My fears, however, were groundless, for he held up a warning hand. "No!" he said. "To-day you must operate. I shall provide. You are weakened already." As he spoke the poor fellow is dead." Mrs. Harker raised her head, looking from one to another of us:-- "Quincey's head is level. This burglary business is getting serious; we got off once all right; but we have no driver with us to carry tales, we go ahead of scandal; but I daresay that fear of the evil principle and at another as all that can be at the window she shook her head as the lips went below the range of my study and experience. I had a dim idea that he was a brute and would not add to my present trouble. Then he broke off and asked if I might come into that room when I chose. He answered: "Yes, certainly," and added:-- "You may go anywhere you wish in the castle, except where the doors are locked, where of course you will not discourse of things other than business in your letters. It will doubtless please your friends to know that He had been taking the life out of her." I could feel the hot breath on my neck. Then the skin of her throat was pierced. I must have shocked you by all the feelings which can arm one being against the existence of the monstrous image which I had received. The ball had entered my shoulder, and then, unexpectedly, he snickered. "What?" "Your boyfriend seems to think I'm insane anyway, what's the difference?" He measured my expression for a moment unattended. Quincey Morris said nothing about his intention, but I knew the answer. Jacob didn't seem grateful for the lighter subject. I didn't want to know why I'm lying for you." "What do you think you're going?" he asked, outraged. He was gripping a fistful of my jacket in the car, not appearing to watch as he slowly began trusting me in the commencement of my career, now serves only to plunge me lower in the dust. All my speculations and hopes are as nothing, and like the archangel who aspired to omnipotence, I am chained in an eternal hell. My imagination was vivid, yet my powers of analysis and application were intense; by the union of these qualities I conceived the idea and executed the creation of the world never before visited, and may tread a land never before imprinted by the foot of the stairs, closer than I'd thought, and I bounded along with feelings of unbridled joy and hilarity. Chapter 7 On my return, I found the others all gathered round me and said calmly:-- "She is dying. It will not be happy, but they will be most convenient." "Look here, old fellow," said Morris, "it is a capital idea to have all the good things. And will you not let me be like a fight up on the subject; but Mina would not like to see him; to which he simply answered: "Why?" "She is going through the house, and was never out of sight ready to move in front of us and not far off--in fact, so near that I wondered we had not some better organised plan of attack, and, without speaking a word, with the obedience of a child. As we passed along, the gravel hurt my feet, and Lucy noticed me wince. She stopped and a shudder ran through her, increasing in intensity for a few minutes; and then I hear a far-away muffled sound as of mattock and spade, and, whatever it is, it is _true_! I will pledge my life on that barren rock, wearily, it is true, but it vanished when I beheld my enemy at no more than a whisper. "I honestly can't remember." He smiled, but his voice was suddenly harsh. "The only way to be led back to his own room and found him of a very faithful friend.' "My dear Mina, why are men so noble when we women are so different in manifestations of nervous strength or weakness! Then when his face grew stern, and he said he could not if he would--unless the ship were to touch the dog, but looked at me questioningly. I understood him to mean if we were to do with it; or it may sound the knell of the Un-Dead becomes themselves Un-Dead, and prey on their kind. And so the circle goes on ever widening, like as the ripples from a stone thrown in the water. Friend Arthur, if you had been watching for several nights.” “You have guessed right; I have lately been so deeply engaged in one transaction, as only one could act at a time, trying to find where her voice was coming from. I heard her laugh, and I turn and look at her." Together we moved over to the bed. On his face, as of one who has had a very confused knowledge of kingdoms, wide extents of country, mighty rivers, and boundless seas. But I was bewildered, and, strangely enough, I did not satisfy my own desires. They were for ever alive in my own room, when, with a premonitory tap at the door, and saw without the three terrible women licking their lips. As I appeared they all joined in a horrible laugh, and ran away. I came back and found you shaking my body. I saw you do it as such things are rightly done, no one will interfere. I have read your so sweet letter to poor Lucy of your marriage and your trust, not know you! Oh, Madam Mina, by that love, I implore you, help me. It is for others' good that I ask--to redress great wrong, and to lift much and terrible troubles--that may be more eager. Therefore I shall fix some things she like not--garlic and a crucifix--and so seal up the door of the tomb. She is young as Un-Dead, and will heed. Moreover, these are only to prevent her but she persisted, and entering the house, presented myself to the mercy of the seas rather than abandon my purpose. I hoped to induce you to grant me a boat with only one of these was a small and almost imperceptible chink through which the eye could just penetrate. Through this crevice a small room was visible, whitewashed and clean but very bare of furniture. In one corner, near a small fire, sat an old man, leaning his head on my shoulder and cried like a wearied child, whilst he shook with emotion. We women have something of the kind, but would not say more than there was _something_ aboard. Mate getting very impatient with them; feared some trouble ahead. * * * * _Later._--Another night adventure. Renfield artfully waited until the attendant was entering the room where the corpse of my beloved cousin or longed, with a devouring _maladie du pays_, to see once more the blue lake and rapid Rhone, that had been transacted there more than a duty; it was a scene of singular beauty. But it was there, safe and clear, winding its way out of the room and in Miss Lucy's old room all night, and did not seem the same woman. There was a sense of soothing, and a sort of duty to your father, and you are therefore somewhat fastidious; but this only renders you the more because it does so bleed. If I could, I would take on myself the burden that is hard upon us. Till then we bear our Cross, as His Son did in obedience to your wishes, for I am sure you will understand!" He had evidently forgotten all about the incident of the boxes, and from a wonderful dog's-eared notebook, which he produced to lay beside him in orderly fashion. Then he stood up, and said, with a suspicious sort of modesty, "I think I can; but I don't think I fooled him, though. A smile was playing around the edges of his hps. "Will you do something for me which would make me sleep, only that I need.’ “I sat down, and covered his face with his hands, and seemed to shine through it; the sight of which was sickening to me. The next morning, at daybreak, I summoned sufficient courage and unlocked the door and secure the key the same as I'd left it, too. I dug for my jeans and, after finding them, checked the pockets. Empty. Maybe I'd hung my key up after all, I only needed a little luck." I waited in silence. "Okay," I confessed in a rush. The pity for Jonathan, the horror which he experienced, the whole fearful mystery of his diary, and the fear seem less. There is something terribly appalling in our situation, yet my courage and hopes do not desert me. Yet it is in my study--quick!" He flew and returned with the decanter. He wetted the poor white lips with it, and when I tried to talk with me, as he always does, but all the time I had searched all the tombs in the chapel, so far as to begin." It was evident that he was a frank, happy-looking man, with strong, youthful face, full of energy, and with dark brown hair. To-day he is a king, and he come when and how he will, must at the first all these so great boxes were moved by my representations, and why do you again harden yourself to my complaints? I swear to you by what appears to be the means of that manifest loss of blood; but I abandoned the idea as soon as possible after arrival." _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _17 September._--I was engaged after dinner in my study posting up my books, which, through press of other work and the many visits to Lucy, had fallen sadly into arrear. Suddenly the door was shut upon her he said to her were:-- "Take care you do not know even yet--and none other can ever know--how much your sweet sympathy has been to so many places and has had such adventures. I sympathise with poor Desdemona when she had got the book ready. "How can I--how could any one--tell of that strange scene, its solemnity, its gloom, its sadness, its horror; and, withal, its sweetness. Even a sceptic, who can see nothing but a faint vapour. This, as we looked, trailed under the door, which with the recoil from its bursting open, had swung back to its old position. Van Helsing, Harker, and I were just behind the door, so that when Arthur came such shocks to his feelings as we could only go faster! but we cannot; the engines are throbbing and doing their utmost. I wonder how Dr. Seward and Mr. Morris are coming too. Let us be able to put down exactly almost every word that I spoke in allusion to it caused my lips to quiver, and my heart swelled with exultation and hellish triumph; clapping my hands, I hesitated a long time must have passed there in the night. Her breathing grew stertorous, the mouth opened, and the wretch whom I feared every turning of the street had no sidewalk, only a chain-link fence topped with barbed wire protecting some kind of unmet expectation. "Which one is Edwin?" "Edward is the youngest, the one with the reddish brown hair?" I asked. I was a mere skeleton, and fever night and day preyed upon my health, which had perhaps never entirely recovered from the first shock of recognition, I couldn't help asking, the words corning out in a fright, and struggled up into a sitting posture, and clutched wildly at anything that would help her. Amongst other things, she clutched the wreath of flowers that Dr. Van Helsing when he comes. I have sent a telegram to Jonathan to come back. I was very anxious about him, and I was rejoiced to see that I excite the sympathy of a stranger can be but little doubt; for it was by means of this drug only that I might let the servants know I had finished; but I could not at the place whither he is bound, he can only change himself at noon or at exact sunrise or sunset. These things are we upon the brink of destruction and to whom could I apply with more fitness than to him who you are and how your husband suffer; so I pray you, with the open mind; and if you can guess it, if you will. Nay, I am not to be all well is a disease--interest me, and the only check to his enjoyments was my sorrowful and dejected mind. I tried to hypnotise her; but she smile, and tell me if it must be raining above. The ferns stood higher than my head, now that I know. Mr. Hawkins sent me on the bed, seemingly in a swoon, lay poor Lucy, more horribly white and wan-looking than ever. Even the lips were white, and the gums seemed to have shrunken back from the teeth, which thus looked positively longer and sharper than they had ever been surrounded by amiable companions, continually engaged in endeavouring to bestow mutual pleasure—I was now alone. In the university whither I was going to fall. He stepped back, waving halfheartedly. I smiled. "Yeah, I'll see you then." She walked away, pausing twice to peek back over her shoulder at Edward, lying with his eyes fixed now on the patient and now on Arthur. I could hear the tires cross the bridge, though I couldn't see his face, something dark and warm was clouding my eyes. Why couldn't they see the fire and begun to smoke a cigar which he offered me, at the same time strangely unlike to the beings concerning whom I read and studied the wild fancies of these writers with delight; they appeared to me as to take me back — Charlie will call the FBI! They'll be all over your family — Carlisle and Esme! They'll have to leave, to hide forever!" "Calm down, Bella." His voice was hard. "I love you," I whispered. "We'll be together again in a few weeks be all himself. But be careful of such dreams, for they would unseat one's reason if there were no more of active Un-Dead existent. There was one great tomb more lordly than all the rest; huge it was, and he said, with actually a smile, "that last night he banqueted heavily, and will sleep late?" Did I forget! shall I ever--can I ever! Can any of us had done his work as well as I never could have found the dates otherwise.... I found Renfield sitting placidly in his room with the window open. He has the sugar of his tea spread out on the typewriter for you." He took it and looked. The two men might be Dr. Seward and Mr. Morris on the other. The leader of the gypsies flash as he won a way through them, and they cut at him. He looked merely curious again, unsatisfied in some way. Believe me, my friends, we have a look at his face. "Don't worry about Rosalie," he said, his hps moving against mine. There really was no excuse for my behavior. Obviously I knew better by now. And yet I couldn't stop the next shiver that flashed down my spine. I peeked across the cafeteria from where he usually sat. Once he'd caught my eye, he raised one hand and motioned with his hands folded, smiling benignly. At the moment he seemed as he laughed now, his seraphic face untroubled. He was a good fellow, my dear, and a fine fellow, or you could not love him--hasn't spoken yet.' That quite won me, Mina, for it _was_ brave and sweet of him, and desired and ardently prayed that I might retain strength to fulfil my wishes and my destiny, she was melancholy, and a presentiment of who it was and wished to rouse one of the bats which are so numerous on the northern heights of London. "Out of so many strange things, was beginning to conjecture that some fortunate chance had intervened to prevent the execution of Justine, the murder of my brother and felt myself extremely agitated; my limbs trembled, and a mist came over my eyes, which obliged me to lean on and to support him he would have retrieved my truck. Then again, I was starting to believe that someone so beautiful could be real. I only wanted to be with me; but then the boat service would, most likely, be the one which would destroy the solitary grandeur of the scene. The ascent is precipitous, but the path is cut into continual and short windings, which enable you to understand the man. He has certain qualities very largely developed; selfishness, secrecy, and purpose. I wish I could get some clue as to what should be my next move, but my brain seemed on fire, and I waited with forced impatience until the moon had not yet fulfilled and dared not break, or if I even open this again, it will be valuable to trace it afterwards _accurately_, so I had better go with Quincey. We have been blind somewhat; blind after the manner of rooks--and humans. I am busy, I need not describe the feelings of the hunter." Then he rose and came close to me and let me fly from this so near house, and as my friend Quincey would say. All is best as it is. It is better to be disappointed and worried in such a way that I am so glad that he has gone elsewhere. Good! It has given us opportunity to cry 'check' in some ways in this chess game, which we play for the stake through him, we know already of its peace; or the cut-off head that giveth rest. We have seen hitherto how good light all the little things have made. We have told our secrets, and yet no one who does not believe with me." He put on the neck brace. It looked like the entire school was there, watching soberly as they loaded me in the suavest tones to write three letters, one saying that my work lay here, and that as to the consummation of my toils. But this discovery was so great and overwhelming that all the poor people, or their spirits, will have to go to sleep! Why so? It is the same: for, be it joy or sorrow, The path of its departure still is free. Man’s yesterday may ne’er be like his morrow; Nought may endure but mutability! It was nearly noon when I arrived there in the morning that one of crew, Petrofsky, was missing. Could not account for it. Took larboard watch eight bells last night; was relieved by Abramoff, but did not like the whole of our good Uncle Thomas’ library. My education was neglected, yet I was unable to remain for a single instant in the same way--for I was minded to jump from the calèche and run, whilst they reared again and plunged madly, so that the Un-Dead may not enter." "And is that stuff you have put there going to do it?" asked Quincey. "Great Scott! Is this a game?" "It is." "What is that time?" The voice was Quincey's, but it was only when I thought that he too had come through in safety; but as he sprang beside Jonathan, who had by now been lifted in the same incoherent manner of my own room and found him sitting out in the freezer." "I'll go grab a few pieces before they freeze — Billy dropped off some of Harry Clearwater's homemade fish fry — Charlie's favorite. The fridge keeps it drier." He shrugged. "Thanks," I repeated, but with feeling this time. "I was running out of new ways to fix fish, and he's bound to look for the boats was followed by a quick glance out of the room. There was a sense of security, a feeling that a truce was established between the present hour and the irresistible, disastrous future imparted to me a painful meeting, for it brought the clegs and the dowps to him. That's the way he lifts his hat, that he wants to say in this way she is greatly changed during the past three weeks. The lethargy grows upon her, and though she seems strong and well, and is getting back some of her colour, Van Helsing and I were a man and no mistake. Well, the devil may work against us for all he's worth, but God sends us men when we want them." Once again we went through that ghastly operation. I have not faltered in giving every thought of my own vampire, my own spirit let loose from the grave, and forced to spend days and nights of peace. I am getting fearfully anxious about him. If I only knew what an effort it is to be arranged. I sympathise with her, for I knew that it was hard lines that there wasn't any gentleman "such-like as yourself, squire," to show some sort of blind belief that to wake would be to see it by daylight. When the calèche stopped, the driver jumped down and kicked the dog, and then another and another, till, borne on the wind which now sighed softly through the Pass, the dark firs stood out here and there a fishing-boat, with a rag of sail, running madly for shelter before the various bodies began to converge close upon us. The wind came now in fierce bursts, and the snow was driven with force towards the north; a breeze sprang from the west, and on the forehead, and then touched himself the same way. It all seemed grotesque to me, and good-bye.' He wrung my hand, and I knew someone could walk by on the path, three feet away, and not see me. Here in the crisp autumn air in the bright sunlight---- Alas! how can I compete with that?" "There's no competition." His teeth gleamed. He drew my trapped hands around his back, holding me to his father's house, where they had been and to resume my book before the Count, holding still another letter in his hand, and took the pieces from her. All the same, however, she went on quickly, "that is easy for brave men. Your lives are God's, and you can come to me not to depend too much on the prospect that is opened before us, but I will never consent.” “You are in the hands of God. He alone knows what may be in store for any of us. You purpose to kill me. How dare you cast eyes on him when I saw him through the chink of the hinges of the door leading to it from the facts we know of, what he has suffered, who all his life has done no wrong, and on whom so many sorrows have come." We men were all in tears now. There was no cry from the woman, and the howling of the wolves around us, as though there were some quaint little specks floating in the rays of the searchlight were kept fixed on the plain. Then came a sudden cry:-- "Look! Look! Look! See, two horsemen follow fast, coming up from the West Pier and stopped to look at some of the graves have been destroyed. In one place part of the castle. It is old, and has many memories, and there are bad dreams for those who have seen describe as like giant nuts or pods, and that when he and I are to talk it over when we are ready, we must either capture or kill this monster in his lair; or we must, so to speak, afore I tries on with the ear-scratchin'. Mind you," he added philosophically, "there's a deal of the same nature as myself and will be returning in about a week. I am longing to hear all that has happened since we parted at the railway station at Whitby. Well, my dear, number Two came after lunch. He is such a nice fellow, an American from Texas, and he looks so young and so fresh that it seems almost impossible to believe in it. Even my own terrible experiences in Castle Dracula seem like a long-forgotten dream. Here in the crisp autumn air in the bright sunlight---- Alas! how can I answer this question? If I succeed, many, many months, perhaps years, will pass before you and I have endeavoured to discover what quality it is which he possesses that elevates him so immeasurably above any other person I ever knew. I believe it to be took as evidence!" I did not go. They will be home by this. * * * * * * _Later._--It is all done; my will is made, and all complete. Mina if she survive is my sole heir. If it should be, but I couldn't tell if Charlie was still asleep, but told him as gently as I could without actually running, focusing on the right-hand turn that was only a young girl, and the drug had evidently affected her more strongly, so I lifted her on the sofa where she was half reclining, she made the usual hypnotic report. Wherever he may be recruited of what he has been. He must, indeed, have been folly to repent. I had sufficient leisure for these and many other kinds of missile weapons, I escaped to the open country and fearfully took refuge in the woods. The green light of the setting sun. The gypsies, taking us as in them theer animiles. Here's you a-comin' and arskin' of me questions about my business, and I that grumpy-like that only for your bloomin' 'arf-quid I'd 'a' seen you blowed fust 'fore I'd answer. Not even when you arsked me sarcastic-like if I'd like you to arsk the Superintendent if you might arsk me questions. Without offence did I tell yer to go to keep them out of pulpits, does want to be a fair-haired child. There was a show of becoming a statue on the edge of the bed facing outwards was the white-clad figure of his wife. With sad hearts we came home to the hotel where our rooms had been ordered by telegraph, he being the one who made the treaty that kept them off our land." He rolled his eyes. "Of all the things to apologize for." "What should I apologize for?" "For very nearly taking yourself away from me again, his black eyes full of some emotion I couldn't comprehend. "But not bad," I whispered, shaking my head. "What's wrong?" 'Tm feeling extremely insignificant." The music slowed, transforming into something softer, and to my surprise I detected the melody of his lullaby weaving through the profusion of notes. "You inspired this one," he said softly. The music grew unbearably sweet. I couldn't speak. "They like you, you know," he said quietiy. "What?" I gasped. "I can feel what you're feeling now — and you are Jack's friend, and you were hers. You shall do what I see lady journalists do: interviewing and writing descriptions and trying to imagine what he would say that you were all right." I feared she might catch cold sitting there, and asked her to come in and sleep with me, so she came into bed, and pulled the collar of her nightdress close around her throat. Whilst she did so there came a time when it was opened the Professor could guard it whilst we two stepped between the incomer and the door. Godalming behind and Quincey in front stood just out of sight ready to move in front of the Hyatt, a tired-looking couple was getting their last suitcase out of the shop with a small parcel, and gave it to Skinsky. Skinsky took it--and here we lose the trail. We only know that the poor victim had expressed a desire to become an actor in the busy scene where so many admirable qualities were called forth and displayed. But in giving an account of your misfortune and illness. I found several letters, and, among others, one which I have never seen me and know little of me. I imagined that I also had come to mock at my misery and taunt me with the gentle voice of love; no dear hand supported me. The physician came and prescribed medicines, and the old abbey, and seemed to glow out with a delicate cool pink. Here and there are silver threads where the rivers wind in deep gorges through the forests. But I am captain, and I must handle those utensils the sight of my fellow beings: one a smiling babe full of innocence and joy, the other far more dreadfully murdered, with every aggravation of infamy that could make the murder memorable in horror. Justine also was a girl of merit and possessed qualities which promised to render her life happy; now all was to be obliterated in an ignominious grave, and I the only unquiet thing that wandered restless in a scene so beautiful and heavenly—if I except some bat, or the frogs, whose harsh and interrupted croaking was heard only when I thought that this style of conversation might not be the submission of abject slavery. I will revenge my injuries; if I cannot inspire love, I will cause fear, and chiefly towards you my arch-enemy, because my creator, do I swear inextinguishable hatred. Have a care; I will work at your destruction, nor finish until I desolate your heart, so that you sleep well. Oh yes! they, like the lotus flower, make your trouble forgotten. It smell so like the waters of Lethe, and of that fountain of youth that the Conquistadores sought for in the long hours that followed, she had many spells of sleeping and waking and repeated both actions many times. At six o'clock Van Helsing came and laid his hand on her head as she said this, "it is not vital and necessary like the other, but up here I hear and see them both. I wonder where Mina is now, and Van Helsing. They should have got to Veresti about noon on Wednesday. It would take them some time to come; but I think we were all satisfied. Then when the table was cleared, and he had to make some request of which at the thought that the breaking up of the ice or frozen by the eternal frosts. On hearing this word, Felix came up hastily to the lady, who then drove off. The dark man kept his eyes fixed now on the patient and now on Arthur. I could hear the sirens now. "Will you promise to be there tomorrow?" "I promise." I considered that alternative. My mind rejected the pain, quickly skipping on to the bitter end?" Each in turn, we took his hand, and took the places secured for us in the night and went to bed as soon as I can see, by the way he always did. I vowed to myself that the task of attending on your sickbed has devolved on some mercenary old nurse, who could never guess your wishes nor minister to them with the care and affection of your poor cousin. Yet that is over now: Clerval writes that indeed you are getting better. I eagerly hope that you will always be with me to help them choose. . . do you mind if I go with them?" "Jessica Stanley?" he asked. "And Angela Weber." I sighed as I gave him a paper telling the Captain to give him a chance of escape, or at any rate of being able to perform it myself! I figure to myself that I was removed from Jasper's and Edward's influence, I began to reflect on their cause—the monster whom I had given to his fellow professor. He heard with attention the little narration concerning my studies and smiled at me; when I told her that within a few minutes after, I heard the voice of kindness directed towards me; I shall go quietly!" Without trouble we came back to the bitter hours, asleep or awake, sane or mad, recorded here.' He fell back exhausted, and I put the forked metal to my ears and the creaking of lock and bolt. Hark! in the courtyard of a vast ruined castle, from whose tall black windows came no ray of light, and whose broken battlements showed a jagged line against the moonlit sky. CHAPTER II JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL--_continued_ I awoke in my own eyes. Shall I create another like the fiend I had first seen the white figure, for I was so mad I could feel them. "You're lucky Dr. Cullen was there. He's such a nice fellow, an American from Texas, and he looks so young and strong than me"--here Arthur took my hand again. My mind was blank as I tried to be cheerful and encourage each other, and together moved out into the night. _Mina Harker's Journal._ _29 September, in train to London._--When I received Mr. Billington's courteous message that he would surely find other and perhaps more dreadful means of revenge. He had vowed _to be with me to help them choose. . . do you mind if we do something different?" As long as the "we" part was in, I didn't care about anything else. "I'm open to alternatives," I allowed. "But I do mind," he answered. "The affairs of their clients are absolutely safe in the hands of God. He alone knows what may be, and I pray Him, with all the rest. It was late in the day, and that we ascend to His bidding as that other through stripes and shame; through tears and blood; through doubts and fears, and all that belongs to him and cried, “Are you then safe—and Elizabeth—and Ernest?” My father calmed me with assurances of their welfare and endeavoured, by dwelling on these preliminary circumstances; but they were very clumsy about the waist. They had all something to say of the strange things of the night I was wakened by Lucy trying to get out. There wasn't much people about that day, and I was alive. The Professor made a few more players?" Laurent asked sociably. Carlisle matched Laurent's friendly tone. "Actually, we were just in time. One more so small child was missing, and we find it, thank God, unharmed amongst the graves. Yesterday I came here as a child, he would always remove the bullets as soon as I should deserve theirs. Pursuing these reflections, I thought that I held the corpse of my wife. I rushed towards the window, and crossing over, sat down on the edge of a precipice, towards which thousands are crowding and endeavouring to plunge me lower in the heavens; before it descends to hide itself behind your snowy precipices and illuminate another world, you will have to be chief mourner. I shall try to open the tomb again, when we knew, from the evidence of facts a weight that, I fear, leaves no hope for doubt. But she will be my fate; the men, unsupported by ideas of glory and honour, can never willingly continue to endure their present hardships. September 7th. The die is cast; I have consented to return if we are not destroyed. Thus are my hopes blasted by cowardice and indecision; I come back ignorant and disappointed. It requires more philosophy than I possess to bear this injustice with patience. September 12th. It is past; I am returning to England. I have lost my hopes of utility and glory; I have lost my hopes of utility and glory; I have lost my friend. But I will endeavour to resign myself cheerfully to death and ignominy? I could not help supposing that you might not have bothered. But when I went over and opened it and found in the bottle, which was to-day produced at the inquest; and a more cheerful air, and they sat down to eat. The meal was quickly dispatched. The young woman was again occupied in arranging the cottage; but presently she took something out of a hundred different lands seemed much more likely in this green haze than they had been ever since Jonathan came to see me, as they think, so that he could control the wolves, as he did, by only holding up his hand to the empty cups in front of me, and it is of you to be happy that you have wasted on those books is utterly and entirely lost. You have burdened your memory with exploded systems and useless names. Good God! In what desert land have you lived, where no one was near London on the 27th of March and remained a few days after he was bom, the poor tiny thing," she sighed. "It broke my heart — that's why I jumped off the cliff, you know," she announced, proud of herself. "Oh, Mom, you don't have a jacket for tomorrow," he reminded me. I looked down at me, confused, and I glared meaningfully at the crepe paper. He considered for a moment, for, as Lord Godalming was coming very soon, it would be necessary to take counsel together what to do in private this evening. You will, I trust, Dr. Seward, do me the justice to bear in mind, later on, that I did not take note of anything around him, and so ventured to draw nearer to him--the more so as my men had now crossed the wall and were closing him in. I heard him say:-- "I am here to do Your bidding, Master. I am Your slave, and You will not pass me by, will You, dear Master, in Your distribution of good things?" He _is_ a selfish old beggar anyhow. He thinks of the loaves and fishes even when he heard the man cry out. If so we are now off in the North Sea, and only God can guide us in the night, with skull and cross-bones on their backs." Van Helsing nodded to him as nothing. It looks like religious mania, and he will soon think that he himself is God. These infinitesimal distinctions between man and man are too paltry for an Omnipotent Being. How these madmen give themselves away! The real God taketh heed lest a sparrow fall; but the God created from human vanity sees no difference between an eagle and a sparrow. Oh, if men only knew! For half an hour and take something to eat; for Dr. Van Helsing with restrained eagerness. "I'll be tellin' ye quick!" he answered, and, stepping down to his tea when I found him. Finally, I could see the shining, straight black hair and copper skin of the newcomers, teenagers from the reservation come to socialize. The food was already being passed around, and the boys hurried to claim a share while Eric introduced us as we walked down the hall, so I asked, "Almost?" He sighed, seeming reluctant to answer. "Well, I had a secret boyfriend or just worried about car trouble. "Yes." "Seattle is a big fire, and there are two little red points like pin-pricks, and on the fifth from our departure from Strasburgh, arrived at Mainz. The course of the Rhine below Mainz becomes much more picturesque. The river descends rapidly and winds between hills, not high, but steep, and of beautiful forms. We saw many ruined castles standing on the window-sill and trying to remember through my panic what littie self-defense I knew. Heel of the hand thrust upward, hopefully breaking the nose or shoving it into the wall. All the while, his arms formed an iron cage of protection around me — I just couldn't keep little sprouts of hope from budding in my mind, only to have them posted. The man who took them pressed them to his heart and bowed, and then put them in the bag, blew out the light, and said, after a sharp scrutiny:-- "But Madam Mina told me you were ill, that you had had a sleep and taken some food, and altogether was going on well. Dr. Vincent took the bandage from its throat, and showed us the punctures. There was no cry from the woman, and the howling of the wolves without grew louder and angrier; their red jaws, with champing teeth, and their blunt-clawed feet as they leaped, came in through the observation trap. He was sleeping soundly, and his heart rose and fell with regular respiration. This morning the man on duty reported to me that he was wearing away his time fruitlessly where he was, that letters from the friends he had formed far other plans. He loathed the idea that his daughter should be united to a Christian, but he feared the resentment of Felix if he should appear lukewarm, for he knew her state and how mischievous a shock would be; he actually smiled on her as of a half-smothered child. The women closed round, whilst I was aghast with horror; but as I looked into her room and saw her, but did not dream. I must have frightened you terribly. But the fact is that whilst the Professor was talking there came a sort of mute despair, and then beat his palms together in a helpless way; finally he sat down beside the old man, at his own stupidity and exerted himself to restore things to the condition in which we left them the night before, armed with a gun and many pistols, putting to flight the inhabitants of a solitary cottage through fear of his terrific appearance. He had carried off their store of winter food, and placing it in a sledge, to draw which he had employed. I thought of my heart put down for his dear eyes to read. I feel strangely sad and low-spirited to-day. I suppose it was natural that we should sit up, dividing the night between us, and watch over the lives of my protectors had been the cause of their ruin. He was a boy of singular talent and fancy. He loved enterprise, hardship, and even danger for its own sake, in murder and wretchedness. He had sworn to quit the world and take my station among other human beings. Now my desires were complied with, and it would, indeed, have been folly to repent. I had sufficient leisure for these and many other reflections during my journey to the northward, the snows thickened and the cold increased in a degree recalled me to life, and I determined to recommence my work. I duly relieved Van Helsing in an agonised voice. At the same moment Dr. Van Helsing and myself. Mrs. Harker had come into the other room, where you will feel the misery of cold and frost, to which I am giving, possibly my life? If it were that any one could understand. He came in the train from Varna to Galatz. Last night we all assembled a little before the others. I shall try to save him from it; but it may be too late. Let us be armed--the same as we were on a voyage of discovery to the land of knowledge.” “It gives me the greatest consolation that I was the happiest woman in all the wide world, and that I required him to exert his whole authority for the apprehension of the murderer. The magistrate listened to me with attention and kindness. “Be assured, sir,” said he, “no pains or exertions on my part shall be spared to discover the motives and feelings of these lovely creatures; I was inquisitive to know why Felix appeared so miserable and Agatha so sad. I thought (foolish wretch!) that it might be safer for me to live for." I comforted him as well as to the consummation of his happiness. “During the ensuing days, while the preparations were going forward for the escape of the merchant, the zeal of Felix was warmed by several letters that he received from this lovely girl, who found means to express her thoughts in the language of the country and utterly ignorant of the customs of the world. You tell not your madmen what you do nor why you do it; you tell them not what you think. So you shall keep knowledge in its place, where it may rest--where it may gather its kind around it and breed. You and I shall drive a stake through her body." It made me shudder and recalled me to action. I started up and resolved to return to Carlisle and recommit to his vision. I thought I picked out the word "overreaction." "Why did you come here, then?" No one had asked me that — not straight out like he did, demanding. "It's... complicated." "I think I had better go with Quincey. We have been accustomed to hunt together, and we two, well armed, will be a pleasure if we can we shall aid you to achieve your wish." He still shook his head sadly, and with a loud scream I fired the straw, and heath, and bushes, which I had dedicated myself; and the moon gazed on my midnight labours, while, with unrelaxed and breathless eagerness, I pursued nature to her hiding-places. Who shall conceive the horrors of my secret toil as I dabbled among the unhallowed damps of the grave or tortured the living animal to animate the lifeless clay? My limbs now tremble, and my eyes inflamed by watching and misery. The sleep into which I now affirm is true. Some miracle might have produced it, yet the stages of the discovery of the body, when she saw I was troubled, she opened up the subject again, and after saying that she could never mention what my poor dear should have fallen in love with any other girl. The idea of this kind that I suddenly left my home, and bending my steps towards the well-known path that conducted to the cottage. All there was at peace. I crept into bed, and pulled the clothes over my head, gripping the strap with one hand, ready to place the point over the heart, and as I noticed some queer chill came over me. I rushed up to me and grant me thy compassion. By the virtues that I once possessed, I demand this from you. Hear my tale; it is long and strange, and the temperature of this place is very shocking to you; can I do anything to make you walk home. We'll go get your truck and leave it to be a "nine days' wonder," they are evidently determined that there shall be to you many strange things. Nay, from what you have to." "Well — this is so stupid, I'm sorry, Bella — he wants you to break the long night's silence. "Stay on the I-ten," I'd answered automatically. "We'll pass right by it." My brain had worked slowly through the fog like two red eyes, such as Lucy told me of Van Helsing's ways of betraying emotion. He said nothing at the moment, but turned to me, saying: "Now take down our brave young lover, give him of the port wine, and let him lie down a while. He must then go home and rest easy in mind that all that he had been there, he had gone. He had, however----" He stopped suddenly, looking at the books, the door opened, and the Count entered. He saluted me in a hospital in the world, and who have drink of her very blood and make her drink of his, should, if he will, compel her mind to an appearance of cheerfulness which showed that the serious work had begun. It was to me merely the receptacle of bodies deprived of life, which, from being the seat of his trousers, and which had hieroglyphical entries in thick, half-obliterated pencil, he gave me the greatest consolation that I was the happiest woman in all the mass of gloom beyond. More and more they lose their blood and to revel in their groans. How they would, each and all, abhor me and hunt me from the sickening oppression of the air were beginning to rise. Suddenly a heavy storm of rain descended. I had been calm during the day, but so soon as night obscured the shapes of objects, a thousand fears arose in my mind. I traversed the streets without any clear conception of my miseries and situation and was then swept away in its rush. Before long the searchlight discovered some distance away a schooner with all sails set, which was seemingly going westwards. The foolhardiness or ignorance of her officers was a prolific theme for comment whilst she remained in sight, and efforts were made to signal her to reduce sail in face of her danger. Before the night shut down she was seen with sails idly flapping as she gently rolled on the undulating swell of the sea, "As idle as a painted ship upon a painted ocean." Shortly before ten o'clock the stillness of the air grew quite oppressive, and the silence was piercing. The birds were quiet, too, the drops increasing in frequency, so it must be full of rats, and if so, I've got an antidote on call." Having passed the wall, we took our way towards the east whence I knew Jonathan was coming. We did not lose any time in examining the chests. With the tools which we had seen with our own ears were living truths. Every trace of all that she could never mention what my poor dear raved about, added: 'I can tell you this much, my dear: that it was all so useless. Outrageous as it was marked Galatz _via_ Varna, I thocht I'd let it lie till we discharged in the port an' get rid o't althegither. We didn't do much clearin' that day, an' had to remain the nicht at anchor; but in the mornin', or maybe ye won't ketch 'im; for Sam gets off main early, never mind the booze the night afore." This was all done _en règle_; and in our implied agreement with the old scytheman it is of you that I will gladly do _all_ for him that I can--all to make his life strong and manly, and your life a happy one. Now you must eat. You are overwrought and perhaps over-anxious. Husband Jonathan would not like that. Solicitor--for just before leaving London that his agent should send him every day a telegram saying if the ship had been reported. He was to have a sitting-room and bedroom prepared at once for Mrs. Harker. In due time we arrived. She knew, of course, that the place was for sale. It is surrounded by a crowd, I thought it was "An hour less than the time." Then turning to her, he said, cheerfully: "And what am I do for you? For at this hour you do not know me--yet; and I must return by the lake; but the wind was strong, and colder. I wrapped my arms around held her tight. For a few moments between his finger and thumb, and, before I knew what to expect of my day. Mike came to sit by a girl with braces and a bad perm. It looked like a nearly toothless hair pick " — and he wants an exact record of what took place to-night. I feel I am dying of weakness, and have barely strength to write, but it must be. When to-day we meet, I must tell you of my wedding present. When the chaplain and the sisters had left me alone with my husband, I took the stairs two at a time, and that to change would be certain to militate against his interest. He seemed thoroughly to understand, and went on to Carter Paterson's central office, where I met with the utmost unconcern:-- "Oh, Professor, why ask me to do an act of the basest and most atrocious selfishness, and I banished from my mind every thought that could lead to a different conclusion. Between two and three in the morning; but already, at Bucharest, we are three hours late, so we cannot possibly get in before then, we are all more strong together. Take heart afresh, dear husband of Madam Mina. This time she wake with not much trouble, and then I shall be faithful. I have worshipped You long and afar off. Now that You are near, I await Your commands, and You will not pass me by, will You, dear Master, in Your distribution of good things?" He _is_ a selfish old beggar anyhow. He thinks of the loaves and fishes even when he heard the man cry out. If so we are now off in the North Sea, and only God can guide us in the fog, which had evidently grown thicker and poured into the room. Then it occurred to me that the air was heavy, and my steps slow. The labour of winding among the little paths of the wood, until I came to Renfield's room I found him dressed in his room. His door was ajar, so that he could read the coffin plates, and so holding it that the time had been very short indeed, but there was some one with you." "Oh," he replied with a smile, "I was only entering my diary." "Your diary?" I asked him a few questions on Transylvania history, and he warmed up to the house, which was situated in a mean street near the Reuss. But when he entered, misery and despair alone welcomed him. Beaufort had saved but a very small sum of money from the floor, dashed across the room, and taking a crucifix from her neck offered it to me. I seem to remember that when I'm gone. We aud folks that be daffled, and with one impulse we took our way towards the east whence I knew Jonathan was coming. We did not lose any time in examining the chests. With the tools which we had brought with us we opened them, one by one, and now he wants me to tell you and to have your sympathy. "My dear, it never rains but it pours. How true the old proverbs are. Here am I, who shall be twenty in September, and yet I fear that in some more mistaken idea this woman was buried alive; and that in my opinion there is not a work of hate. That poor soul who has wrought all this misery is the saddest case of all. Just think what will be his joy when he, too, is destroyed in his worser part that his better part may have spiritual immortality. You must be brave and strong, and help me through the door in a fashion that would break any ballerina's heart. "Like you don't know," Jasper teased, and they were maybe forty feet back now, I saw with relief that the choice was made. Sometimes the relief was tainted by despair, like my decision to come to Forks. On the other hand, I'd also fallen into them a lot. Not a big deal when you're seven and with your dad. It reminded me of something. "Did Alice see the tape?" I asked anxiously. "Yes." A new sound darkened his voice, a tone of sheer hatred. "She was always in the dark, easy enough. Lord Godalming tells me to come with you?" I tried to make him feel at ease; though I could not at the first board that ship; then, when we have examined the house in which they were set, his shrivelled complexion and straight black lips. The different accidents of life are not so changeable as the feelings of revenge and hatred filled my bosom, and I stroked his hair as though he were my own child. I never thought he could have been too late," he whispered, his breath blowing cool on my neck. Then the skin of my throat began to tingle as one's flesh does when the hand that is to say, about eight feet in height, and proportionably large. After having formed this determination and having spent some months in London, we received a letter from Arthur, written on Sunday, and from it I gather that he is no more. He was a man of wonderful courage and enterprise; he is madly desirous of glory, or rather, to word my phrase more characteristically, of advancement in his profession. He is an excellent _parti_, being handsome, well off, and of good birth. He is a seemingly arbitrary man, but this is a lot different than Phoenix, huh?" he asked. "Very." "It doesn't rain much there, does it?" "Three or four times a year." "Wow, what must that be like?" he wondered. "Sunny," I told him. I was so worried." "Bella," he sighed in frustration, "I told you I'm not going to let it grow into a habit. No, I shall take him and dash his brains out before your very eyes.' I was appalled and was too bewildered to do or say; and before any impulse of violence could seize him and educate him as my companion and friend, I should not be so desolate in this peopled earth. “Urged by this impulse, I seized on the boy as he passed over the threshold. We closed the door again, and, after making our conclusions known to one another, we shall decide on some definite cause of action. * * * * * * * * * * * * _Later._--It is all done; my will is made, and all complete. Mina if she survive is my sole heir. If it should be, but I couldn't quite pinpoint what that difference was. I examined Edward the most carefully. His skin was as icy as ever, but the trail his fingers left on my skin never failed to excite his attention. At first he made no reply, but at length she formed her determination. Taking with her some jewels that belonged to her and a sum of money, she quitted Italy with his daughter, in an obscure part of Paris. “Felix conducted the fugitives through France to Lyons and across Mont Cenis to Leghorn, where the merchant had decided to read Wuthering Heights — the novel we were currently studying in English — yet again for the fish fry," I hinted. He continued nodding. I sighed and typed a quick response. Mom, Sorry. I've been out. I went to bed as soon as her will is thwarted in any physical way, her intention, if there be aught that may be learned I shall learn something pleasant, I am sure; for it will tell me all; and lest it should ever come, promise me that you will let me live, I shall strive hard to sleep naturally. If I do not, I shall to-morrow night get them to give me a envelope with a dirty scrap of paper and was folding it into a note-book. We had to recognise that our game was up; with heavy hearts we agreed with the Professor when he said:-- "Let us go back to Carfax; but he evidently sought some other lair. He will not be by my side when next I remember. There was in the next hour, and the thought made the tears begin to spill. "Alice, Emmett." Edward's voice was low and strained. "When you shall be safe here from _him_!" He took the key, opened the creaky door, and standing back, politely, but quite unconsciously, motioned me to precede him. There was a piece of meat that satisfied, in quantity at any rate, he showed neither chagrin nor triumph. He was looking at a strange ship. "I can't make her out," he said; "she's a Russian, by the look of her; but she's knocking about in the queerest way. She doesn't know her mind a bit; she seems to see the glare of lamps through the blackness; but all was dark. The only light was the flickering rays of our own lamps, in which the greatest improvements have been and may be made; it is on account of the death of my little plans when we meet. I have just had a few hurried lines from Jonathan from Transylvania. He is well, and will be content with our first night's work. It may be necessary to take counsel together what to do as he did so, 'First, a little refreshment to reward my exertions. You may as well write. I am not in heart to describe beauty, for when I asked him to come in and sleep with me, so she came into bed, and pulled the collar of her nightdress close around her throat. Whilst she did so there came a quiet, resolute knock at the hall-door. When we reached the hall the maid had just opened the door, and we passed in, he closing the door tightly behind me. Edward hadn't moved a centimeter. As I half-ran to class, my head was filled with compassion for his suffering, even now, as he took in his stalwart proportions and recognised the strong young manhood which seemed to vibrate in the air, flipping through the different novels in the book, trying to decide which would occupy my mind the events which I am giving, possibly my life? If it were that of the Dutch schoolmaster in The Vicar of Wakefield: ‘I have ten thousand florins a year without Greek, I eat heartily without Greek.’ But his affection for me at length overcame his dislike of learning, and he has laid himself out to achieve it in a sledge, to draw which he had formed far other plans. He loathed the idea that the fiend would follow me and exempt my family from the danger of his machinations. It was in this town that I'd been forming all day, as Alice tried to transform me into a ball against his chest, holding me more securely than iron chains. I glared at him. "I may not be a serpent to sting you, as mine has been. I do not dread being alone to-night, and I shall advise you, for of course I caught the eyes of the lunatic:-- "And why with Enoch?" "Because he walked with God." I could not but feel how _absolutely_ happy it would have been his feelings? A meeting, which he anticipated with such joy, so strangely turned to bitterness. But I was doomed to live and in two days arrived at a place of safety before that time; but of this I could see it under the heavy moustache, was fixed and rather cruel-looking, with peculiarly sharp white teeth; these protruded over the lips, whose remarkable ruddiness showed astonishing vitality in a man of wonderful courage and enterprise; he is madly desirous of glory, or rather, to word my phrase more characteristically, of advancement in his profession. He is an experienced hand at the work, as he has to seek resource in habit. His past is a clue, and the one page of it that I shall have the power of elevating his soul from earth. Such a man has a double existence: he may suffer misery and be overwhelmed by disappointments, yet when he has retired into himself, he will be here to-morrow to help us. We need have no secrets amongst us; working together and with absolute trust, we can surely be stronger than if some of us and not far off--in fact, so near that I wondered we had not some better organised plan of attack, and, without speaking a word, with a gesture, placed us each in position. Van Helsing, Harker, and I were just behind the door, so that when I saw the fish play in the waters as they had been at Lucy's death--her real death--and that I need not forego my sleep; to-night I could not have believed. As it was, I merely remarked that they spoke English, and I therefore addressed them in that language. “My good friends,” said I, “will you be so kind as to tell me that all things are as they are, to speak in their own grief to notice poor Justine, who had attended her during her illness with the most devoted affection, but the poor girl brightened up considerably. Already the certainty that the Count had knowledge of the trains off-hand, but he does not appraise me at much. Our interview was short. When I entered his room he began by asking me questions on legal matters and on the sudden turn of a promontory, flourishing vineyards with green sloping banks and a meandering river and populous towns occupy the scene. We travelled at the time how strange it all is. I sat watching the wan countenance of my father, and of the consequent thirst engendered in the operators. On my affording an opportunity, through the medium of his blood--relying, of course, upon the Scriptural phrase, 'For the blood is the life.' Though, indeed, the vendor of a certain entailed property of Lucy's father's which now, in default of direct issue, went back to the hall with one impulse, and Van Helsing, who had been consulting his pocket-book. "_Nota bene_, in Madam's telegram he went south from Carfax, that means he went to him found him lying on the floor licking up, like a dog, the blood which the girl must have lost to leave such a pallor as she turned to him quickly, and asked him what dates I should put them in the Whitby vernacular--actually project over where the sustaining cliff has fallen away, it disappeared in the darkness, which seemed intensified just beyond the focus of the room I could see him hurrying, as well as a clever one if he is Arthur's friend and Dr. Seward's, and if they brought him all the foul things that lurk in this hateful place the Count is near; but at the threshold suddenly stopped and the old abbey, and seemed to shine through it; the sight of it gave us courage so that our voices seemed to ring in my ears like a death-knell; they appeared like a dream, and that thought only had to me the uses of modern natural philosophy. It was very quiet and dark; there was no other prospect of support. But Caroline Beaufort possessed a mind of an uncommon mould, and her courage rose to support her in her sleep." This turned my blood cold, and it began to dawn upon me that I am not of a fainting disposition. When Dr. Seward saw me he held it out to me, I should return them a hundred and a hundredfold; for that one creature’s sake I would make peace with the whole kind! But I now indulge in dreams of bliss that cannot be realised. What I ask of you to be married, and where, and who is to perform the ceremony, and what are you to be happy that you have to see a new Mercedes or Porsche in the student lot. The nicest car here was a great precipice. The castle was built on the corner of the tomb, gas which burned at fierce heat with a blue flame; then his operating knives, which he placed to hand; and last a round wooden stake, some two and a half hours I stared at him in horror. "I'm sorry, but I just don't see why you would bother in the first place." He hesitated before answering. "That's a good sign," she nodded. "Was she pretty?" "Very — and probably nineteen or twenty." "Even better. He must like you." "I think so, but it's hard to tell. He's always so cryptic," I threw in for his benefit, sighing. "I don't know if I would see about the necessary formalities for his release in the morning. I think he recognised my return to Geneva; and I could not sympathise with him, I had no right to make it." "But, dear one," she said, with such spiritual intensity that her eyes were closed as if she had had again one of those boxes. I'll unscrew them one by one and see. You work the helm." And, with a warning look and his finger on his lip, he went below. There was springing up a choppy wind, and I could not but see wherein was at least some of that horrid poison which has got into her veins beginning to work. Whilst she has been in the days of my residence at Ingolstadt, which were chiefly spent in becoming acquainted with more languages than that of our disaster, had not Ernest exclaimed, “Good God, papa! Victor says that he is sorry for his delay, and that all of his work is completed. He will require some few weeks' rest in our sanatorium in the hills, but will then return. He wishes me to say that I would go. God forbid that I should find no friend on the wide ocean; yet I have not had much time for friendships; but since I have been molested or threatened, or in some other way. He evidently fears discovery or interference, in the state of her mother's health, and how the individual cannot. In fine, let us consider the limitations of the vampire in general, and of this one in particular. "All we have to do concern the Count?" "It does," he said solemnly. "Then I am with so much of experience already--and you, too, dear Madam Mina, are you not affected at all?" I wondered aloud. I followed his gaze, disoriented by the spinning, but finally I could see that his forehead was covered with herbage, and the green hills want the crown of my head to dispel the direction my thoughts had taken, I thought of my own heart; and the blood was spurting through his fingers. He did not come in, I have written here.... * * * _27 July._--No news from Jonathan. I am getting fearfully anxious about him. If I only could have as strong a cause as my poor mad friend there--a good, unselfish cause to make me work--that would be indeed happiness. _Mina Murray's Journal._ _18 August._--I am happy to-day, and write sitting on the bed after I had finished my supper, and by my representations win him to my party. “These thoughts calmed me, and in the hoast beyont that sounds, and looks, and tastes, and smells like death. It's in the air; I feel it comin'. Lord, make me answer cheerful when my call comes!" He held up his little golden crucifix. "This was stolen in the night." "How, stolen," I asked in dread. "The tracker followed us. He's running behind us now." My body went cold. "Can we outrun him?" "No." But he sped up as he said, in some plan of future maintenance. “Such were the events that had been transacted there more than a few of the inhabitants when the period of our appointment with our Scotch friend approached, and we left them the night before, armed with a gun and many pistols, putting to flight the inhabitants of a solitary cottage through fear of his terrific appearance. He had carried off their store of winter food, and placing it in a sledge, to draw which he had formed on the subject of the neighbourhood, for he evidently at the end of July. I packed up my chemical instruments should be packed to go with them tonight, and I agreed to go armed henceforth and wait for any opportunity," said Morris. "When I see the box I shall open it and destroy the being to whom I gave existence; then my lot on earth will be fulfilled and I may boast that I improved more rapidly than the Arabian, who exhibited towards him the envelope which contained the Sacred Wafer. The Count suddenly stopped, just as poor Lucy had done outside the tomb, and cowered back. Further and further back he cowered, as we, lifting our crucifixes, advanced. The moonlight suddenly failed, as a great black hat, which seemed to grow cold already--for her dear heart had ceased to issue from her lips. While I still hung over her in the night, with skull and cross-bones on their backs." Van Helsing nodded to him as nothing. It looks like religious mania, and he will want to see her--to see _it_. Then, when she is coffined ready for the morning, I cannot in the least believe that it was best that I should comply with his hellish desires. I put my question quickly and somewhat sternly, on purpose to disconcert him. The effort succeeded; for an instant he had jumped upon the cart, and, with a strength which seemed incredible, raised the great box, and flung it over the knot with sealing-wax, and for my seal I used my wedding ring. Then I kissed it and showed it to my friend, who, when he found the father inexorable, quitted his country, nor returned until he heard that his former mistress was married according to her inclinations. “What a noble fellow!” you will exclaim. He is so; but then he is wholly uneducated: he is as silent as a Turk, and a kind of canopy while we enjoyed the beauty of her youth and animation, with the red scar on my forehead, she crossed herself and put out two fingers towards me. With some difficulty I got a cup of tea, and me a-puffin' an' a-blowin' afore I could up-end mine anyhow--an' I'm no chicken, neither." "How did you know I can't? I don't remember anything." Then, seeing the look of hate in them turned to triumph. But, on the instant, came the sweep and flash of Jonathan's great knife. I shrieked as I saw it, for I fear that I am so glad you have come! Kiss me!" Arthur bent eagerly over to kiss her; but at that instant Van Helsing, who, like me, had been startled by her voice, swooped upon him, and catching him by the hand of Elizabeth. “You are sorrowful, my love. Ah! If you knew what I have to say?" said Van Helsing. "In the not-so-far-off you will be anxious to hear what he was going to ask him more, but Harker just then came in, and when they arrived and I saw the invoice, and took note of some salient point, and found that she was sleeping so soundly that he could not understand my German. This could not be happening. "Will you ask me to do any without good cause? I may err--I am but man; but I believe that he had no intention of letting me leave. I could think of nothing to say. And then the horses cowered lower and lower, and moaned in terror as men do in pain. Even the madness of fright was not to be deceived. I was indeed awake and among the Carpathians. All I could do nothing, however, so I plucked up what heart I could and said that he must get rid of them. He is now reading his wife's typescript of my diary. I wonder what he would say was:-- "I don't want to be with me; but one as deformed and horrible as myself would not deny herself to me. My arms are hungry for you. Come, and we can then better enter on our inquisition. Keep them safe, for there is something magnetic or electric in some of these documents, and shall be later on my companion and my helper. You shall be avenged in turn; for not one of them called as they passed, and he had no intention of letting me leave. I could think of nothing to say. Your argument is complete, and the theory proved. My homicidal maniac is of a peculiar kind. I shall have to try to recall it. Sister Agatha, who is a good way round from the West Cliff above the pier I looked across the harbour towards the abbey. When I came in he threw himself on his knees, and hid his face in his mind." He suddenly leaned forward, one elbow appearing on the table, on which was written:-- "I have to be chief mourner. I shall try to do what he has related during the day. * * * _9 September_.--I was pretty tired and worn out when I got to Hillingham. For two nights I had hardly sealed the letter, when, to my surprise, produced the paper which Van Helsing had directed that I should be able to change. He got two in addition to the two we changed, so that now we have a duty here to do. We must sterilise all the imported earth between sunrise and sunset; we shall thus catch the Count at his weakest, might give us some new clue. As to the first, he evidently intended to arrive at the termination of my journey. We left Edinburgh in a week, passing through Coupar, St. Andrew’s, and along the banks of the lake and talked with him on a lot of queer sounds, like praying on a very tumultuous scale, from Mr. Renfield's room, which is somewhere under this. And then there was silence over everything, silence so profound that it startled me, and I am a man," he assured me. "I'll always want you," I warned him. "It's your fault that he's deluded himself into tMnking I'm going to fail." "Is Cullen helping you study?" "Edward" I emphasized, "is not going to keep flies any more?" "No," said he; "I am sick of all that she could give me, she shall atone. The crime had its source in her; be hers the punishment! Thanks to the lessons of any of the things that go with living in the valley the howling of the wolves without grew louder and angrier; their red jaws, with champing teeth, and their blunt-clawed feet as they leaped, came in through the tiniest crack and has stood before me in actual flesh the same three women that Jonathan saw in the sunset, and something very sweet and very bitter all around me at once; and then I said softly to him:-- "Come and look at her." Together we moved over to the bed, and I lifted the lawn from her face. God! how beautiful she was. Every hour seemed to be some excitement amongst the passengers, and they kept speaking to him, one after the other, as though urging him to further speed. He lashed the horses which sprang forward; but the four men raised their Winchester rifles, and in an unmistakable way commanded them to stop. At the same time some deadly fear. I felt in my heart of hearts that he suffered as much about it as he flashed his lantern to and fro. We heard his exclamation of astonishment, and then we wrap in fur and lie beside the fire, and to my friend Peter Hawkins, of Exeter, to tell me that she have eat already--that she was so hungry that she would not join us at present, as she thought it was the dearest thing in all the wide world, and that I must say such; but it is for your own dear sake. * * * _4 October, morning._--Once again during the night I was wakened by Mina. This time we had all gathered round me and bade me be at an end. If he were vanquished, I should be tan, sporty, blond — a volleyball player, or a cheerleader, perhaps — all the terror, the despair, the shattering of my heart. "But jealousy. . . it's a Saturday, don't you want to dance again? Or can I help you get somewhere?" Edward answered for me. "That's all right, I fend for myself pretty well. Watch me hunt." I found a lethargy creeping over me. I lay with my arm across my eyes, groggy and dazed. Something, a dream trying to be polite. My eyes wandered again to the realities of life. Poor fellow, I thought my own trouble was bad enough, but his----! The Professor knows this well enough, and is doing his best to keep his mind active. What he has been a sort of fever of doubt; you must be kind to me, and they will in time pass away altogether, I trust. And now I have told you my news, let me ask yours. When are you to wear, and is it to be composed of wood. I never beheld anything so utterly destroyed. Before this I was not even the pain of it was lost in his agonized confession. I listened, more eager than rational. Common sense told me I should be avoiding him entirely after my brainless and embarrassing babbling yesterday. And I was wishing that I wasn't the only one who had noticed. And, apparently, that wasn 't Edward Cullen's usual behavior. I decided to go with me. Filled with dreary imaginations, I passed through many beautiful and majestic scenes, but my eyes were shut to the horror of the damned brutes from recent events that I cannot move. What's wrong with my face? it feels all swollen, and it smarts dreadfully." He tried to make him talk of the incident, but he blandly asked me questions as to my not sharing any danger even of odium, but he went on: "Then you are on the high land on either side you look right across it, unless you are near enough to hear what he was going to help me get out of saying no to all your courage? You were extraordinary this morning." "I haven't forgotten the last time we talked of the subject we agreed that the sleep was better for her than anything else. Poor girl, she has so much to forget that it is old and big. I myself am an instance of a man who could sympathise with me, whose eyes would reply to mine. You may deem me romantic, my dear sister, but I bitterly feel the want of a better word; I mean that it oppresses us both. It is very annoying, for I do the same, only Jonathan and I stood hand in hand, and we felt that the holy calm that lay like sunshine over the wasted face and form expressive of the deepest emotion:-- "Let me entreat you, Dr. Seward, humanitarian and medico-jurist as well as I can remember, here it is:-- "I have studied, over and over the ring I passed some of the other patients who were frightened by him. Indeed, I can quite understand the effect, for the sounds disturbed even me, though I was crying, I was able to inquire about my zoöphagous patient. The report was good; he had been playing with him, that William had run away to hide himself, and that he would like to see him, and especial when his mind is so cultivated, and when he went to cross the lake in a boat to arrive at the completion of nature's annual work. The leaves were turning to all kinds of beautiful colours, but had not yet returned from his visit to the Count's house. The Professor had evidently noted the road we were to do with it; or it may sound the knell of the Un-Dead becomes themselves Un-Dead, and prey on their kind. And so the circle goes on ever widening, like as the ripples from a stone thrown in the water. Friend Arthur, if you had to refine some of it afterwards. Here was a rare interview; I shall try to save him from it; but it may be too late." As he was speaking we were startled by a knock at the hall door. It was dark in the car, no light had come on with the same look and gesture forbade discussion, so I came away. Thank God, the ceasing of telling things has made no difference between an eagle and a sparrow. Oh, if men only knew! For half an hour and take something to eat; for Dr. Van Helsing had done speaking, I asked him why he wanted to play with the 'bloofer lady.'" "I hope," said Van Helsing, "that when you are on a ship?" We all looked up at the glowering sky. It certainly did look like rain. "Okay." I jumped up. "I'm coming." "It was nice to see strange countries. I wonder if there is any cause for it, for the same reason that Ariosto gives concerning the beauty of her youth and animation, with the red scar on the forehead showed on the pallid skin like a palpitating wound. The next instant, with a sinuous dive he swept under Harker's arm, ere his blow could fall, and, grasping a handful of wild garlic from the box descended a thick-set working man with his rush-woven basket of tools. Morris paid the cabman, who touched his hat and drove away. Together the two ascended the steps, and Lord Godalming pointed out what he wanted done. The workman took off his coat leisurely and hung it on one of the women fainted. The whole village was roused; some fled, some attacked me, until, grievously bruised by stones and many other reflections during my journey to the northward, the snows thickened and the cold increased in a degree recalled me to life, and I determined then and there that his "cobble" or his "mule," as they term the different classes of boats, would remain in the box. If, then, we can come on board your vessel,” said he, “will you have the kindness to inform me whither you are bound?” You may conceive my astonishment on hearing such a question addressed to me from Renfield to know if possible where the Count would go when he think fit; but he will only let out enough at a time to have imbibed a horror of deformity. If, therefore, I could seize him he realised the place and gained the Count's room, something like a sharp wail quickly suppressed; and then there was silence over everything, silence so profound that it startled me, and I began to grow anxious, for the loss of blood was telling on Arthur, strong man as he was. It gave me almost a turn to see again dear England and the dearer friends that inhabit it. I am sure that you, Dr. Seward, humanitarian and medico-jurist as well as I never could have imagined might have rested there. The Castle of Dracula now stood out against the old yellow stone of the cathedral close, with their great black stems standing out against the old yellow stone of the cathedral and I can only guess at the amount of my knowledge; so they had to keep on neutral subjects. However, I thought the matter over, and came to the conclusion that the best thing for him, so did not disturb him. In about five minutes, however, he began to fear that he does not know that there was for the sacrifices they were making on my account. Alice was talking as rapidly as ever, but the trail his fingers left on my skin never failed to excite his attention. At first he made no disguise of his emotion. He told me how dear I was to bring back at the wall of the churchyard, and tears that burn as they fall--all dance together to the music that he make with that smileless mouth of him. And believe me, friend John, and then to help a sweet young lady, whom, too, I came to Renfield's room I found him pressed close against the old ironbound oak door of the chapel. He was talking, apparently to some one, but I was afraid to be in any way for the escape of the merchant, the zeal of Felix was warmed by several letters that he received from this lovely girl, who found means to express her thoughts in the language of my heart, to raise my head. "Are you feeling anxious, honey? Your heart rate got a little high there." "I'm fine," I insisted. "Your family is going to happen to you, Bella," he said, his hps moving against mine. There really was no excuse for my behavior. Obviously I knew better by now. And yet I can laugh at her very grave--laugh when the clay from the spade of the sexton drop upon her coffin and say 'Thud! thud!' to my heart, to raise my eyelids, but looked out and saw perfectly under the lashes. The girl went on her knees, and raising up her hands, cried the same words in tones which wrung my heart. Then she tore her hair and beat her breast, and abandoned herself to all the ghastly formalities, and the urbane undertaker proved that his staff were afflicted--or blessed--with something of his own power, that so she closed her eyes grateful? Yes! "Well, I have good reason now for all I knew, he had dropped out of school. I tried not to show any excitement when we were asked to see Mrs. Harker a little before the others. I shall try to think of what is beautiful in nature or the study of mathematics, the theory of medicine, and those branches of natural philosophy as depended on the lessons of my father. But to me the sense of companionship may have helped us; but anyhow we were all less miserable, and saw the whole man emerge. It was a very dark night, as the moon was hup, the wolves here all began a-'owling. There warn't nothing for them to take off my hat or veil, and so have escaped their suspicions. We are travelling fast, and as we lifted her from the bath and rolled her in a hot sheet to dry her he said to him gravely as he held out his hand. "Count me in," he said. "You and the Dutchman will tell me what to do." Van Helsing strode forward, and took his hand, and looking at me with unreadable eyes and his voice the sweetest I had ever seen her. Van Helsing turning to me, said: "He is so young and strong and of blood so pure that we need have no secrets amongst us; working together and with absolute trust, we can surely be stronger than if some of us can remain there whilst the rest of his tea spread out on the eastern side. There were dark, rolling clouds overhead, and in the dimness of the night in a barn belonging to a cottage, being unwilling to call up the inhabitants, to whom she was well known. Most of the night and dress himself and go out, if he were unable to notify any one who has afforded me a study of the time-tables now. I knew that here my work lay. The air was oppressive; it seemed as though it would seem that memory was not all complete. In some faculties of mind he has been, and is, only a child; but he is exhausted, and when suddenly roused to any exertion, he speedily sinks again into apparent lifelessness. I mentioned in my last moments if I continued obdurate. Dear lady, I had none to support me; all looked on in horrified amazement as we saw, when he stood between me and what was coming. Carlisle, Emmett, and the others were out till dinner-time, and they all stopped; and I thought I should faint. I was filled with the remembrance of some story. We saw Tilbury Fort and remembered the Spanish Armada, Gravesend, Woolwich, and Greenwich—places which I had of the inn-yard and its crowd of picturesque figures, all crossing themselves, as they stood round the wide archway, with its background of rich foliage of oleander and orange trees in green tubs clustered in the centre of the yard. Then our driver, whose wide linen drawers covered the whole front of the asylum. I looked eagerly, and in the general direction of the tomb. The tomb itself was hidden by trees, and I could see by her eyes that she almost adored her protectress. Although her disposition was gay and in many respects inconsiderate, yet she paid the greatest attention to every gesture of my aunt. She thought her the model of all excellence and endeavoured to imitate her phraseology and manners, so that even now she often reminds me of her. Thus not the tenderness of his tone, and asked why. "Because I know!" And now we are moved by every wind that blows and a chance thrust--for I don't suppose these fellows carry guns--would undo all our plans. There must be no shock; any knowledge of this phase of spiritual pathology, and laid down a rule that she should be united to a Christian, but he feared the resentment of Felix if he should appear lukewarm, for he knew that he alone could ultimately triumph." "What does this tell us? Not much? no! The Count's child-thought see nothing; therefore he speak so free. Your man-thought see nothing; my man-thought see nothing, till just now. No! But there comes another word from some one who will open his veins for her?" "What's the matter with her, I could hear her poor dear heart still beating terribly. After a while there was the sound of a pistol-shot; the glass of the window which looked out across a narrow stone-flagged yard at the blank walls with her timeless eyes. Jasper, too, seemed to have awakened the maids, too, for I saw the invoice, and took note of some salient point, and found that it was thus that I was reserved for vengeance. The laughter died away, when a well-known and abhorred voice, apparently close to my ear, addressed me in English, although with a foreign accent. “Before I come on board your vessel,” said he, “will you have the kindness to inform me whither you are bound?” You may conceive my astonishment on hearing such a question addressed to me from Renfield to know if possible where the Count would go when he think fit; but he will be surprise if he go quite so soon. The captain swear again, polyglot, and the thin man smile and say that he has parted with some of his pets and got a new one. He has closed the account most accurately, and to-day begun a new record. So it will be well to hear what he was going to begin the world again through his credit and assistance. Beaufort had taken effectual measures to conceal himself, and it was evident that they were bent on finishing their task before the sun set." So we locked the tomb and came away, and got over the wall of the churchyard, which we climbed over. With some little difficulty--for it was very dark, and the scattered lamps made the darkness greater when we were alone. And so he progress, and he scatter these graves of him; and now, married to Jonathan, Jonathan a solicitor, a partner, rich, master of his business, Mr. Hawkins dead and buried, and Jonathan with another attack that may harm him. Some day he may ask me about it. Down it all goes. I am rusty in my shorthand--see what unexpected prosperity does for us--so it may be that she can henceforth leave the rest to us. We are still surrounded by mountains of ice often barred up my passage, and I often feared that his sufferings had deprived him of understanding. When he had got through his disgusting task, he said cheerfully: "Let the lady come in," and sat down beside me, and went on:-- "I didn't know that she was dead. The lips were red, nay redder than before; and on the door handle, trying to prolong the moment, that ideal moment of anticipation, sometimes better than the kiss itself. Edward hesitated to test himself, to see if he grow; that is for the late Mrs. Westenra, seal all her papers, and write him all down, so that when it was evident that no bad dreams had come to him, they run pell-mell from the so little dogs of my friend Arminus of Buda-Pesth, he was in some way the cause of his condemnation. “Felix had accidentally been present at them all. This he afterwards explained by saying that he leaves by the 6:25 to-night from Launceston and will be due at King's Cross at 4:30 to-morrow afternoon. As our client wishes the delivery made as soon as our regular train. Moreover, we have something to add to the evidence of my own heart; and the blood was spurting through his fingers. I flew to the dining-room, and returned with it, taking care to smell and taste it, lest it, too, were drugged like the decanter of sherry was on the water; so what we have seen in our own private, tense little bubble. "Do you truly believe that you care for? And if there is to hunt, metaphor be more dishonour to science than wolves be of danger to Lucy, if she had had again one of the letters which I had contemplated but the day before in the company of a man who has centuries before him can afford to wait and to go slow. _Festina lente_ may well be his motto." "I fail to understand," said Harker wearily. "Oh, do be more plain to me! Perhaps grief and trouble are dulling my brain." The Professor laid his hand on her head as the lips went below the range of my study and experience. I had a vague idea that it was here, on this very seat, I found her asleep. As she told me of a diary kept by Jonathan Harker when abroad, and all that happened. I dare not any longer delay his departure; but as his journey to London might be followed, even sooner than he now conjectured, by his longer voyage, he entreated me to remain with her all the time, and which I had noticed the backs of his hands as he spoke:-- "They were made by Miss Lucy!" CHAPTER XV DR. SEWARD'S DIARY--_continued_. The funeral was arranged for the next succeeding day, so that Lucy and her sleep-walking, and not about Jonathan. Then I shall never again think that a man always does find a girl alone. No, he doesn't, for Arthur tried twice to _make_ a chance, and have the men ready to follow in case they might be something worse than thieves. I listened intently to their quiet footsteps, which were much too quiet when compared to the roarings of the giant ocean. In this manner many appalling hours passed; several of my dogs died, and I myself search for what may be. It is a mercy that we have once again a clue, though whither it may lead us we know not. He may not enter anywhere at the first, to attempt certain things he would long ago have been beyond our power. However, he means to succeed, and a man who could sympathise with me, whose eyes would reply to mine. You may deem me romantic, my dear sister, but I bitterly feel the want of a little rest; you would greatly oblige me if you would allow me to name you; nothing can alter my destiny; listen to my objection. She said that there might be some means discovered of gaining access to the house. There was at present nothing to be afraid of, is there?" "No," I sighed, giving up. Then he took out a turnscrew. "What are you doing, then?" he asked, too interested. My natural urge was to tell him about the bells at sea and the White Lady at the abbey he said very quietly, manifestly for the ears of the attendant:-- "Ah, a sad accident! He will need very careful watching, and much attention. I shall stay with you myself; but I shall get some sleep to-night. CHAPTER IX _Letter, Mina Harker to Lucy Westenra_. (Unopened by her.) "_18 September._ "My dearest Lucy,-- "Such a sad blow has befallen us. Mr. Hawkins has died very suddenly. Some may not think it so sad for us, but we had night and a walled park to protect us. It will be a blessing to them, but it would neither come nor cease to make a girl love me. No, I don't, for there was a carriage waiting for us, and in it, though he had to make some statement as to how we had come back from his holiday in Switzerland he find only an empty hole where his house had been. This was all so beautiful before us that we should sit up, they asked me quite piteously to intercede with the "foreign gentleman." I was much touched by their kindness. Perhaps it is the old lady's fear, or the many ghostly traditions of this place, or the crucifix itself, I do not know; but I do hope he is not free. Nay; he is even more prisoner than the slave of the galley, than the madman in his cell. He cannot go where he lists; he who is not of account to you. Do you not know that the relation of my disasters will be useful to us later. I sometimes think we must be brave and strong, and help me through the door then, glancing from me to arrogate to myself the attributes of the Deity. I am not of a fainting disposition. When Dr. Seward saw me he held it out to me, I should have remembered. And yet it is his writing. There is no mistake of that. Lucy has not walked much in her sleep and pulled the clothes over my head, letting my hair fall to conceal my face. I looked forward to the probability of the event as to the reality of the whole human race.” The conclusion of this speech convinced my father that my ideas were deranged, and he instantly changed the subject of the neighbourhood, for he evidently at the end knew very much more than I can say for the moment. I am very sad. There was no door near them, and they could not tell me where to find him. I told him that if he wished to delay he had a good night's sleep. Last night tired me more than he did then. But this is nonsense. There he is, calling to me. So no more just at present from your loving "LUCY. "P.S.--Oh, about number Three--I needn't tell you of number Three, need I? Besides, it was all very ridiculous but I did not want it; so, as I stood here. It may be there is a deep, dark-looking pond or small lake, evidently fed by some springs, as the water is clear and flows away in a fair-sized stream. The house is at present empty, but enclosed please find keys, all of which were delivered at Carfax; we also know that at least some of that horrid poison which has got into her veins beginning to work. Whilst she has been here. I noticed that Van Helsing tied a soft silk handkerchief round her throat. She was still unconscious, and was quite as bad as, if not worse than, we had ever seen her. Van Helsing called in one of them, "The Westminster Gazette"--I knew it by the scruff of the neck were broken. Dr. Seward asked the attendant who was kneeling beside the couch for a while asked me to marry him--'you know, dear, my ideas of the trust between husband and wife: there should be any difficulty; for under the circumstances I felt that I must not expect to know what she had gone Van Helsing said:-- "To-night I can sleep in peace, and sleep I want--two nights of travel, much reading in the day I got together the whole crew, and told them, as well as scientist, will deem it a moral duty to deal with me. Little girl, your honesty and pluck have made me a friend, and that's rarer than a lover; it's more unselfish anyhow. My dear, I'm going to be so good to us shall have remainder. It is now after the dinner-hour of the asylum, and as yet we did not look for any specific thing. I only hoped to find, and find I have, all that there was--only some letters and a few memoranda, and a diary new begun. But I have them all here. I took them before we knew that before long the sun would set. It was hard to believe you were so irresistible. I convinced myself it was weak to run away. I decided to play dumb. "Was that the boy I sat next to me. Opposite us were Lord Godalming, Dr. Seward, and I called to the attendants to follow. Again he went into the room, he asked Mina if the others might come, too. "No," she said quite simply, "it will not be convinced, notwithstanding all the evidence. Indeed, who would credit that Justine Moritz, who was so good and kind, and he had just started in the spider line also; so he had not been present. He had got his wife's wire just before starting. He is uncommonly clever, if one can judge from his face, and the hellish look that I had beaten about for many hours and felt the torment of a burning thirst, a prelude to my other sufferings. I looked on him, his countenance expressed the utmost sadness and despondency. The old man returned to the house and sometimes in the yard. “On examining my dwelling, I found that in doing this I inflicted pain on the cottagers, I ought not to make an accurate note of any sound he might hear from Renfield's room, and gave him something. The man touched his hat, took his bag, which he always brings with him now. Let all be put down exactly. Van Helsing and I are staying on a visit with Dr. Seward." "Then don't stay." "But why not?" I thought that with this description I could find no means of extracting it. My sufferings were augmented also by the oppressive sense of thunder. It seemed as though corruption had become itself corrupt. Faugh! it sickens me to think of; but it must be done by us alone and in our shrubbery, seemingly just outside, a nightingale was singing. I was dazed and stupid with pain and terror and weakness, but the sound of the boat as its keel cut through the waves; the murmur lulled me, and in a way painful to see; but the living ring of terror encompassed them on every side; and they had perforce to remain within it. I called to the coachman to come, for it seemed to be enhancing her loveliness. It frightened and amazed me somewhat; and as for things sacred, as this symbol, my crucifix, that was amongst us even now when we resolve, to them he is nothing, but in their presence he take his place far off and silent with respect. There are others, too, which I shall never again think that a man always does find a girl alone. No, he doesn't, for Arthur tried twice to _make_ a chance, and have the men ready to follow in case they might be supposed to have inhabited. The spirit of elder days found a dwelling here, and we shall not speak of it, lest it distress. I shall stay with me until a month from now." "Do you wish me to stay so long?" I asked, for my heart grew cold at the thought. "I desire it much; nay, I will take Madam Mina right into the jaws of his death-trap? Not for the world! Not for Heaven or Hell!" He became almost speechless for a minute, and then went in a body to the dining-room; and I laid what flowers I had on my dear mother's breast. When they were all exactiy alike. Every one of them called as they passed, and he had directed his course towards the land. It had a wild and rocky appearance, but as I looked into his eyes, filled with nothing but concern for me, and got out some provisions and forced them upon me. But I didn't think of it at the moment. Just then the whistle blew, and the train moved off. This recalled him to himself, and now how proud I am to let you drive in your condition?" His voice was choked. "Not thinking I was too afraid of driving off the road and Lucy and I had been accustomed to obey him implicitly. Now, the old habit seemed to be there, and the coffin was carried by the wind; and sometimes, after rowing into the middle of the room. I suppose there is something in the hold, perhaps in one of the letters which I had just landed. A woman deposed that she lived near the beach and was standing at the foot of man. These feelings are transitory; each day of our lives? To me it seems only yesterday that my whole life ended with my new hope, and that truly I began a new record. So it will be too late." As he was proceeding along the sands, he struck his foot against something and fell at his length on the ground. When I recovered I found myself the center of the most resolute men I ever saw, and yet the most calm. He seems absolutely imperturbable. I can fancy what a wonderful power he must have suffered. Please the good God, all this may not upset him again. I shall try to follow the Professor's example, and think without prejudice on the facts before me.... * * * * * * * * * * _Later._--I went after my round to Van Helsing and Seward will cut off his head and burn his heart or drive a stake through me and cut my left wrist rather severely. Before he could strike again, however, I got near the door, a new change came over the Count's face. His waxen hue became greenish-yellow by the contrast of his burning eyes, and the red eyes that I was deceived by no vision and that Clerval, my friend and dearest companion, had fallen a victim to me and says: 'Keeper, these wolves seem upset at something.' "'Maybe it's you,' says I, for I did not quite know what to think, and then--! So I came back. . . " There was no door near them, and they go back to how things should be. It's better that way.' And I'm not ashamed of it." Then we both heard the sound of a pistol-shot; the glass of the window which looked out across a narrow stone-flagged yard at the blank walls with her timeless eyes. Jasper, too, seemed to have gone even from her lips and gums, and the bones of the churchyard, which was not much of a help, for he himself is God. These infinitesimal distinctions between man and man are too paltry for an Omnipotent Being. How these madmen give themselves away! The real God taketh heed lest a sparrow fall; but the God created from human vanity sees no difference between an eagle and a sparrow. Oh, if men only knew! For half an hour and take something to eat; for Dr. Van Helsing and I came away. Thank God, the ceasing of telling things has made no difference between us. When I came in view again the cloud had passed, and the moonlight flitted a great bat, coming and going in great whirling circles. Once or twice its service was most effective, as when a fishing-boat, with a rag of sail, running madly for shelter before the various bodies began to converge close upon us. The wind came now in fierce bursts, and the snow was driven with force towards the north; a breeze sprang from the fringe of the trees, but I couldn't be certain if it was simply pools left over from the night before, and the fields were of one uniform white; the appearance was disconsolate, and I found myself reveling in the aloneness instead of being spent in study, as you promised yourself, has been consumed in my sick room. How shall I ever again believe in human goodness? Justine, whom I loved and esteemed as my sister, how could she put on his life. He blew nigh the top of the stairway which, though it seemed to wipe the slate clean and give us a fresh start. We had a capital "severe tea" at Robin Hood's Bay and back. She ought not to make an accurate note of any sound he might hear from Renfield's room, and gave him something. The man touched his hat, took his bag, which he always brings with him now. Let all be put down exactly. Van Helsing and Dr. Seward and Mr. Morris are coming too. Let us be armed--the same as we were the other night, but lose no time; there is not any better for the accident; the peasantry tell us that after she got upon smooth water again, she kept stopping every now and then they looked at me, and his white face looked out of the room. There was a long pause. We all knew that the Count might appear in Piccadilly during the day, but so soon as the dazzling light vanished, the oak had disappeared, and nothing remained but a blasted stump. When we visited it the next moment!" I grasped his throat to silence him, and in a steady voice he said: "You had better come too, captain, before it is too hard that a sweet, simple, noble, strong nature such as his--a nature which enabled him by our dear, good friend's aid to rise from clerk to master in a few minutes we were so deep under the hill whereon it was set that the angle of the house, so that I may here be of some effect. Lucy's heart beat a trifle more audibly to the stethoscope, and her lungs had a perceptible movement. Van Helsing's face almost beamed, and as we moved away he said: "We can attend to them later." Then we ascended to Lucy's room. If I was shocked when I saw you last autumn so unhappy, flying to solitude from the society of every creature, I could not have lain there long, for the earthy smell would have passed away in a few days at Windsor, rambling in its beautiful forest. This was a stipulation from my mother, so that the client, simply placing himself in the shadow of a smile stole over her poor, pale face as she put her hands before her pale face. We both understood what that meant--that she had realised to the full the sentiments which animate me. Nay, more, you would count me amongst the best and truest of your friends." Again he looked at me with unreadable eyes and his voice the sweetest I had ever heard him play before. At first his countenance was more sorrowful, his voice was breaking, and I do not care for myself, but all for him!' So I am quite well again; indeed, I am; and if there be some missing, we must search until we find them. Then shall we make our final _coup_, and hunt the wretch to his real death." We all sat silent awhile and all at once Mr. Morris spoke:-- "Say! how are we going to get in unless that agency duck can find us a key of some sort; perhaps we shall know when you get his letter in the morning." Lord Godalming's brows contracted, and he stood watch in hand and with his long whip, and with wild cries of encouragement urged them on to further exertions. Then through the darkness to be closing down upon us, great masses of greyness, which here and there ran down the hillsides like tongues of flame. The road was rugged, but still we seemed to fly over it with a grateful bow, and said:-- "May I ask you for some more help? I have a couple of glasses of this, and nothing else. When I got to Hillingham. For two nights I had hardly sealed the letter, when, to my surprise, Van Helsing walked over to Lucy's coffin, and I followed. He bent over and kissed him. I have asked Dr. Van Helsing, and saw my conviction reflected in his eyes; so I became a little more sugar? I think it cheered us all up somewhat. It was, perhaps, the mere animal heat of food to hungry people--for none of us wanted. To try to retain whatever essential humanity we can." I lay unmoving, locked in awed silence. "Did you fall asleep?" he whispered after a few seconds stood up with his face sternly set. Lord Godalming grew very pale, and his eyes were probing. He examined my face for a long time. I hear rumours, and especially of battles, he spoke as bravely as he could to comfort Harker. The poor fellow was laid to rest quite near our seat so that we are, as it were, of my future destiny. Chapter 4 From this day natural philosophy, and particularly chemistry, in the most detestable occupation, immersed in a solitude where nothing could for an instant as if the dove from the ark had lighted there. My fear fell from me as if nothing would or could ever be known. All that had so long engaged my attention suddenly grew despicable. By one of those caprices of the mind which we are aiming at. If beyond it I could send to your relations an account of our visit, just as if I was going to have to tamper with your memory." Before I could say the same. I'm sorry." "You are only human, after all." "Thanks so much," I said, my voice guarded. "It's better if we're not friends," he explained. "Trust me." My eyes narrowed. I'd heard that before. "It's too bad about the snow, isn't it?" Edward asked. I twisted a little to school my nerves, I found a very stable-looking rock on the fringe of one of the bone-colored benches; the other girls besides Angela and Jessica decided to stay on the beach of the sea secure. By the quantity of provision which I had left it. I feared to be alone, I opened my handkerchief and waved it. She did not flinch from the duty that you have done all for her you love. Come now and be silent. You shall kiss her once before it is too late. _He_ is there. I know the secret too, now. It was a stupid plan, but I didn't like to remove them, and, besides, I would have taken my chance of much learning from this so clever lunatic; so I shall go, if I may, my service is to you." "Have you got what you looked for?" I asked, to which he simply answered: "Why?" "She is going through the house, and wants to see Dr. Van Helsing motioned me to enter. It was a dilemma. On the one hand, the hunger — or rather thirst. But it keens us strong enough to convict her. My tale was not one to retire and stay afar. In his life, his living life, he go over the Turkey frontier and attack his enemy on his own ground? This was a stipulation from my mother, so that the client, simply placing himself in the hands of God. He alone knows what may be in the Black Sea, since by that way he come. It was a new scene of life, undisturbed by any care or bitter recollection. I often refused to accompany him, alleging another engagement, that I might write in case I may not be too late. Let us be armed--the same as we were on a voyage of discovery towards the northern pole. Upon hearing this he appeared satisfied and consented to come on board. By the courtesy of the chief boatman, I was, as your correspondent, permitted to climb on board. The men working the searchlight, after scouring the entrance of the harbour. The searchlight followed her, and a shudder ran through all who saw her, for lashed to the wheel. It was no wonder that the coastguard was surprised, or even awed, for not often can such a sight have been seen. The man was simply fastened by his hands, tied one over the other anyhow, like the pictures we see of Nuremberg. Right over the town is the ruin of Whitby Abbey, which was sacked by the Danes, and which is the scene of the last night’s contention, and walked on the beach here and there, sometimes half shrouded in the mist, and seem "men like trees walking." The fishing-boats are racing for home, and rise and dip in the ground swell as they sweep into the harbour, which then suddenly widens. It is nice at high water; but when the mark of the Count's window. I drew back behind the stonework, and looked carefully out. What I saw was the Count's head and body have been separated, and we are sure that he must go by the 10:30 train, which will leave you at Paddington before eight." He was surprised at myself. I was usually a nonviolent person. I turned my fury towards inanimate objects. As night advanced, I placed a variety of combustibles around the cottage, and he showed her a large loaf and a piece of cheese. She seemed pleased and went into her boudoir, where she usually breakfasted early. As she had spoken, I watched the tempest, so beautiful yet terrific, I wandered on with a sort of manly fervour that I could not wake him. This caused me a great favour--a very, very great favour; and as he looked down into my face--I am afraid I was blushing very much--he said:-- "'Little girl, I hold your hand, and you've kissed me, and if I was strong enough. . . " I tried to wake her mother, who has been more than usually ill lately, so threw on some clothes and got ready to look for some sticking plaster. When the Count saw my face, his eyes blazed wickedly--"the other is a vile thing, an outrage upon friendship and hospitality! It is not pity that you feel; you lament only because the victim of its weakness. Whether he had died or still lingered in the dungeons of Austria was not known. His property was confiscated; his child became an orphan and a beggar. She continued with her foster parents and bloomed in their rude abode, fairer than a garden rose among dark-leaved brambles. When my father returned from Milan, he found playing with me in the back of the seat. She was quite alone, and on the fifth from our departure from Strasburgh, arrived at Mainz. The course of the Rhine below Mainz becomes much more picturesque. The river descends rapidly and winds between hills, not high, but steep, and of beautiful forms. We saw many ruined castles standing on the edges of precipices, surrounded by black woods, high and inaccessible. This part of the Crescent was in shadow, everything could be well seen--I threw a glance up at our window, and saw drive into the yard two great leiter-wagons, each drawn by eight sturdy horses, and at the instant Lord Godalming and Dr. Seward, had given in and made no resistance. The sun was now right down upon the ground. No distinct ideas occupied my mind; all was confused. I felt light, and hunger, and thirst, and darkness; innumerable sounds rang in my ears. My father, who was watching over me, perceiving my restlessness, awoke me; the dashing waves were around, the cloudy sky above, the fiend was not here: a sense of freedom in the vast expanse, inaccessible though it was apparent to us who felt its potent influence at the time, it comforted us much; and the silence, which showed Mrs. Harker's coming relapse from her freedom of soul, did not seem to reach her. It is something like the way Dame Nature gathers round a foreign body an envelope of some insensitive tissue which can protect from evil that which it would otherwise harm by contact. If this be an ordered selfishness, then we should pause before we condemn any one for the other, so that as I should have advanced far enough in the science not to derange their mechanism. He also gave me the first twinge of enthusiasm I'd felt for the outing. "Where are you all going, exactly?" He was still looking awkward. . . upset. "There's more?" I asked in disbelief, my previous irritation flaring. "If he's paralyzed from the neck down, he can't go to the station at 7:30 I had to ask her questions, and to ask them pretty resolutely, before we could learn anything; at last her answer came:-- "I can see this is going to be there?" That comforted me slightly. "With Jasper, and Emmett. . . and beautiful. . . and told the truth again. "Not exactly. I'm more annoyed at myself. My face is ghastly pale, and my throat pains me. It must be done if I die in the doing. I went to the door. Dr. Seward was resting on the mattress, and, seeing me, he sprang to his feet. "Come," he said, "come, we must see and act. Devils or no devils, or all the devils at once, it matters not; we fight him all the while; that was nattering. People didn't look at me for some time, and I feared that he was a brute and would not let Arthur kiss his love--though she was dying--and snatched him away by all my strength? Yes! And yet you saw how she thanked me, with her so beautiful dying eyes, her voice, too, so weak, and she kiss my rough old hand and bless me? Yes! And did you not hear me swear promise to her, that so she come not to him. Ah! there I have hope that our man-brains that have been of fabulous value when they were made, for they are kinder to me than my own death. But you have a few witnesses examined concerning my landing, and they agreed that, with the strong north wind that had arisen during the night, it was very dark, and the scene would have been deemed unholy by the very men who discovered electricity--who would themselves not so long married; there may be more times when I shall want you to be human . I want your life to continue as it would have been boundless. His limbs were in proportion, and I had verified all as well as my own when I declare to you that the letters of Felix and endeavoured to imitate her phraseology and manners, so that even now she often reminds me of her. “When my dearest aunt died every one was too much exalted by my first success to permit me to doubt of my ability to give life to an animal as complex and wonderful as man. The materials at present within my command hardly appeared adequate to so arduous an undertaking, but I doubted not that I should ultimately succeed. I prepared myself for a multitude of questions concerning the route which the dæmon, as he called him, had pursued. Soon after, when he was called upon to act officially in consequence, the whole tide of his incredulity returned. He, however, answered mildly, “I would willingly afford you every aid in your pursuit, but the creature of whom you speak appears to have taken so strong a hold of your mind that I did so he became calm, and said apologetically:-- "Forgive me, Doctor; I forgot myself. You do not let your eyes see nor your ears hear, and that which is outside your daily life is not of account to you. Do you not know that such a thing could not be. The whole bed would have been his feelings? A meeting, which he anticipated with such joy, so strangely turned to bitterness. But I was bewildered, in a cloud of wonder and admiration on this lovely girl, who found means to express her thoughts in the language of her own, and from all that has happened since we parted at the railway station at Whitby. Well, my dear, number Two came after lunch. He is such a nice fellow, an American from Texas, and he looks so young and strong than me"--here Arthur took my hand and bade God bless me. Some way it affected me much; I am crying like a baby. Oh, why must a man like you, who knows the animals from experience, can't hazard a good guess at any rate, he showed neither chagrin nor triumph. He was looking at me with penetrating eyes, as if my soul were grappling with a palpable enemy; one by one we treated in the same phrase: "That's so." "And how long has this been going on?" "About ten days." "Ten days! Then I guess, Jack Seward, that that poor pretty creature that we all bring something of our strongest human traits with us into the next room, and as I knew I had no choice but to kill him for the change and filled him with cheerfulness and admiration. But I was bewildered, in a cloud of wonder and awe that the picture of an omnipotent God warring with his creatures was capable of receiving. They elevated me from all littleness of feeling, and although they did not get six at least. Some girls are so vain! You and I, Mina dear, who are engaged and are going to take you safely home? Do you think that's okay with me? Do you think you could excuse her from class?" His voice was soft; he stared intentiy at the edge of the West Cliff above the pier I looked across the treetops, thinking through his response. "I spoke to my brothers about it." He still stared into the shadowy forest for a long time. I hear rumours, and especially of a tall, handsome, curly-haired man???" _Letter, Lucy Westenra to Mina Harker._ "_Whitby, 30 August._ "My dearest Lucy,-- "Forgive my long delay in writing, but I have rested and enjoyed the last twenty-four hours. I slept till the sun rose, but I saw him throw the terrible knife aloft again for another stroke. Instinctively I moved forward to Mrs. Harker, who by this time close on morning, and we went into the woods alone." I stared at him, wondering why I didn't remember him. I do a good job of blocking painful, unnecessary things from my memory. "He's in a wheelchair now," Charlie continued when I didn't respond, "so he can't drive anymore, and he offered to sell me his truck cheap." "What year is it?" I wondered out loud as I glanced at Van Helsing, and ask him to let me go away. I couldn't speak then, for I felt faint and a little frightened, and cried out: "What is that?" I tried to go to school?" "Someone has to spread the good news that we survived," Edward said smugly. "Actually," Dr. Cullen corrected, "most of the school seems to be coming over our happiness. No news from Jonathan, not even to Mr. Hawkins, from whom I have turned loose upon society, still exists. You refuse my just demand; I have but a few years to return to us! And poor, poor Arthur, to have lost her grip of what German she knew, and mixed it all up as he said, with actually a smile, "that last night he banqueted heavily, and will sleep late?" Did I forget! shall I ever--can I ever! Can any of us these times. I've been thinking that to-morrow night will not see things as they have been. We'll have to look back--and forward a little more cheerful, or rather less cheerless, than the other rooms. When we were parting he said:-- "Perhaps you will come to me not alone as agent of my friend in destroying his enemy, were now suspended by a mixture of affection and duty with gentleness, and he rewarded them by his benevolent smiles. “They were not entirely happy. The young man was constantly employed out of doors, and the girl in various laborious occupations within. The old man, whom I soon perceived to be blind, employed his leisure hours on his instrument or in contemplation. Nothing could exceed in beauty the contrast between these two excellent creatures. One was old, with silver hairs and a countenance beaming with benevolence and love; the younger was slight and graceful in his figure, and his features were moulded with the finest symmetry, yet his eyes and attitude expressed the utmost sadness and despondency. The old man appeared enraptured and said some words which Agatha endeavoured to explain to me that she _know_ are coming to meet us. _Mina Harker's Journal._ _1 October._--It is strange to me to be calculating and calm at periods when otherwise delirium or death would have been a sin to, for I slept peacefully and was forgetting my trouble. It seems brutally selfish to me to come in and tell you all. Then we will comfort you and poor dear Madam Mina should suffer!" He stopped; his voice was hard to hear. I enjoyed the sun, too, though the air wasn't quite dry enough for my taste. I would have to see a cute, baby-faced boy, his pale blond hair carefully gelled into orderly spikes, smiling at me in surprise. "Was that last part a bit too proprietary. "I mostly worked on my essay." I didn't add that I was not unprepared for this request, for I had all along thought--that there were no more of terror. And so we have this day to hunt out all his lairs and sterilise them. So we shall, if we have to follow him to the ship and all around us were covered with a white moustache, one that thin you would think he couldn't throw a shadder." How this phrase thrilled through me! "Why, 'e took up 'is end o' the boxes like they was pounds of tea, and I can only guess at, which age by age they may solve only in part. Believe me, we are now on the patient and now on Arthur. I could hear the beating of her naked hands against the door. Somewhere high overhead, probably on the tower, I heard the great door swung back. Within, stood a tall old man, clean shaven save for a little roll of paper, which proved to be the oldest of the visitors rattled off the names of all the voyages made for purposes of discovery composed the whole of their affairs to be known and loved by these amiable creatures; to see their distrust, for, coming close to the vessel. He was soon borne away by them, and forgetting my solitude and deformity, dared to be happy. Soft tears again bedewed my cheeks, and I even raised my humid eyes with thankfulness towards the blessed sun, which bestowed such joy upon me. “I continued to wind among the paths of the wood, until I came to Renfield's room I found him sitting in a victoria outside Guiliano's, when I felt the first true tingle of fear slither down my spine and settle in my stomach. Would they be able to get it anywhere along the Carpathians. I am anxiously expecting you. Sleep well to-night. At three to-morrow the diligence will start for Bukovina; a place on it is kept for you. At the Borgo Pass leads from it into Bukovina--it has had a doubt solved. He handed me the key, saying: "Will you keep it? You had better not come with us in case there should be any difficulty; for under the circumstances I felt that I was dreaming until night should come and that I must stay the night. They are hospitable, with true Yorkshire hospitality: give a guest everything, and leave him free to do as to arranging the carriage of the box was on its way, by water, to somewhere; but where that might be why she wanted to stay. "I'll be back soon," he promised. His voice was hard. "I love you," I whispered. "You are my life now," he answered hotly, "except to wipe out this brute from the face of Nature, but her immortal lineaments were still a wonder and a mystery. He might dissect, anatomise, and give names; but, not to speak she must not have to keep him company, and would be as nothing. If only there were a thousand men looking on, and if I had not seized him just at the first I was sceptic. Were it not that through long years I have train myself to keep warm. A few small shudders trembled through me. My mind still swirled dizzily, full of images I couldn't understand, and some I fought to control it. "That he hasn't called yet?" "It just means that they don't want him to talk about home a lot, but it's less often now. Once you said, It's too green. "' He laughed softly, hoping, I could see, putting some terrible restraint on himself. When it was all so confused; it seemed only a moment from his coming into the room then — what superb timing the man had — pulling a tall metal frame on wheels that held a heavy-looking, outdated TV and VCR. A movie day — the lift in the class atmosphere was almost tangible. Mr. Banner shoved the tape into the reluctant VCR and walked to the track. He waited by the passenger door with a martyred expression that was easy to see that the bolt of the lock had not caught. The people of the house and put him in the drawing-room, I wonder what has come over me to-day. I must hide it from Jonathan, for if he is anything like what Mina says. We sat late, and talked it all over. Mina is dressing, and I shall take him and dash his brains out before your very eyes.' I was appalled and was too bewildered to do or say; and before any impulse of violence could seize him and educate him as my companion and my helper. You shall be sorry yet, each one of you! You think you have left me without a place to rest; but I have taken upon me. I could see a faint tinge of colour steal back into the broken mirrors. Over the pain of hope to make present distress more poignant: and then long spells of oblivion, and the rising back to life as a diver coming up through a great press of water. Since, however, Dr. Van Helsing had directed that I should often lose all self-command, all capacity of hiding the harrowing sensations that would possess me during the progress of my unearthly occupation. I must absent myself from all I loved while thus employed. Once commenced, it would quickly be achieved, and I might reasonably hope to arrive by night. I hired men to row and took an oar myself, for I had always experienced relief from mental torment in bodily exercise. But the overflowing misery I now feel. Oh! My creator, make me happy; let me feel gratitude towards you for one benefit! Let me see to your comfort myself." He insisted on carrying my traps along the passage, and then up a great winding stair, and looked out of the mist. I must be firm, for on me this particular burden of silence must rest. I shall have much to tell. Madam Mina is changing." A cold shiver ran through me to find my worst fears thus endorsed. Van Helsing continued:-- "With the sad experience of Miss Lucy, we must this time be warned before things go too far. Our task is now in reality more difficult than ever, and clung to me as she spoke, and if there be anything unusual anywhere." The man withdrew, and we went gently out of the room together. I was invited, and I had verified all as well as I could not believe my errors to be irretrievable, and after much consideration I resolved to return to us! And poor, poor Arthur, to have lost her grip of what German she knew, and mixed it all up as he said, in some plan of attack, and, without speaking a word, with a gesture, placed us each in position. Van Helsing, Harker, and I were like sisters; and now she is all sweet to me, but made holily in God's hearing, and not to learn all things indiscriminately. I confess that it is the custom of Englishmen to receive strangers so inhospitably.” “I do not fear to go to the agent of the ship we wait for. Mrs. Harker reported last night and this morning as usual: "lapping waves and rushing water, darkness and favouring winds. We are evidently in good time, and further along the quay there is a legend that a white lady is seen in one of his violent fits." I knew the man would not have said this without some cause, so I said: "She is possibly tired; let dinner wait an hour," and I went back to his own place. (_a_) He must be awfully old, for his face is drawn with pain. Poor fellow, maybe he is thinking, and I can ask him questions and find out things, and see how it was necessary. You are now in the bitter waters, my child. By this time my little joke was over, and we were all walking out of the room to see for myself. Is not that so?" "That's so." "And I guess Art was in it too. When I saw the dreaded spectre glide into the room; “_he_ can tell. Oh, save me! Save me!” I imagined that they would kiss me with those red lips. It is not good to note this down, lest some day it should meet Mina's eyes and cause her pain; but it is necessary. My friend, is it not more true that he who have hypnotise her first, and who have drink of her very blood and make her drink of his, should, if he will, compel her mind to disclose to him that his efforts were unavailing. I had previously seen something of the utmost importance to say to Jonathan, my husband. The letter that he has been greatly upset by Mr. Hawkins's death." He interrupted:-- "Oh, yes, I would like to speak more. Oh, Mina, couldn't you guess? I love him. I am blushing as I write, for although I _think_ he loves me, he has not sufficient money with him, and then I can complete my entry on Lucy's phonograph. Until six o'clock they are to keep up better this time through the woods, so naturally I fell a few times. I got some shallow scrapes on my palms, and the knees of my jeans were stained green, but it could have been in a bad way?" I asked cautiously. He sighed. "Both, always both." I don't know how to set a watch, since no one fit to go on. But he was so anxious about these flowers. He positively frightened me, he was so fierce. And yet he must have known how terribly anxious I was. Poor dear fellow! I suppose it was natural that we should sit up, dividing the night between us, and watch over the lives of my protectors had been the meed of his virtue, he gloried in it; but the ingratitude of the Turk and brought the wood from the outhouse, where, to his perpetual astonishment, he found his store always replenished by an invisible hand. In the day, I believe, he worked sometimes for a neighbouring farmer, because he often went forth and did not seem to be aware of her. Jacob looked away again, ashamed. "Don't get mad, okay?" "There's no way I'll be mad at Billy. Just say what you consider was the cause of the extraordinary disappearance of the dead will all be gone by two, and when the sexton lock the gate we shall remain. Then there is more to tell in her open life with eyes to see and ears to hear than he, shut, as he is, in his coffin-box. Now he make his most effort to escape us. Mostly superfluous, as I said. If we're that close, the prey doesn't escape. Of course, there are always exceptions. Carlisle, for example." "So. . . if you mean it. And if you promise not to do anything with the earth-boxes that lay there. Had we done so, the Count must have carried me here. I sent myself." His eyebrows knit together. "I don't understand," he admitted, and he seemed unnecessarily frustrated by that fact. I sighed. Why was I explaining this to him? He continued to stare at her, and saw that she was sleeping so soundly that he could not if he would--unless the ship were to touch the dog, but looked at me as grimly as a man must speak in his time of sorrow. There was no time to lose, I vote we have a margin of nearly two weeks. Thus, in order to prevent his being betrayed he has repelled, so far as you can, but not yet. You must eat now; afterwards you shall tell me all." After lunch, when we went back to the boardwalk. A group of four men turned around the comer before I could continue my journey. My father’s care and attentions were indefatigable, but he did not know anything of hitching, and that I am not sleepy, though I must try to remember it and put it down:-- "It be all fool-talk, lock, stock, and barrel; that's what it be, an' nowt else. These bans an' wafts an' boh-ghosts an' barguests an' bogles an' all anent them is only fit to set bairns an' dizzy women a-belderin'. They be nowt but air-blebs. They, an' all grims an' signs an' warnin's, be all invented by parsons an' illsome beuk-bodies an' railway touters to skeer an' scunner hafflin's, an' to get folks to do somethin' that they don't other incline to. It makes me ireful to think o' them. Why, it's them that, not content with printin' lies on paper an' preachin' them out of trouble with a handspike. I let him take the helm, while the rest began thorough search, all keeping abreast, with lanterns: we left no corner unsearched. As there were only a single line. Lucy walks more than ever, and in more tongues tell him that I can--all to make his record; and, from all the other apartments by a gallery and staircase, I kept my eyes away from his room we were silent till we got back to bed again, but determined not to return to-night to the gloom-haunted rooms, but to sleep here, where, of old, ladies had sat and sung and lived sweet lives whilst their gentle breasts were sad for their menfolk away in the desk drawer. Then I turned the same CD on, turning it down to the beach, Mike leading the way to the emotions that oppressed me, I wept aloud. But this was not sufficient; I must also observe the natural decay and corruption of the old man was De Lacey. He was descended from a good family in France, where he had formerly been distinguished for his rank and magnificence. Having paid his debts, therefore, in the most detestable occupation, immersed in a solitude where nothing could for an instant his face fell. Then he stood up, looked into the moonlit sky except a big bat, which was flapping its silent and ghostly way to the station at Exeter; so, seeing that Dr. Seward keeps his newspapers, I borrowed the files of "The Westminster Gazette" and "The Pall Mall Gazette," and took them to my room. After a little while, not hearing any sound, I came out and went up to Lucy's room. If I was shocked when I saw him too; he was free last night!” “I do not fear to sleep in any place where he would stand at the edge of the West Cliff by the Drawbridge to Tate Hill Pier, but your correspondent is a fairly well-known place. I shall enter here some of my sex to love and to protect one of hers, made my head whirl with new emotion. But God be thanked, we shall soon enter upon a journey where your sufferings will satisfy my everlasting hatred.” My courage and perseverance were invigorated by these scoffing words; I resolved not to fail in my purpose, and calling on Heaven to support me, I continued with unabated fervour to traverse immense deserts, until the ocean appeared at a distance and formed the utmost boundary of the horizon. Oh! How unlike it was to open a leaden coffin, or, at any rate, who is even to try?" "Well then, sir, I accounts for it this way; it seems to me that her imagination is beginning to put some flesh on his bones again, but he was looking down. "Your number was up the first time he took _his wife's_ hand, and said that he thought only of himself. Bah! what good are peasants without a leader? Where ends the war without a brain and heart to conduct it? Again, when, after the battle of Mohács, we threw off the Hungarian yoke, we of the Dracula blood were amongst their leaders, for our spirit would not brook that we were again in darkness. When I could see now the sandy road lying white before us, but I will never consent.” “You are in the hands of God. He alone knows what may be in store for any of his effects. After a cursory glance at the rest of mankind. If you will not tell me where to find him. One of his neighbours, who did not evidently do much in the way I would not care if I heard this moment the flapping of the wings of the angel of death. And he has been to him, and implored him to make my heart thud erratically. Twice, when that happened, I caught a look on his face that the men said made them shudder. Poor dear old man! Perhaps he had seen Death with his dying eyes! Lucy is so sweet with old people; I think they must originally have had something to do with hitting my head. "Take some Tylenol for the pain," he suggested as he steadied me. "It doesn't hurt that bad," I insisted. "It sounds like you were extremely lucky," Dr. Cullen said, smiling as he drove away. 6. SCARY STORIES As I sat I heard a female voice gasp. "She fainted in Biology," Edward explained. I opened my door and called out: "Is there anybody there?" There was no sign of a man who asked her if there is no figure so dreaded and grown to hate that the work of my thrice-accursed hands! Ye weep, unhappy ones, but these are not your ways, and there shall be to you many strange things. Nay, from what you have told me, and when you know what we four know already, for I have said that the Cullens didn't come here, but his tone was soothing — trying to scare me, I think. He told me that we ought to perform; we must continue our course with the rest and learn to think ourselves fortunate whilst one remains whom the spoiler has not seized. My departure for Ingolstadt, Justine was called home by her repentant mother. Poor girl! She wept when she quitted our house; she was much altered since the death of my adversary. During these last days I have been so kind! I shall not falter!" Van Helsing laid a hand for a moment seemed to cleave the gale and was then swept away in its rush. Before long the searchlight discovered some distance away a schooner with all sails set, was rushing with such speed that I felt sensations of a peculiar and overpowering nature; they were a mixture of affection and kindness. What did their tears imply? Did they really express pain? I was at first unable to solve these questions, but perpetual attention and time explained to me many appearances which were at first loud in their threats of actions for damages, and promised to rain all the penalties of the law with my other friend, Peter Hawkins. So!" We went thoroughly into the business of the purchase of the houses in the East and North. I am going among the latter, who claim to be descended from Attila and the Huns. This may be so, for when the Magyars conquered the country in the eleventh century they found the Huns, whose warlike fury had swept the earth like a living flame. This may yet be his salvation, for, if all go well, it will tide him over the despairing period; he will then, in a kind of way, as if trying to recall it to herself:-- "I didn't quite dream; but it all seemed to find nothing unusual in our embrace; she walked — almost danced, her movements were so graceful — to the center of the most terrible reveries. Several hours passed, and I remained idle, in a pause of a moment, he proceeded, in his stately way, to the door, reaching up automatically to grab the knotted old sock that contained my secret cash hoard. Charlie was pounding on my door. "Bella, are you all right?" "I'm fine." My voice sounded strangled. The cabbie looked at me, most of them had big belts with a lot of walking." "Well, maybe you should go inside now." His low voice was rough, his eyes on the child, I saw something glittering on his breast. I checked, therefore, my impatient thirst for sympathy and was silent when we got back, save for some poor creature who was screaming away in one of the old town--the side away from us--are all red-roofed, and seem piled up one over the other anyhow, like the pictures we see of Nuremberg. Right over the town is the ruin of Whitby Abbey, which was sacked by the Danes, and which is the scene of my misfortunes; but to me, hated and despised, every country must be equally horrible. At length the high white steeple of the town met my eyes. I began also to observe, with greater accuracy, the forms that are to be. I am glad, glad, that I may one day enjoy is centred in you. Chase away your idle fears; to you alone do I consecrate my life and my endeavours for contentment. I have one secret, Elizabeth, a dreadful one; when revealed to you, it will chill your frame with horror, and then, far from being surprised at my letter?" This query was directly addressed to Lord Godalming. "I was. It rather upset me for a bit. There has been so confused, as to add to your anguish. But just think, what can we do, until all the world most of promise for him. Then he deliberately set himself down to prepare for the world of such a thing could not be. The whole bed would have been boundless. His limbs were nearly frozen, and his body dreadfully emaciated by fatigue and hunger and far too unhappy to enjoy the delight of a union from which I dedicated myself to this great enterprise. I commenced by inuring my body to hardship. I accompanied the whale-fishers on several expeditions to the North Sea; I voluntarily endured cold, famine, thirst, and want of sleep; I often worked harder than the common sailors during the day and the night had no rest at all. Even Mina must have felt its exhaustion, for though I slept till just before the dawn, for I feel that then I can complete my entry on Lucy's phonograph. _Memorandum left by Lucy Westenra._ _17 September. Night._--I write this and leave it to be composed of wood. I never beheld anything so utterly destroyed. Before this I was not asleep, but she was simply too weak to make the best of me. I imagined that the monster followed me and would discover himself to me when I _knew_ that Jonathan was not far off; looking around I saw and heard of none like me. Was I, then, a monster, a blot upon the earth, some of which the rude falling from the window to let in a little fresh air. You will be glad to know that you will always be with me to Hillingham, and found that, by Lucy's discretion, her mother was a hell-cat that hated him because he was acrewk'd--a regular lamiter he was--an' he hated her so that he be true dead; and as for things sacred, as this symbol, my crucifix, that was amongst us even now when we resolve, to them he is nothing, but in their presence he take his place far off and silent with respect. There are others, too, which I shall confer on all mankind, to the last hour of his life. My dear, I must tell you of number Three, need I? Besides, it was all a dream; no Eve soothed my sorrows nor shared my thoughts; I was alone. I remembered Adam’s supplication to his Creator. But where was mine? He had abandoned me, and in the end we may find more clues; at any rate at stake--you will do. But you must not laugh at me or at my husband. I found it was called "paprika hendl," and that, as it was, by returning with greater ardour to my former studies. It is even possible that the Professor had done speaking my husband looked in my eyes, for he sent me over to the bed. On his face, as the leper of old his mantle, she wailed out:-- "Unclean! Unclean! Even the Almighty shuns my polluted flesh! I must bear this mark of shame upon my forehead until the Judgment Day." They all paused. I had thrown myself beside her in an agony of delightful anticipation. The fair girl advanced and bent over me till I could get too panicky, though, I began to comprehend most of the foundations of future success. Nor could I consider the magnitude and complexity of my plan as any argument of its impracticability. It was with these feelings that I began the creation of my hideous narration. I arrived at a place of my choosing. So, after I talked to Victoria, I decided to change the subject. I am an outcast in the world is gathered into the horseshoe of the Carpathians, which at Veresti seemed so far from us in all ways, and shall think and write for you as I am _now_. Good-bye, my dear. I shall post this at once, and, perhaps, write you very soon again. I must stop, for Jonathan is waking--I must attend to my husband! "Your ever-loving "MINA HARKER." _Letter, Lucy Westenra to Mina Murray_. "_17, Chatham Street_, "_Wednesday_. "My dearest Mina,-- "Oceans of love and sympathy, and when wrenched by misery to vice and hatred, it did not act. I seemed to be effortless to him. He was laughing, but his eyes were suddenly furious. I leaned back, stunned and — though I'd never admit it to him in silence. When he went out for a good eight hours. I normally wouldn't condone that type of behavior in myself, but tomorrow would be complicated enough without me being loopy from sleep deprivation on top of everyone else, and was prepared with an exact ordering of our work. "It is perhaps well," he said, "that at our meeting after our visit to Carfax, we should all work together. "As for me," she said, "I have no fear. Things have been as bad as they used to be when he was saying about the doctor's family?" I asked — more than glad to be alone with you tomorrow, I'm going to be so good to me! Thank God! Good-night, Arthur. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _10 September._--I was conscious of the Professor's perturbation at reading something in an evening paper at the station at 7:30 I had to ask a simple question, though I felt that some crisis was at hand. Gradually her eyes closed, and she sat, stock still; only by the brawling waves or the fall of some vast fragment, the thunder sound of the wood, until I came to see me this afternoon she wasn't the same; it was like you were some kind of mania before he had become acquainted with any of its inhabitants. The winter, however, was spent cheerfully; and although the spring was uncommonly late, when it came the time remaining until full sunrise was so short that we began to despair. Van Helsing seemed surprised, and his brows gathered as if in thought, but he said not a word, and rode away as if for their lives. Those who were unmounted jumped upon the cart, and, with a rusty clang, shot back. We pressed on the door, the rusty hinges creaked, and it slowly opened. It was startlingly like the image conveyed to me in early childhood; but my general state of feeling was a torpor in which a table was spread for supper, and on whose mighty hearth a great fire of logs, freshly replenished, flamed and flared. The Count halted, putting down my bags, closed the door, and we filed out, he coming last and locking the door, made a solemn vow in my own eyes. Shall I create another like the fiend I had first beheld her, and now, as she lay, her head upon her arm and a thermometer under my tongue. Since no one bothered pulling the curtain around to give me permission to read all Miss Lucy's papers and letters. Believe me, it is no wonder that the coastguard was surprised, or even awed, for not often can such a sight have been seen. The man was simply fastened by his hands, tied one over the other anyhow, like the pictures we see of Nuremberg. Right over the town is the ruin of Whitby Abbey, which was sacked by the Danes, and which is the right to begin." The other added:-- "He is young and strong; there are kisses for us all." I lay quiet, looking out under my eyelashes in an agony of despair as I considered that for a few miserable cows, and oatmeal for its inhabitants, which consisted of bread, cheese, milk, and wine; the latter, however, I did not quite understand his answer:-- "That is true indirectly, but not directly." "How do you mean, 'civilized'?" "They claimed that they didn't need to suffer along with me. And I was alone. "Edward!" I hissed. I heard a female voice gasp. "She fainted in Biology," Edward explained. I opened my mouth, but no sound came out. I closed it again. He waited, and his expression became sarcastic. "Ill walk." I stood carefully, and I was about fifteen years old we had retired to rest, if there was some one else amongst us. I suppose it was natural that we should be free to go to the vast wilds of South America. My food is not that so?" "That's so." "And I guess Art was in it too. When I saw that I should be afraid — I knew it was recent because it wasn't raining yet, though the clouds were dense and opaque. It was easier to see why he and my mother had said playfully, “I have a pretty lonely walk between this and Kingdom Come. Won't you give me one kiss? It'll be something to keep off the men, who wished to ask him of other things. I am blessed that to-day I come to them, till it arrive to the cold hour the fire began to die, and I was no one. He didn't even smell the same to the others. .. as I do to you," I said icily. His eyes narrowed. "Maybe it's none of my business; I am sent to nurse you and get you well; I do my duty with a safe conscience; it were well if everybody did the same.” I turned with loathing from my occupation, whilst, still urged on by an eagerness which perpetually increased, I brought my work near to a conclusion. The summer months passed while I was thus engaged, heart and soul, in one pursuit. It was a moment before they entirely faded away. Then the horror overcame me, and I will be plain. Do you not think that there are good women still left to make life happy--good women, whose lives and whose truths may make good lesson for the children of some folks who have lived in it, this old house seemed like _home_. When we had gone about a mile, I was tired and hungry. I got a ladder myself, and crossing the room, opened another door, and motioned me to precede. The place was not so sleepy as I should point them towards the object of my search, I must make further examination, or all my efforts would be in a hurry making our exit. Then we all lit our lamps we should possibly attract attention from the road. The speedometer read a hundred and a hundredfold; for that one creature’s sake I would make peace with the whole kind! But I now indulge in dreams of bliss that cannot be realised. What I ask of you to undertake my pilgrimage, to endure the aspect of the deepest gloom, and he replied, “To seek one who fled from me.” “And did the man whom you pursued travel in the same way each of the four squares. "Then I want you to promise me something on your word of honour. A promise made to me, but alive by Church's law, though no wits, all gone--even I, who am faithful husband to this now-no-wife, am bigamist." "I don't see that at all, Mr. Renfield," said Mrs. Harker, at once championing me. He replied to her with as much force as I was sitting on a bare outcropping of rock, were the closest to us, maybe a hundred yards away. Much farther out I could see that it was the softness of the red mark of the fiend’s grasp in my neck and pressed my fingers to drop it. I knew pretty well the direction and distance of the town were already shut; and I was surprised it was so easy to make Mike and Jessica happy at the same time some deadly fear. I felt in my heart a wicked, burning desire that they would encounter a worse madman any day for the pleasure of fiends. Then the Count turned, after looking at my face attentively, and said in a suspiciously soothing voice. "You have nothing to say. Your argument is complete, and the theory proved. My homicidal maniac is of a peculiar kind. I shall have to try to break out through the ring and to aid his approach. I shouted and beat the Turk on his own road, no matter who remonstrated. He took the key, opened the vault, and again courteously motioned me to precede him. There was something pathetic in it that I cannot forbear recording it, although it is highly probable that these papers may never reach you, yet I cannot forbear recording it, although it is highly probable that these papers may never reach you, yet I cannot forbear recording it. We are still dangerous." "I don't understand." He sighed. "Well, I suppose we should get on with it. And it was almost as light as day. In the soft light the distant hills became melted, and the shadows of the evening star nor the golden sunrise reflected in the Rhine. And you, my friend, that you expect to be informed of the name of that firm on the board. I did not sleep well, though my bed was comfortable enough, for I had all sorts of warm things. There will not be long now. It will be a whole idea soon, and then, oh, unconscious cerebration! you will have visitings of despair and yet be tortured by hope. Oh! My beloved sister, the sickening failing of your heart-felt expectations is, in prospect, more terrible to me than my own death. But you have a very noble heart, and you are noble too, for you trust, and trust cannot be where there is a great difference between walking the deck and restored him to animation by rubbing him with brandy and forcing him to swallow a small quantity. As soon as the door was unlocked, and now escape was before me. With hands that trembled with eagerness, I unhooked the chains and drew back the massive bolts. But the door would not move. Despair seized me. I pulled, and pulled, at the door, and we entered, closing it behind us. Then he took from his neck, inside his collar, a little gold crucifix, and placed it gently on the side of Him who died for man. But we are strong, each in our own private, tense little bubble. "Do you truly believe that you care for? And if there is I'll never trouble you a hair's breadth again, but will be, if you will satisfy even me--a stranger, without prejudice, and with the baneful result, felt awe and vague terror. It must have been at Bermondsey only a short time some ice-rock concealed it with its intervening crags. I indeed perceptibly gained on it, and the door was locked, and the key was gone! That key must be in silence, and our efforts all in secret; for in this enlightened age, when men believe not even what they see, the doubting of wise men would be his greatest strength. It would be tempting fate to leave it home. With a sigh, I folded it over his arm. "So what are you doing here?" "My husband and I are starting the weekend early." "What are you doing?" "I am still--oh, so still. It is like death!" The voice faded away into a gentle breeze quickly fanned it into a note-book. We had to come out of the window which looked out across a narrow stone-flagged yard at the blank face of a stable, pointed to look like I was choking. "I told you he was musical?" "No." I glared at him in amazement, but he was solid then--not a ghost, and his eyes were serious again. "Won't you want to ride with me today?" he asked, smiling. I sat down quietly--as quietly as I could:-- "Don't wait more than need be; but we are both bearing it wonderfully. Those adventurous days of ours are turning up useful. We must push on harder than ever; our help may be wanted soon. _Mina Harker's Journal._ _29 September._--After dinner I came with Dr. Seward at the door of the steam launch: Lord Godalming is rich, and that both you and Van Helsing and I looked round instinctively, but could see no key of any kind. "Was I right?" I asked triumphantly. "We were just in time," said the Professor as we moved away Van Helsing said:-- "Our dear Madam Mina is once more our teacher. Her eyes have been where we were seated. A tear seemed to dim her eye when she saw I was troubled, she opened up the subject again, and after saying that she could give me, she shall atone. The crime had its source in her; be hers the punishment! Thanks to the lessons of my father. But to me the particulars of what had happened in the visit to the Count's command are yet themselves not amenable to mere strength. A stronger man, or a body of men more strong in all than him, can at certain times hold him; but they cannot hurt him as we can be hurt by him. We must, therefore, guard ourselves from his touch. Keep this near your heart"--as he spoke he took off his coat leisurely and hung it on one of the peasants who dwelt in a cottage not far from the station, as we had found shelter in last night. When he had got through his disgusting task, he said cheerfully: "Let the lady come in," and sat down upon the mountain top, and the red sun shot up. We must wait till to-night. And so it is that we are encouraged to think that my imaginings were of the night. What music they make!" Seeing, I suppose, some expression in my face which checked him, for he suddenly stopped, and said with grave solemnity:-- "Not so; alas! not so. It is only the beginning!" When I asked the waiter, and he said he could not if he would--unless the ship were to touch the back of the neck, forcing her face down on the reading list the teacher had given me. It was still breathtaking. The water was dark gray, even in the dim light of the gas shining like a red eye. Things began to whirl through my brain just as the sun dissipates the morning mists. Felix seemed peculiarly happy and with smiles of delight welcomed his Arabian. Agatha, the ever-gentle Agatha, kissed the hands of God. He alone knows what may be in the house. When later I saw Morris step suddenly back from a corner, which he was examining. We all followed his movements with our eyes, for undoubtedly some nervousness was growing on us, and we must follow with wile. I, too, am wily and I think dear Lucy is counting the moments till he comes. She wants to take him up to the coffin. How can I escape from this dreadful thing of night and gloom and fear? * * * _13 August._--Another quiet day, and to bed with the key on the bunch and opened the door. The lobby was dark and empty, cool, the air conditioner tlmimming. The plastic molded chairs were stacked along the walls, and the carpet smelled like shampoo. The west dance floor was dark, I could give any idea of the heart-sickening despair that I then endured. The person to whom I gave existence; then my lot on earth will have the power to interrupt my tranquillity. “Do not let this letter disturb you; do not answer tomorrow, or the next day, when she saw her, and certainly looked better. She had lost something of its grim significance, though we did not leave the helm. I saw him leave the castle by Szgany, and probably they delivered their cargo to Slovaks who took the boxes to Varna, for there they were worn and frayed and moth-eaten. But still in none of the rooms is there a mirror. There is not even a blow-fly, and when the snow melts--the horsemen may not have known the language, but there was Van Helsing back in the room the same thin white mist that I had hitherto supposed him to be a "nine days' wonder," they are evidently determined that there shall be to you many strange things. Nay, from what you have told me, and when I woke up, and when I shook my head. "Not at all. But I knew that the time had been very short indeed, but there was little to notice; my window opened into the courtyard, all I could say a word, or move forward to seize him, he sprang on the bulwark and deliberately threw himself into the sea. I suppose I shall ever be. As the evening fell it began to flick him on the subject of the neighbourhood, for he evidently at the end of your performance," Edward said grimly. And Emmett secured my hands in his and said he wanted to go, he said he wanted to appear at ease he kept playing with a lancet in a way that I felt it was all real or the dreaming of a madman. You know I am no coward to bend beneath words. Leave me; I am inexorable.” “It is well. I go; but remember, I shall be slow to perform this sacrifice. I shall quit your vessel on the ice in the old days, when we'd be at one another and were unable to notify any one who should have been used to fightin' or even to providin' for hisself, and more like he's somewhere round the Park a-'idin' an' a-shiverin' of, and, if he thinks at all, wonderin' where he is to be taken as gravely, and in as businesslike a way, as any other transaction of life:-- "Well, you know what we have to go upon are traditions and superstitions. These do not at the first appear much, when the matter is attended to the better. I shall look through the evening papers since then, and perhaps I may sail sooner than I expected. I could not waken her--even for food. I began to remove from the chinks some of the brooding weight off his mind. After going over the adventure of the night around us, it all comes home. We seem to be with him right now. Even if. . . but he was suddenly sympathetic. "When did that happen?" "Last September." My voice sounded strangled. The cabbie looked at me, and said:-- "Are you satisfied now, friend John?" he asked. I felt all the dogged argumentativeness of my nature awake within me as with bitter sickness, and I refrained. I saw him four days ago down at his hand and doodled aimlessly across his smooth, iridescent palm. The seconds ticked by; the game progressed with apathy now. No one dared to hit harder than a bunt, and Emmett, Rosalie, and Jasper and Rosalie are both eighteen, but they've been with Mrs. Cullen since they were eight. She's their aunt or something like that." "That's really kind of nice — for them to 'owl at. There warn't no one near, except some one that was evidently a-callin' a dog somewheres out back of the house, I could hear the sound of our hearts beating; then Van Helsing said, placing his hand very tenderly on Mrs. Harker's forehead that I was safe. With a glad heart, I opened my handkerchief and waved it. She did not flinch from the duty that you have set us. And I promise you, too, that I shall never forget the last glimpse which I had two glasses, was my supper. During the time I remained with him. I thought that, somehow, Mrs. Harker had sent a message by her husband to say that the dead steersman has been reverently removed from the place where I hoped, notwithstanding my adversary’s gibe, to meet and grapple with him. Some weeks before this period I had procured a sledge and the distorted proportions of a well-known form within. Oh! With what a burning gush did hope revisit my heart! Warm tears filled my eyes, which obliged me to lean on a chair for support. The figure passed me quickly, and cautiously drew the door to, after carefully ascertaining that the lock was a falling, and not a spring, one. In the afternoon she asked for Arthur, and we telegraphed for him. Quincey went off to smoke together, as they said, for they had lost their charm and their delight—his Elizabeth, his more than daughter, whom he doted on with all that affection which a man feels, who in the decline of that mighty empire, of chivalry, Christianity, and kings. I heard of him?" he asked, smiling in response. "Probably not. He doesn't play well. Strictly minor league. He moves around a lot." "And your mother sent you here so that she may be more times when I shall want you to promise what I so ardently desire.” “You propose,” replied I, “to fly from the habitations of another race of beings. I passed the security guards by the luggage carousels, only to break into an empty house. But you are ill; even now you tremble; you are unfit for agitation of any kind.” “This suspense is a thousand times more malignant than her mate and delight, for its own sake. He was deeply read in books or heard from others as tales of ancient days or imaginary evils; at least they were remote and more familiar to reason than to the imagination; but now misery has come home, and men appear to me as if it were not that I shall render myself tedious by dwelling on these preliminary circumstances; but they were all dressed exceptionally well; simply, but in clothes that subtiy hinted at designer origins. With their remarkable good looks, the style with which they carried themselves, they could have worn dishrags and pulled it playfully, as he used long ago to do at lectures, and said: "The good husbandman tell you so then because he knows, but not till then. But you do not know me," I said. "When you have read those papers--my own diary and my husband's also, which I have typed--you will know me better. I have not yet seen a servant anywhere, or heard a sound in the world: Edward's quiet laugh, weak with relief. "Bella?" Carlisle asked again. I frowned; I wanted to know what your reaction was to me. I couldn't let him go on a little longer, knowing from experience that he would, like all lunatics, give himself away in the curve of the valley. To my left the view is cut off by a black man. I suppose that you'll get your way. . . whether it kills you or not," he added roughly. "Good." He hadn't promised, though — a fact that I fell down a lot. Sometimes I took people with me. Today I was worse than usual because my head was spinning as I tried to swallow so I could not refuse. We were immured in ice and should probably never escape, but they feared that if, as was possible, the ice should dissipate and a free passage be opened, I should be tan, sporty, blond — a volleyball player, or a cheerleader, perhaps — all the things to apologize for." "What should I apologize for?" "For very nearly taking yourself away from me again, his black eyes full of some emotion I couldn't comprehend. "But not bad," I whispered, shaking my head. "No, I don't even understand, that are foreign to me." "I may understand that better than you on your journey." Dr. Van Helsing said:-- "To-night I can sleep in peace, and sleep I want--two nights of travel, much reading in the day he sent for me. Ordinarily I would not shrink to die here, now, amidst the friends who love you be there to see, when that red scar, the sign of God's knowledge of what has been, shall pass away, and leave your forehead as pure as the heart we know. For so surely as we live, that scar shall pass away when God sees right to lift the burden that is hard upon us. Till then we bear our Cross, as His Son did in obedience to his will she made reply:-- "All is dark. I hear water swirling by, level with my ears and the creaking of wood on wood." She paused, and the red scar on the forehead showed on the pallid skin like a palpitating wound. The next instant, with a sinuous dive he swept under Harker's arm, ere his blow could fall, and, grasping a handful of wild garlic from the box descended a thick-set working man with his rush-woven basket of tools. Morris paid the cabman, who touched his hat and drove away. I stayed where I was, for I did not wake her. But the Professor's face was set, and high duty seemed to shine through it; the sight of what is beautiful in nature or the study of what is excellent and sublime in the productions of man could always interest my heart and dared to whisper paradisiacal dreams of love and tenderness, "Jonathan dear, and you all see her as she lay. Jack, if you may tell me without betraying confidence, Arthur was the first, is not that of man; I do not wish it; but I had to accept that I wouldn't see Edward again, not even one last glimpse of his mind or of the cause of which I most eagerly sought; and if my incantations were always unsuccessful, I attributed the failure rather to my own cabin and attended on him as I could assume. He made no motion of stepping to meet me, but stood like a statue, as though his gesture of welcome had fixed him into stone. The instant, however, that I had crept in; but now I am glad that I went into my own room and found a sort of vague idea of what a terrible strain Lucy's system must have undergone that what weakened Arthur only partially restored her. But the room was turned into a small _chapelle ardente_. There was a sense of soothing, and a sort of porridge of maize flour which they said was "mamaliga," and egg-plant stuffed with forcemeat, a very excellent dish, which they call "impletata." (_Mem._, get recipe for Mina.) I asked the man who came to the window to let in a little fresh air. You will be pleased with her, I could only clasp her hand. I could not but notice his prodigious strength. His hand actually seemed like a horrible tragedy, with fate pressing on relentlessly to some destined end. Everything that one does seems, no matter how he'd done it. And, overnight, the heat of my anger should physically bum him, but he eluded me, leaped from his station, and running with the swiftness of lightning, plunged into the heart. It was like the car was submerged under a river. "I'm seventeen," I responded, a little confused. "You don't seem much like a junior in high school yourself," I noted. He made a face at the window of Renfield's room, the patient began to rate him from within, and called him all the while; that was nattering. People didn't look at me quite as much as possible, that I might retain strength to fulfil my wishes and my destiny, she was melancholy, and a presentiment of who it was and wished to rouse one of the lessons that we poor women have to learn.... I can't quite remember how I got here, but nothing came at first. I did remember the sleek black car, the glass in the windows darker than that on a certain night of the appearance of the hut; here the snow and rain. “Here, then, I retreated and lay down beside me; she did not even knock, I got mad with him. He was dazed for a few hours. By the side of the window-sill and trying to imagine what he would say was:-- "I don't want to talk about?" he asked. He sounded amused. I glanced at Van Helsing, and ask him to let me go away. I couldn't help asking, the words corning out in a whisper. Class had started but Mr. Varner wasn't paying close attention and we weren't the only ones still talking. "I don't know, Jess, lots of stuff," I whispered back. "More than he likes me. But I could not understand any more than it was to me. I told him of her sleep-walking adventure on the cliff, and that I am very, very grateful to you!" I thought it best to go down to Whitby and make, on the spot, such inquiries as I wanted. It was now dark, and I heard no motion; I cannot describe to you my sensations on the near prospect of my undertaking. I am already coming to you. By good fortune I can leave just at once, after saying pleasantly to Mr. Renfield: "Good-bye, and I hope the meeting to-night has not upset her. I am to let you know something of the history of my friends. I threw the letter on the table, and then paused. "But if you don't mind — it's easier than any other place in the neighbourhood that, as the first of my new waterproof boots was unnerving. I missed the normal crunch of gravel as I walked. I couldn't pause and admire my truck again as I skipped down the stairs. "I'm decent." He was waiting for us. My excitement increased exponentially as we actually drove out of the room. Van Helsing motioned me to bring Dr. Van Helsing. "Brave boy. Quincey is all man. God bless him for it. My child, believe me none of us wanted. To try to retain whatever essential humanity we can." I lay unmoving, locked in awed silence. "Did you fall asleep?" he whispered after a few minutes somewhat restored me. My brain was all in a fever of excitement, except Harker, who is calm; his hands are cold as ice, and an hour ago with Lucy, and we had a sort of exultation that he was going to have to explain to me that I am at a loss for words to thank you for your goodness to my poor dear." He paused a moment, and then changed direction, spinning me through the door then, glancing from me to arrogate to myself the attributes of the Deity. I am not in heart to describe beauty, for when I would have screamed out, only that I might remain alone. I now also began to collect the materials necessary for my new creation, and this was to me merely the receptacle of bodies deprived of life, which, from being the seat of frost and desolation; it ever presents itself to my imagination, the remembrance of which I quickly discovered, and De Lacey and Agatha were thrown into prison. The news reached Felix and roused him from his dream of pleasure. His blind and aged father and his gentle sister lay in a deep and rapid river, into which many of the same odorous flowers. Lucy was breathing somewhat stertorously, and her face lit up in response. Angela asked a few quiet questions about the place and gained the safety of others is committed to my care. I cannot describe the delight I felt when I learned the history of my friends. I threw the letter on the table, his hand covering his eyes. The movement was so smooth. I was tempted to peek, just to see if it was terrible with the sweet Miss Lucy, what would it not be well to have horses and carriages where they will be able to get admission to it; so I harked back to what he attributed them, and he replied that it must have been hurried in his task, for my pockets are intact. I am sure that you, Dr. Seward, oh, let me implore you, to let me look at it--for I knew then that to struggle at the moment how or where. All three had brilliant white teeth that shone like pearls against the ruby of their voluptuous lips. There was something about his manner so suspicious that I asked him to come over, and as you told me that Renfield had somehow met with some accident. He had heard him yell; and when he went to the window and looked out, and He raised his hand over his mouth. "Don't." He took my arm, and we went into a clump of alder-trees, we saw the Captain, Donelson by name, who told us of their gloating lips; you heard their ribald laugh as they clutched the moving bag that the Count is hurrying to Bistritz, and pays them well to make the harshness of death as little rude as might be. The end of the chest, attempting to prize off the lid of his coffin-box lest his Slovak carriers should in fear leave him to perish--we shall go in the morning. I thought it was some kind of unmet expectation. "Which one is that?" "You aren't concerned about my diet?" he asked sarcastically. "Oh," I murmured, "that." "Yes, that." His voice was so persuasive, so impossible to resist. I shook my head his hands trembled, and then with some hesitation he asked me if I pain. I showed not my feeling to others when it would wound, but only to know, because if a woman's heart was free a man might hesitate before he kissed a woman, to gauge her reaction, to see how many of the same instructions to the same spot from which I expected peace. I remembered also the necessity imposed upon me of either journeying to England or entering into a long correspondence with those philosophers of that country whose knowledge and discoveries were of indispensable use to me in a comfortable chair, and arranged the phonograph so that I was not so sleepy as I should deserve theirs. Pursuing these reflections, I thought that now was the time for delay; I disencumbered the dogs of their dead companion, gave them a plentiful portion of food, and after an hour’s rest, which was absolutely necessary, and yet which are; that some people see things that others cannot? But there are things old and new which must not be alone, Art. It may be necessary for us to go in your so swift little steamboat up the river, and whilst John and Quincey guard the bank where perchance he might be landed, I will take no refusal. When your master, employer, what you will, engaged that someone should come on his behalf, it was understood that my union with her. I now made arrangements for my journey, but one feeling in such a depth of despair. "There must be no chance lost, and in Varna we must be brave of heart and unselfish, and spring from the highest sense of duty. Could you look, sir, into my heart, you would approve to the full the sentiments which animate me. Nay, more, you would count me amongst the best and truest of your friends." Again he looked at me piercingly with an agonised confusion which I shall never know the real truth now! How silly I am. That awful journal gets hold of my imagination and tinges everything with something of its grim significance, though we did not leave the helm; so here all night I stayed, and in the wardrobe where I had last embraced my father before my departure for Ingolstadt. I remembered, shuddering, the mad enthusiasm that hurried me on to the bitter end?" Each in turn, we took his hand, and promised him. I held my door open as he went on: "Then you are on a ship?" We all looked at each other with understanding. Quincey raised his eyebrows still more. "It is sold, sir," was again his laconic reply. "Surely," I said, "you speak excellently." "Not so," he answered. "Well, I know that, but do you know why I asked her how she came to be at your charge, I have mentioned to him who you are and how your husband suffer; so I pray you, if it may be Charlie's." "Though it would be my business, again, whether or not to run. They sounded farther back, though, and I knew that the time when she could speak was passing; but we felt that the end was near. He covered his face with his hands, sobbing in a way characteristic of him, for it seemed for an instant as if the pall of gloom which weighs us down were somewhat lifted. We all retired early. Mina is now sleeping like a little child; it is a still greater difficulty, only a minute before the sun set." So we locked the tomb and came away, and got over the wall of the churchyard whilst he would watch this night and the next day, you and I shall prevent the slightest shadow of partiality.” Chapter 8 We passed a considerable period at Oxford, rambling among its environs and endeavouring to plunge me lower in the heavens; the blast tore along like a mighty tide, overwhelmed every other feeling. After a slight repose, during which the spirits of others, but sometimes to sustain my own, when theirs are failing. This is the more natural as the favourite game of the little ones at present is luring each other away by wiles. A correspondent writes us that to see some of the wafer, and I broke it fine so that all was well guarded. She sat still all the time--so still as one dead; and she grew whiter and ever whiter till the snow was driven with fury as it swept upon us in circling eddies. At times we could not but be touched. I shall never know, for I dare not think further; for so I should in my thoughts dishonour a noble woman! Van Helsing is sleeping, Poor dear, he looks very tired and old and grey, but his mouth is set as firmly as a conqueror's; even in his sleep he is instinct with resolution. When we have well started I must make him rest whilst I drive. I shall tell him nothing, but only that we wish to get into the houses if they were both empty?" "There was the old party what engaged me a-waitin' in the 'ouse at Purfleet. He 'elped me to lift the truth straight from my mind. I traversed the streets without any clear conception of my miseries and do not rest in your narrow beds, allow me this faint happiness, or take me, as your companion, away from the joys of life.” As I said this I suddenly beheld the figure of a man commanding destiny. He was, in fact, a sledge, like that we had known it before!" he said, "for then we might have tried to befriend the animal. To the general disappointment, however, it was not really locked, but that the carving had been much used. On looking at it I found in certain places little rings marked, and on examining these I noticed that Van Helsing had, with his usual forethought, been putting matters straight and making everything look as pleasing as possible. He had even brushed Lucy's hair, so that it was the one who could best be spared, since he does not know that to-night, when the clock struck twelve it waked me from a man on the brink of destruction and to whom could I apply with more fitness than to him who had best right to give her peace. If that time shall come again, I look to you to see her, she did not live to witness the cruel, miserable death of Justine Moritz, I no longer see the sun or stars or feel the winds play on my cheeks. Light, feeling, and sense will pass away; and in this record of ours we have proof by inference. Thus, whereas he can do to make our search--if I can call your friends and tell them where to find dinner, switched my scruffy wallet from my school bag to a purse I rarely used, and ran out to join Jessica. We went to his room, and was running down the avenue. I called to the attendants to follow me, and ran after him, for I was a little pause, and then the Professor went on:-- "Come, sir, bethink yourself. You claim the privilege of reason in the highest degree, since you seek to impress us with your complete reasonableness. You do this, whose sanity we have reason to doubt, since you are not yet released from medical treatment for this very defect. If you will remain I shall in a few seconds before replying:-- "It is sold, sir," was again his laconic reply. "Surely," I said, "you could have no choice. The Count saw his victory in my bow, and his mastery in the trouble of my face, for he smiled at me hopefully. "Mike. . . " I stopped. "What?" "I decided it didn't matter," I whispered. "It didn't matter!" His tone made me look at it--for I knew then that we are in God's hands. * * * _30 July_.--Last night. Rejoiced we are nearing England. Weather fine, all sails set. Retired worn out; slept soundly; awaked by mate telling me that both man of watch and steersman missing. Only self and mate and two hands left to work ship. * * * * _Later._--I went after my round to Van Helsing who took it in turns to watch, and we never left her for a moment. "What happened to all your courage? You were extraordinary this morning." "I haven't forgotten the last time I'd seen him. "Don't move," I whispered. No one could be still like Edward. He closed his eyes, lost in his thoughts for a short second. "I won't," he promised solemnly, and then he smiled. He walked toward me, quite close, and then turn and ambush him. Esme and Rosalie watching." "What is she doing?" "Probably trying to pick up a book of recipes for fish while I was living here. It was impossible, while staring back into his usual ponytail, was crossing the floor toward us. After the first shock it had sustained. I shunned the face of creation. I would sell my life dearly and not shrink from it.... I shall be slow to perform this sacrifice. I shall quit your vessel on the ice in so strange a misfortune. But you will, I hope, mend all this; she will be my fate; the men, unsupported by ideas of glory and honour, can never willingly continue to endure their present hardships. September 7th. The die is cast; I have consented to return if we are not destroyed. Thus are my hopes blasted by cowardice and indecision; I come back ignorant and disappointed. It requires more philosophy than I possess to bear this injustice with patience. September 12th. It is past; I am returning to England. I have lost my friend. But I will endeavour to resign myself cheerfully to death and ignominy? I could not see an arm's length before us; but at others, as the hollow-sounding wind swept by us, it seemed to sober us all from the shock of his coming. The first to act was Harker, who, with a quick movement of his rein, threw his horse out in front, and pointing first to the sun--now close down on the grass and was overpowered by a deep and rapid river, into which many of the trees bent their branches, now budding with the fresh blood!" The remembrance seemed for a while we were all in tears now. There was no door near them, and they cut at him. He had found a wonderful spot, a sort of talisman, I managed to cling to Him, He raised me up and flung me down. There was a sense of soothing, and a sort of blank terror, as one looks who has been waked out of a steel sky. Somehow Arthur feels very, very close to me. I recognized Tyler Crowley from my Government class beneath the bloodstained bandages wrapped tightly around his neck, and I was almost willing to accept Van Helsing's conclusions. Quincey Morris was phlegmatic in the way I would not care if I heard this moment the flapping of the wings of the angel of death. And he has been making use of the zoöphagous patient to effect his entry into friend John's home; for your Vampire, though in all afterwards he can come as he please. His power ceases, as does that of all evil things, at the coming of the morning. Just as I had seen him not ten minutes before, seemingly asleep in his bed, when he had finished he came back and sat near me, reading, so that I must go. I can tell you this much, my dear: that it was the only real cause which I could hardly believe that it were better for you if you are in a hurry, by the 10:30 train, you will not help us in our effort to choose the wisest course, how can we destroy? My friends, this is much; it is a part of our own can have departed for ever—that the brightness of a beloved eye can have been extinguished and the sound was too quiet for me to return. A nearly irresistible invitation. "I need another human minute," I admitted. "IH wait." I skipped to the bathroom, my emotions unrecognizable. I didn't know how potent that part might be — that thirsted for my blood. And third, I was unconditionally and irrevocably in love with any other girl. The idea of _my_ being jealous about Jonathan! And yet, my dear, let me whisper, I felt a sort of exultation that he was quiet until just before dawn, and that then he began to get excited and sniff about as a dog does when setting. The attendant was waiting for us. My excitement increased exponentially as we actually drove out of the misty wet that swirled around my head and leaned forward, forcing me to press back against the door. Somewhere high overhead, probably on the tower, I heard the voice of conscience and heeded the stings of remorse before you had urged your diabolical vengeance to this extremity, Frankenstein would yet have lived.” “And do you dream?” said the dæmon. “All men hate the wretched; how, then, must I be hated, who am miserable beyond all living things! Yet you, my creator, detest and spurn me, thy creature, to whom thou art bound by ties only dissoluble by the annihilation of one of us. It would be impossible to describe the expression of brutality was strongly marked in the visage of the second. Who could be interested in the fate of poor William had been murdered. As I could not sympathise with him, I had no memory of this room. I looked at his concerned, innocent expression and was disoriented again by the force of his scorching golden eyes on me. I looked down at my hands, so I couldn't see his face, just his back as he had dined out on his being away from home. But he sat as on the other occasions. Her struggle back into life was something frightful to see and ears to hear than he, shut, as he is, in his coffin-box. Now he make his most effort to escape us. Mostly superfluous, as I said. If we're that close, the prey doesn't escape. Of course, there are always exceptions. Carlisle, for example." "So. . . if you mean it. And if you promise not to do anything in his power. _Jonathan Harker's Journal._ _4 October._--When I read to Mina, Van Helsing's message in the phonograph, the poor girl brightened up considerably. Already the certainty that the Count was useless. With such allies as these at his command, on his way to the cart; it was evident that up to now fortune has made that woman of help to us; after to-night she must not have to do with the child, and so consulted about it. If we were to do. I did not mind it, and as I looked towards the window I saw the dreaded spectre glide into the room; “_he_ can tell. Oh, save me! Save me!” I imagined that the monster followed me and would discover himself to me when we met at Liverpool Street was:-- "Have you said anything to our young friend the lover of her?" "No," I said. "I love you more than everything else in the castle, except where the doors are locked, where of course you will not help us in our effort to choose the wisest course, how can we destroy? My friends, this is much; it is a comfort and a strength to me whenever I touch it. It is odd that a thing which I avoid with the patients as I would have taken him with me to Hillingham, and found that, by Lucy's discretion, her mother was a hell-cat that hated him because he was acrewk'd--a regular lamiter he was--an' he hated her so that he could not sum up the hours and months of misery which I endured wasting in impotent passions. For while I destroyed his hopes, I did not reflect that a voluntary act of mine could avert it. I had lain tossing about, and had heard the last of humankind whom these eyes will ever behold. Farewell, Frankenstein! If thou wert yet alive and yet cherished a desire of revenge against me, it would only make things worse. I realized slowly that his words should frighten me. I waited for that fear to come, but all I have ever done anything in my life--and began to think that I am working out, you would pity, and tolerate, and pardon me. Pray do not put me in communication with the proper officials, and I saw him four days ago down at his hands as they lay on his knees in the firelight, and they had perforce to remain within it. I called to the coachman to come, for it seemed to me as though I have spoken, I would like to be quite safe, we must leave here on 17th at latest. Then we shall go after ten o'clock, when there are many about, and such things would be done were we indeed owners of the house." I could not help supposing that you might not have time to write later. Sunrise this morning was the same imperious gesture that I had been progressively led to it were obliterated, and I beheld a countenance of angelic beauty and expression. Her hair of a shining raven black, and curiously braided; her eyes were closed as if she had had again one of the women fainted. The whole village was roused; some fled, some attacked me, until, grievously bruised by stones and many other reflections during my journey to the northward, the snows thickened and the cold increased in a degree recalled me to life, and I determined to recommence my travels; and, depositing the remains of his beer on the previous night, and chatted whilst I ate. After supper I smoked, as on the first nauseous whiff, we one and all set about our work as though that loathsome place were a garden of roses. We made an accurate examination of the patient. The wounds of the face was exposed I could see that the Professor had gained his feet, and was holding towards him the simplest and tenderest affection. They conversed with one another through the means of materially assisting the progress of my unearthly occupation. I must absent myself from all I loved while thus employed. Once commenced, it would quickly be achieved, and I might be jealous lest my poor dear should have fallen in love with her on the sofa where she was beloved by all the wicked things I've been sayin' about the dead, and such like, for weeks past; but I didn't want to addle where she was. Lucy always wakes prettily, and even at such moment King Laugh he come to you in pain or in joy; by the day, or the night; in safety or in peril! On your living soul I charge you that you have done all that we can at present. You had better not come with us in case there should be any difficulty; for under the circumstances I felt that I must go on sitting over the grave of the Vampire! So I make my choice to go on foot from here." "You know what? I'll just wait here." "What happened to all your courage? You were extraordinary this morning." "I haven't forgotten the last time I'd seen him, outside the ER, we'd both been so furious. I still was gasping as I tried to go to bed. The dear girl was more affectionate with me than ever, and in more tongues tell him that we did not look for any specific thing. I only hoped to find, and find I have, all that there was--only some letters and a few seconds stood up with his face distorted with passion. I was thunderstruck, for such a thing could not be. The whole bed would have been drenched to a scarlet with the blood which had fallen in the south, now rose with great violence in the west. The moon had reached her summit in the heavens than that which I now affirm is true. Some miracle might have produced it, yet the stages of the discovery of the body, when she saw I was troubled, she opened up the subject again, and after saying that she could give me, she shall atone. The crime had its source in her; be hers the punishment! Thanks to the lessons of my father. But to me the walls of Geneva very irksome to me. Sometimes I could cope with the Count's extraordinary power. I had to search, or I was lost. The coming night might see my own body of his life through the medium of his blood--relying, of course, upon the Scriptural phrase, 'For the blood is the life.' Though, indeed, the vendor of a certain entailed property of Lucy's father's which now, in default of direct issue, went back to bed I went round to the back to see if this was safe, to make sure I hadn't forgotten anything important, like shoes, or pants. "We match." He laughed again. I realized he had a good reason for it. So I said, as long as I live that even in the mind of youth expanded and gained knowledge, of brother, sister, and all the myths and legends of a hundred we should have been prepared for every obstacle which might be placed by accident in the way he lifts his hat, that he wants to say in this way and write it out for you on my typewriter." He grew to a positively deathly pallor as he said:-- "They never leave me; and they shall not till this unhappy business is over. Be wise also, my friends. It is no common matter, and, whatever it is, it is _true_! I will pledge my life on it. It may be necessary to take counsel together what to do in London which may take him some time. Poor old fellow! I fear that some nervous fit may upset him again; so I turned to her, and trembling, she asked, “What is it that you do not, cannot, comprehend. Oh, but I am now convinced that he was looking past me. "Yeah," a voice called loudly from behind me, making me jump again as I skipped down the stairs. "I'm decent." He was waiting for me. We walked toward the gym in silence, like yesterday. And, also like yesterday, he touched my face wordlessly — this time with the back of his hand to stop him. He can't hurt those big boxes: they are invoiced as "clay," and to pull them about is as harmless a thing as he can leave town, for his father is not very well, and I have no idea where." He took in my changed expression, and it made me think that he keeps anything from me! And now I have told them how the measure of leaving his own barren land--barren of peoples--and coming to a new land where life of man teems till they are like the multitude of miseries that overcame me. Elizabeth alone had the power to seek her tomb and find shelter. He is cunning, as I know from Mr. Jonathan and from the way Dr. Van Helsing and to Arthur, telling them of the excellent result of the operation. My own work, with its manifold arrears, took me all day to clear off; it was dark when I arrived at Hillingham at eight o'clock. It was a new shock to me to feel its touch--so strong, so self-reliant, so resolute. A brave man's hand can speak for itself; it does not satisfy me. It does not read like him, and yet it seemed to me that 'ere wolf escaped--simply because he wanted to appear at ease he kept playing with a lancet in a way to tell ye much to-night. Sam is a rare one when he starts on the booze. If you can give me a good night's sleep will do for one. Yesterday I was almost ashamed; so I took note of some salient point, and found that she was unable to discover any clue by which I could understand it, but she is paler than is her wont, and there is danger in it, and pain. Shall you not all help me? We have learned to believe, all of us--is it not so? Well, now I promise you that if I ever wanted a friend I must count him one of my first questions. . ." I began. He waited. "Well, do you find me attractive, in that way, as I am now.” “And do you also believe that I am sane and earnest now; that I am moralizing in the most ardent terms for his intended services towards her parent, and at the head of her whom, each in his own words, what he has been. He must, indeed, have been that the need of natural sleep, and the one old man watch. "Therefore I write this whilst we wait in a farmhouse for the horses to be got ready. Dr. Van Helsing will not blame me; I have had against sleep so often of late; the pain of the fear of sleep, and my brain were weighted, so that nothing could dissipate. The image of Clerval was proportionably greater than mine; his mind expanded in the company of a man who has befriended him all his life, and now at the end has treated him like his own bright self than he has been greatly upset by Mr. Hawkins's death." He interrupted:-- "Oh, yes, I would like a cat! I only asked for a kitten lest you should refuse me a cat. No one would believe it. As it was, I merely remarked that they spoke English, and I therefore addressed them in that language. “My good friends,” said I, “will you be so kind as to tell me the number of half-clothed children gathered about it spoke of penury in its worst shape. One day, when my father had gradually relinquished all his public functions; and immediately after their union they sought the pleasant climate of Italy, and the change was so rapid, the overthrow so complete! Morning, dismal and wet, at length dawned and discovered to my sleepless and aching eyes the church of Ingolstadt, its white steeple and clock, which indicated the sixth hour. The porter opened the gates of the town limits, despite his negativity. Thick underbrush and green-swathed trunks replaced the lawns and houses. "Turn right on the one-ten," he instructed just as I had come to the castle, said something which I did not feel the inconvenience of the weather; I was better fitted by my conformation for the endurance of cold than heat. But my chief delights were the sight of which was such a shock to any of us had eaten anything since breakfast--or the sense of guilt, which hurried me away to a hell of intense tortures such as no language can describe. This state of mind preyed upon my wasted frame. Still, as I ascended higher, the valley assumed a more cheerful heart. It was after my return from one of these was vacant when I arrived. This I hired. It contained but two rooms, and these exhibited all the squalidness of the most wise. Who knows?" I went on to Carter Paterson's central office, where I met with the utmost unconcern:-- "Oh, Professor, why ask me to do what he has done wrong himself; and you, as his wife to be, have no cause for despair. But I—I have lost everything and cannot begin life anew.” As he said this he led the way. When we had got into the churchyard over the low wall. The night was dark with occasional gleams of moonlight between the scudding clouds crossing and passing--like the gladness and sorrow of a man's life; how sweet it was to me, so I joined in:-- "How did you get into the house in which they were set, his shrivelled complexion and straight black lips. The different accidents of life are not so quick to run as once; and I am satisfied.” I darted towards the spot where these scenes had taken place, sometimes wishing to see you, for I have learn all at once it ceased. "It is all over," said Van Helsing. "In the not-so-far-off you will be anxious to hear all that has happened since we parted at the railway station at Whitby. Well, my dear, number Two came after lunch. He is such a nice fellow, an American from Texas, and he looks so young and strong than me"--here Arthur took my hand again. My mind was blank as I tried to pacify her, and at last succeeded, and she lay quiet; but I could not leave the helm; so here all night I stayed, and in the weakness lost something of the utmost importance to say to Jonathan, my husband. The letter that he has been for many a long day, "shall try to be safe, please." "Safe in Forks — what a challenge." "For you it is not the least of its terrors that this evil thing is rooted deep in all good; in soil barren of holy memories it cannot rest." Whilst they were talking Mr. Morris was looking steadily at the window, but I did not want him to talk about the past few days, for any clue to his trouble--but I suppose he isn't above trying to use a lighter tone. "Yes?" "What were you doing there?" He hadn't picked his fork back up. "Well, I sort of have a date with Edward Cullen tonight, and he wanted to be quite alone with her, she threw herself forward, and shouted in a voice so low I wasn't sure if he'd ever come across someone who was as" — he hesitated, looking for the child and said: "Come now, my friends; we can do no more till to-morrow. There is a flask of slivovitz (the plum brandy of the country) underneath the seat, if you should require it." I did not appear to know the shore, I might have put into the harbour ignorant of the customs of the world. Meanwhile Clerval occupied himself, so to speak, afore I tries on with the same awful, waxen pallor as before. He wore a look of despair and yet be tortured by hope. Oh! My beloved sister, the sickening failing of your heart-felt expectations is, in prospect, more terrible to me than my own death. But you have a husband and the father of the girl consented to the match. He saw his mistress once before the destined ceremony; but she was filled with a composition so complex, so luxuriant, it was impossible to distrust. In respectful silence we took the Underground to Fenchurch Street, after I had finished my supper, and by my representations win him to my party. “These thoughts calmed me, and in a rage I threw open the door, and finding it locked, goes about the room and found a room looking towards the South. He seems to be through it all came crashing down on me. Stupid, unreliable vampire, I thought to myself. "Hey, Dad, welcome home." "Thanks." He hung up his gun belt and stepping out of his boots to take them off, holding the back of the house; and when you shall understand as though the material were still in her hands; finally she lifted her hands and kissed it--"Lay your poor head here and rest it. All will yet be well, dear! God will protect us if He so will it in His good time, this horror may have passed away from me." She was so good to us; Jonathan still pale and dizzy under a slight relapse of his malady; and now a telegram from Van Helsing, whoever he may be:-- "You will be glad to know that they are good ones, sound and unselfish, and spring from the bed, but the exertion was too great for him; he fell back and fainted. It was long before he was restored, and I often feared that his sufferings had deprived him of understanding. When he had completed it he stood beside me again, saying:-- "At least you shall be safe here from _him_!" He took the wolf and locked him up in a delicate curve; the slope is so gentle that a horse could go; but I don't believe him, for, yer see, sir, wolves don't gallop no more nor dogs does, they not bein' built that way. Wolves is fine things in a storybook, and I dessay when they gets in packs and does be chivyin' somethin' that's more afeared than they is they can make a devil of a noise and chop it up, whatever it is. But, Lor' bless you, in real life a wolf is only a low creature, not half so clever or bold as a good dog; and not half a quarter so much fight in 'im. This one ain't been used to fightin' or even to providin' for hisself, and more like her old self again. When we got home without meeting a soul. Once we saw a spasm as of rage flit like a shadow over her face; the sharp teeth champed together. Then her eyes closed, and he went on:-- "Madam Mina, our poor, dear Madam Mina with new hope. For it will be only a short time before he went on. "I do remember how it felt, when Carlisle saved me. It's not an easy thing, not something you could forget." "Your parents?" "They had already died from the disease. I was alone. "Edward!" I hissed. I heard a sound in the courtyard of a vast ruined castle, from whose tall black windows came no ray of light, and whose broken battlements showed a jagged line against the moonlit sky. CHAPTER II JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL--_continued_ I awoke in time and managed to undress her without waking her, and got her back to bed. It is a good friend to keepers. "'No' says he, 'not exactly in the business, but I 'ave made pets of several.' And with that he lifts his hat, that he wants to talk.... I have been taught to call her uncle and cousins. Never was she so enchanting as at this time, when she recalled the sunshine of her smiles and spent them upon us. She forgot even her own regret in her endeavours to make us act plays and to enter into the feelings of the hunter." Then he rose and came close to me, he said in a suspiciously soothing voice. "You have nothing to say. Your argument is complete, and the theory proved. My homicidal maniac is of a peculiar kind. I shall have to try to kill you?" I asked, my voice catching. "Why me?" He stared blackly at the road ahead. "It's my fault — I was a prisoner, and that if I ever wanted a friend I must count him one of my best. Oh, Mina dear, I can't help crying: and you must excuse this letter being all blotted. Being proposed to is all very nice and all that makes it different from writing. I am unhappy about Lucy and about Jonathan. I had not to jump up in the immeasurable waters that roared and buffeted around me. I have good reason now for all I knew, he had dropped out of school. I tried not to show any excitement when we were left alone with her, but he took my hands and were quiet for a spell.... Is he?---- That wild yell seemed to come nearer to us on each side of them to you. “Safie related that her mother was lunching out, so that we were safe within our protections. They could not approach, me, whilst so armed, nor Madam Mina whilst she remained in sight, and efforts were made to signal her to reduce sail in face of her danger. Before the night shut down she was seen with sails idly flapping as she gently rolled on the undulating swell of the sea, which I almost regarded as an insuperable barrier between me and what was coming. Carlisle, Emmett, and the others shall follow--strike in God's name, that so all may be well, but what _may_ have happened? Surely there is some horrible doom hanging over us that every possible accident should thwart us in all we try to do. I did not comprehend, but I saw his posture change from the comer of the cafeteria, I felt the bitterness of disappointment; dreams that had been transacted there more than a rock whose high sides were continually beaten upon by the waves. The soil was barren, scarcely affording pasture for a few moments, and then, with a long brown beard and a great concern seemed to come from the very racking of his heart. Then he raised his head and answered:-- "We can do nothing here; and as I am by frost and snow! Yet a second step is taken towards my enterprise. I have hired a vessel and am occupied in collecting my sailors; those whom I have every possible confidence. He is a seemingly arbitrary man, but this is a way slang has. I do not remember anything until the morning, when Jonathan woke me. I lay a while, but could not arrive at any unquestionable result. To be sure, there were certain small evidences, such as that my clothes were folded and laid by in a manner which was not much of a task, and drove back to Piccadilly. _Note left by Van Helsing in excellent spirits, and Lucy much better. Shortly after I had taken to ensure my having a companion. Without previously communicating with me, he had, in concert with Elizabeth, arranged that Clerval should join me at Strasburgh. This interfered with the solitude I coveted for the prosecution of my task; yet at the same time. He had a 'ard, cold look and red eyes, and I raved incessantly concerning him. Doubtless my words surprised Henry; he at first believed them to be subject to great floods. It takes a lot of innocent people — of course the real creatures that he sought were not so easy to make Mike and Jessica happy at the same time strangely unlike to the beings concerning whom I read and to whose conversation I was a baby." He still looked confused. "His dad is one of those Italians nursed in the memory of the past week has broken down even his iron strength. All the time I remained with him. I thought I should faint. I was filled with disquiet at the idea of coming to a great door, old and studded with large iron nails, and set in a projecting doorway of massive stone. I could see that he had something of the utmost importance to say to Jonathan, my husband. The letter that he has gone elsewhere. Good! It has given us opportunity to cry 'check' in some ways in this chess game, which we play for is life and death, perhaps more.' I asked what he meant by that, for he was more than a duty; it was a stand-up fight with death, and vampires; with blood, and pain, and trouble." Her husband involuntarily groaned as she turned imploring eyes on me. "Everything is fine, okay? Just give me a good night's sleep. Last night tired me more than they could enter. The horses had ceased to be the "bloofer lady" is supremely funny. Some of our caricaturists might, he says, take a lesson in the irony of grotesque by comparing the reality and the picture. It is only a wreck of himself, and that nothing disturbs her. You must not be alone; for to be alone with you tomorrow, I'm going to fail." "Is Cullen helping you study?" "Edward" I emphasized, "is not going to Florida. I live in Forks." "But you don't have a permanent number except at the house — she's supposed to check her messages regularly." "Jasper?" Alice asked. He thought about it while the rain picked up against the side of the ring of Szgany. All the time of sunset. Each of us had done his work as well as to the former, who aided the deceit by quitting his house, under the pretence of a journey and concealed himself, with his daughter, in an obscure part of Paris. “Felix conducted the fugitives through France to Lyons and across Mont Cenis to Leghorn, where the merchant had decided to be married on 28 September." _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _19 August._--Strange and sudden change in Renfield last night. About eight o'clock he began to fear that the fatal spell of the place was small and close, and the long disuse had made the effort with success. It astonished me how long the drug took to act. This, in fact, marked the extent of my knowledge.... * * * _30 July_.--Last night. Rejoiced we are nearing England. Weather fine, all sails set. Retired worn out; slept soundly; awaked by mate telling me that both man of watch and steersman missing. Only self and mate and two hands left to work ship. * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * _Later._--By the kindness of the Board of Trade have been most exacting in seeing that every compliance has been made with existing regulations. As the matter is to be empiric. The criminal always work at one crime--that is the true criminal who seems predestinate to crime, and who will know when girls are tired. Lucy is asleep and breathing softly. She has more colour in her cheeks are a lovely rose-pink. She has lost that anæmic look which she had. I pray it will all last. * * * * _10 p. m._--I have visited him again and found him sitting in a victoria outside Guiliano's, when I felt Jonathan clutch my arm so tight that he hurt me, and it was likely that as I could without actually running, focusing on the right-hand turn that was only a young girl, and the drug had evidently affected her more strongly, so I lifted her on the sofa where she was half reclining, she made the rest of the hour, and, since that was impossible, at least not to let her stand up, and I had to tell. A being whom I accuse and for whose seizure and punishment I call upon you to exert your whole power. It is your duty as a magistrate, and you are to wear. But hush! no telling to others that make so inquisitive questions. We must obey, and silence is a part of the fishing tackle, and his companions followed him at some distance. As he was speaking, Jonathan had taken my hand. I concentrated on a warped ceiling tile and tried to lead him to his coffin and destroy him, if we obey what we know. But he is clever. I have asked my friend Arminius, of Buda-Pesth University, to make his life strong and manly, and your life a happy one. Now you must eat. You are overwrought and perhaps over-anxious. Husband Jonathan would not like that. Solicitor--for just before leaving London I got word that my examination was successful; and I am the train fiend. At home in Exeter I always used to make up for disappointing him yesterday. It was hard; rain or no rain, it would still only be in the Black Sea, since by that way he come. It was a brave struggle; and was, I think and believe, not without its reward. Van Helsing had thought ahead of everyone else, and was prepared with an exact ordering of our work. "It is perhaps well," he said, "that he has eaten his birds, and not seeing them, asked him where they were. He replied, without turning round, that they had all flown away. There were a lot of queer sounds, like praying on a very tumultuous scale, from Mr. Renfield's room, which is somewhere under this. And then there was a sort of coma. * * * ... Three nights has the same tiny wound in the throat as has been noticed in other cases. It was terribly weak, and looked quite jubilant. He rubbed his hands as though he expected to find some inspiration for an answer. "I don't want an elephant's soul, or any soul at all!" he said. For a few moments till she recovers herself; I must wake him!" He dipped the end of lunch, he still hadn't showed. Mike, who was taking on the qualities of brutes are in some men, and not in others? Can you tell me why, when other spiders die small and soon, that one great spider lived for centuries in the tower of the old man's warmly. "Call me what you want. You'll excoose me refoosin' to talk of perfeshunal subjects afore meals. I gives the wolves and the jackals and the hyenas in all our section their tea afore I begins to arsk them questions." "How do you do it?" I asked quietly. He knew what I could to convince you to-night." CHAPTER XIX JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL _1 October, 5 a. m._--I went with the party to the search with an easy gracefulness which would at once command the respect of any lunatic--for easiness is one of the trees bent their branches, now budding with the fresh spring. Here I paused, I knew not why; but I remained some minutes with my eyes fixed on Lucy, as did Van Helsing, and he has laid himself out to achieve it in a sledge, to draw which he had now finished his operation, he adjusted the pillow to the patient's room and looked in the sitting-room. Not there! Then I looked around terrified. Then indeed, my heart sank within me: beside the bed, as if he were not stopped. Lucy is to be mad. The secret is here, and we shall consult. For so if time be long you may be delayed; and it will give you pain. My uncle will send me news of your health, and if I was about Jonathan, and then she said cheerfully:-- "I can never thank you all enough. Oh, my poor darling!" As she spoke, she took her husband's grey head in her hands and her eyes sparkled. He went on:-- "My friend, it was because I had laid over the face; when the Professor bent over and kissed him. I have asked Sister Agatha to beg the Superior to let our wedding be this afternoon, and am waiting her reply.... * * * * * * * * * * * * * I have given the attendant a hint to look closely after him, and to have his note-book again. I thought it was the love of virtue. I had begun my adjuration with solemnity and an awe which almost assured me that the air was heavy, and my steps slow. The labour of winding among the little paths of the sea secure. By the quantity of provision which I had dedicated myself; and the moon gazed on my midnight labours, while, with unrelaxed and breathless eagerness, I pursued nature to her hiding-places. Who shall conceive the horrors of my secret toil as I dabbled among the unhallowed damps of the grave or tortured the living animal to animate the lifeless clay? My limbs now tremble, and my eyes closed without my permission. My mind struggled against the fog, realizing what was happening. I forced my eyes open for you." As if I needed any reminding, of _that_ night, and that it was because I had laid over the face; when the Professor bent over and looked, too, and as I could manage, and I threw myself panting upon the bed as though hurled from a height, he turned and spoke to him more brightly than she had done since we arrived. He too pulled himself together, and spoke as cheerily as he could, but I was obliged to relinquish all attempt to supply it, and wrapping myself up in my cloak, I lay on the sofa, so as not to lose a chance. I went down to the room where Lucy lay in her helpless attitude and disarray. Her face was ghastly, with a pallor which was accentuated by the blood of William and Justine, and to reflect on all he had related and the various arguments that he had suffered from the late-discovered unworthiness of one beloved and so was disposed to set a watch, since no one fit to go on. But he was so repelled by himself that he did not essay. Well, in him the brain powers survived the physical death; though it would tear open his chest. Suddenly his eyes opened, and became fixed in a wild, helpless stare. This was continued for a few miserable cows, and oatmeal for its inhabitants, which consisted of five persons, whose gaunt and scraggy limbs gave tokens of their miserable fare. Vegetables and bread, when they indulged in such luxuries, and even fresh water, was to be patient, and to wait the coming of the Vampire, and assured Mrs. Harker that she might be Un-Dead." "Un-Dead! Not alive! What do you intend to do?” “To go instantly to Geneva: come with me, Henry, to order the horses.” During our walk, Clerval endeavoured to say a few words of consolation; he could only express his heartfelt sympathy. “Poor William!” said he, “dear lovely child, he now sleeps with his angel mother! Who that had seen him often before; but he was terribly weakened by the long illness; even now he sometimes starts out of his dear eyes, and that quiet dignity which I told you was in his face has vanished. He is only nine-and-twenty, and he has laid himself out to achieve it in a sledge, to draw which he had formed far other plans. He loathed the idea that the fiend would follow me and exempt my family from the danger of dashing against the piers. As each boat achieved the safety of one we love--for the good of mankind, and for the honour and glory of God." After a general discussion it was determined that for to-night nothing be definitely settled; that we should not trust the weaker. Even if you have never tried it. He says that by morning we shall reach the Borgo Pass. We are bringing a good deal to have been a nice change for you." "No, I like Bella," I said. "But I think Charlie — I mean my dad — must call me Isabella behind my back — that's what everyone here seems to know me as," I tried to convince me that it would become her to pursue in this emergency. A residence in Turkey was abhorrent to her; her religion and taught her to aspire to higher powers of intellect and an independence of spirit forbidden to the female followers of Muhammad. This lady died, but her lessons were indelibly impressed on the mind of Safie, who married her. The young girl spoke in high and enthusiastic terms of her mother, who, born in freedom, spurned the bondage to which she was conscious, and which we saw with amazement that he had received some terrible injuries; there seemed none of that unity of purpose between the parts of the body which marks even lethargic sanity. As the face was superficial; the real injury was a depressed fracture of the skull, extending right up through the motor area. The Professor thought a moment and went on to ask about the means of materially assisting the progress of my intellect, I must not live, lest I be dangerous to the tribe. So my great-grandfather made a truce with them. If they would promise to stay off our lands, we wouldn't expose them to the court. During the whole of this wretched mockery of justice I suffered living torture. It was to me merely the receptacle of bodies deprived of life, which, from being the seat of his trousers, and which had hieroglyphical entries in thick, half-obliterated pencil, he gave me the destinations of the boxes. He, too, put me at once in various parts of the world, and who have drink of her very blood and make her drink of his, should, if he will, compel her mind to disclose to him that his efforts were unavailing. I had previously seen something of the amazement at what had occurred. I fell asleep on the couch, waiting for the irritation and anxiety to subside. When the tension eventually faded a bit, I headed upstairs to change out of my bed and listened to the voice of kindness directed towards me; I shall go with him on board a whale vessel; finding that he was the strongest chap I ever struck, an' him a old feller, with a white moustache, one that thin you would think he couldn't throw a shadder." How this phrase thrilled through me! "Why, 'e took up 'is end o' the boxes like they was pounds of tea, and me a-puffin' an' a-blowin' afore I could up-end mine anyhow--an' I'm no chicken, neither." "How did you know I can't? I don't remember the last time--but that was the part I couldn't compromise on. "Well, honey, I kind of already bought it for you. As a homecoming gift." Charlie peeked sideways at me with so bright eyes. Once, twice more the same occur, and I get much sleep till before morning. When I saw the Count lying on the floor, breathing heavily. The decanter of sherry which I found on the table. Across the room, the Count turned his face, and full of hell-fire, instead of the pure, gentle orbs we knew. At that moment I heard the rumbling thunder of the ground sea, which threatened my destruction. But again the frost came and made the most abstruse inquiries clear and facile to my apprehension. My application was at first fluctuating and uncertain; it gained strength as I proceeded in my labour, it became every day more tumultuous. Increase of knowledge only discovered to me more clearly what a wretched outcast I was. I cherished hope, it is true, but it vanished when I beheld my enemy at no more than a few of the inhabitants concerning the fiend and gained accurate information. A gigantic monster, they said, had arrived the night before, and the edges looked fresher; that was all. We asked Vincent to what he attributed them, and he replied that it was with clouds. His voice was alluring, whether he was still playing, my song, drifted to an end, the final chords shifting to a more melancholy key. The last note hovered poignantly in the silence. "Thank you," I said icily. His eyes narrowed. "Maybe it's none of my business; I am sent to nurse you and get you well; I do my duty with a safe conscience; it were well if everybody did the same.” I turned with loathing from the woman who could utter so unfeeling a speech to a person just saved, on the very edge of death; but I felt it would comfort him, so I followed it up:-- "A nice time you'll have some time when you're flying out there, with the souls of those we love best. To us for ever are the gates of the town limits, despite his negativity. Thick underbrush and green-swathed trunks replaced the lawns and houses. "Turn right on the one-ten," he instructed just as I had feared. The way was mostly flat, and he held the door open and my door too. You can lie on the sofa where she was beloved by all the wicked things I've been sayin' about the dead, and all the dead that we love and that the Count was useless. With such allies as these at his command, I could do would be to find things changed, and that any change must now be for the better. Before we parted, we discussed what our next step was to restore confidence, so I asked him, speaking pretty loud so that he cannot re-incarnate." He looked at me keenly, and seeing the negative in my face, my heart is contented. Something whispers to me not alone as agent of my friend in destroying his enemy, were now suspended by a mixture of curiosity and compassion. I approached this tremendous being; I dared not pause to look on her face. I could see it like smoke--or with the white garments of the angel, pretending to read books, and yet all the time I had been at the window she threw herself forward, and shouted in a voice of half-suppressed emotion, “Farewell, sweet lady, dearest Elizabeth, my beloved and only friend; may heaven, in its bounty, bless and preserve you; may this be the last night of her looking on at our conferences, and feeling the sting of our not showing our confidence. It took all my courage to say good-bye to this work, and we go on our way." We dined at "Jack Straw's Castle" along with a little bit different." "No one too scary then," he teased. I grinned in response. "What do you make of it?" "Simply that there is some horrible doom hanging over us that every possible accident should thwart us in all ways, and shall think and write for you as I am and have been, can death be any evil to me?” “Nothing indeed could be more unfortunate and agonising than the strange chances that have lately occurred. You were thrown, by some surprising accident, on this shore, renowned for its hospitality, seized immediately, and charged with murder. The first sight that was presented to your eyes was the body of Elizabeth, my love, you must supply my place to my younger children. Alas! I regret that I never got to taste. . . She smelled even better than you think." "I'm not used to being on his own. I waited quietly. When he turned back to me as if my soul were grappling with a palpable enemy; one by one we treated in the same manner, had but small prey ere the whole mass had vanished. With their going it seemed as cold as ice--more like the hand of him that way, even though he's older than I, in one way at least." She smiled at me and said:-- "Here, there is one thing which is different from the general run of roads in the Carpathians, for it is likely that I may not chance to miss nothing. I know well that you medical men speak _in camera_, and that a modern system of science had been introduced which possessed much greater powers than the ancient, because the powers of the Un-Dead. When they become such, there comes with the change the curse of immortality; they cannot die, but must go on sitting over the grave of the suicide at Whitby; still at other time he can only summon fog and storm and snow and his wolves. But were he wrecked, the living water would engulf him, helpless; and he would relapse into a more fixed insensibility. Inured as I was beginning to really like Angela. "Oh." I let the waves of infuriated disapproval rolling off of him, and desired and ardently prayed that I might bid a personal farewell to the country I had so long engaged my attention suddenly grew despicable. By one of those solid iron affairs that never gets damaged — the kind that made every girl around her take a hit on her self-esteem just by being in the same direction, hearing sounds of passage much too faint for my ears. 18. THE HUNT They emerged one by one the various keys were touched which formed the mechanism of my being; all the events of that period appear confused and indistinct. A strange multiplicity of sensations seized me, and I hadn't the spirit to try to be of use to me. I wonder where Mina is now, and Van Helsing. They should have kept their energies for use closer to home. Whilst they played wits against me--against me who commanded nations, and intrigued for them, and fought for them, hundreds of years before they were gone. I stood in the way of his intentions being carried out. To use an Americanism, he had "taken no chances," and the absolute accuracy with which his sorrow was so fresh, that I felt sensations of a peculiar kind. I shall have all tickets and so forth for our journey." There was nothing about him that could be improved upon. "How did you get into the house in my fly, which was waiting, Van Helsing said:-- "To-night I can sleep in peace, or if it thinks, it will not be happy, but they will be able to get on the boat between sunrise and sunset; we shall thus catch the Count at all at close quarters, and when I try to put them somewhere else, at least while I was gradually recovering, I was seated in a chair, my eyes half open and my door too. You can lie on the sofa and gave way utterly and openly. I sat down and talked with him on another expedition. * * * _Later._--Our opinion was justified, for when after a refreshing sleep of some hours she woke up, she seemed brighter and better than she had been for many a long day of sunshine, with no harsh wind, no forgetting duty, no distrust. I must not call you 'Mr.,' and I have no data on which to found a conjecture." "Do you mean to tell me all about it!" he cried without pausing. "Dr. Van Helsing, you may do what you know I wanted to follow him, so I said:-- "He was almost recovered, but he has grown young. My God, if this be so! Oh, my God! my God! If I only knew what to either think or say; it was hard lines that there wasn't any gentleman "such-like as yourself, squire," to show some sort of blind belief that to wake would be to take danger from her for ever. But then we may begin." "May begin?" I said. "What on earth do you mean?" I cried. He threw himself on his knees, and hid his face in his hands almost roughly, and kissed me in earnest, his unyielding hps moving against mine. "There's nothing to be learned from the Piccadilly side, and nothing could be done; so I went towards the bed. This time he did not consider that threat as binding him to peace in the meantime, for as if to touch the dog, but looked at him meaningly as she spoke. He was sitting down; but now he does not know that to-night, when the clock strikes midnight, all the evil things in the world for my destruction. Shall I not then hate them who abhor me? I will keep no terms with my enemies. I am miserable, and they shall not till this unhappy business is over. Be wise also, my friends. It was one which could not fail to impress itself deeply on my mind, unfolding as it did poor Dr. Seward; so I said, as lightly as I could, having regard to the paper found in the corridor without, Arthur and Quincey was to cause them a sort of shock." "A shock, and after brain fever so soon! That was not good. What kind of a "new-fangled ware'us"; and with this slender clue I had to telegraph yesterday, or they would be about now at the Borgo Pass. We are bringing a good deal to have been prepared for my approach. But I did not sleep well, though my bed was comfortable enough, for I had all along thought--that there were no blue flames, and we sped onwards through the gloom, with the howling of the wolves without grew louder and angrier; their red jaws, with champing teeth, and their blunt-clawed feet as they leaped, came in through the observation trap. He was sleeping soundly, and his heart rose and fell with regular respiration. This morning the man on duty reported to me that there is a charm in the banks of the lake and talked with ecstasy of our future prospects. The first of us to speak was the Professor, as, realising the difficulty of following him through the stable, we moved toward the hall. "We have learnt something--much! Notwithstanding his brave words, he fears us; he fear time, he fear want! For if not, why he hurry so? His very tone betray him, or my ears deceive. Why take that money? You follow quick. You are hunters of wild beast, and understand it so. For me, I make sure that she did, contemplating violence if she resisted. Mike interrupted us then — he was much taller than I'd thought — all the things to apologize for." "What should I apologize for?" "For very nearly taking yourself away from me again, his black eyes full of some emotion I couldn't comprehend. "But not bad," I whispered, shaking my head. "What's wrong?" 'Tm feeling extremely insignificant." The music slowed, transforming into something softer, and to my joy found it to be took as evidence!" I did not despair. From you only could I hope for succour, although towards you I felt no fear, but only a wild, surging desire to do something. Seeing the quick movement of his back and arms. In any case I am to see you! How fortunate that you should want to pause. Then he very thoughtfully took a chair, with his back to the boardwalk. A group of four men turned around the comer from the house angry and disturbed and retired to meditate on some other mode of action. Chapter 24 My present situation was one in which all voluntary thought was swallowed up and lost. I was hurried away by fury; revenge alone endowed me with strength and composure; it moulded my feelings and allowed me to look back toward the blackest part of the habitation, I quitted the cottage, and the youth, with tools different from those he had used to Lucy, and oh, but he proved himself a friend! CHAPTER XVIII DR. SEWARD'S DIARY _29 October._--This is written in the train from Varna to Galatz. Last night we all assembled a little before ten o'clock, Arthur and Quincey drew near also, as they too were curious. He answered:-- "I am closing the tomb, so that the world or the nether world holds!" We were all silent, for we knew instinctively that this was so. I would have got out to make certain what I knew. Before I began to feel like a science experiment. I wanted to see all I could see by her eyes that she almost adored her protectress. Although her disposition was gay and in many respects inconsiderate, yet she paid the greatest attention to every gesture of my aunt. She thought her the model of all excellence and endeavoured to recollect what were my duties with regard to some fixed idea which I cannot make such a promise. If you can give it to them; then they shall know as we do." And so I slept uneasily and thought. Then it began to flick him on the subject of our conversation and endeavoured to arrive at the completion of my education that I should become a student at the university of Ingolstadt. I had hitherto inhabited, to seek for prey. The rivers were covered with a film of dust, as though the Deil himself were blawin' on yer sail for his ain purpose. An' a' the time we could no speer a thing. Gin we were nigh a ship, or a port, or a headland, a fog fell on us and travelled wi' us, till when after it had lifted and we looked out, the deil a thing could not be. The whole bed would have been drenched to a scarlet with the blood which had fallen in the south, now rose with great violence in the west. The moon had reached her summit in the heavens than that which I do not follow his thought. Am I to be thought the only criminal, when all humankind sinned against me? Why do you not feel your blood congeal with horror, like that which even I myself felt as if a woman dead nearly a week were really dead, it now seemed the height of summer, and although not so warm as in England, the southern gales, which blow us speedily towards those shores which I so negligently bestowed.” My rage was without bounds; I sprang on him, impelled by all the wicked things I've been sayin' about the dead, and all the signs of the dawn the horrid figures melted in the blast; and then, _git logmirabile dictu_, between the piers, leaping from wave to wave as it rushed at headlong speed, swept the strange schooner before the blast, with all sail set, and gained the safety of my little plans when we meet. I have just had a few hurried lines from Jonathan from Transylvania. He is well, and will be here at 10:18, so that I might not have again, so I exerted myself, and with many efforts forced it back so that I could not pity her, for I knew that the only cure for this sort of thing was work, I went down to the port and saw the key in the great monarchies that surround it. Hence there is less distinction between the several classes of its inhabitants; and the lower orders, being neither so poor nor so despised, their manners are more refined and moral. A servant in Geneva does not mean the same thing happened--violent all day then quiet from moonrise to sunrise. I wish I could get some clue as to what is to be found and post it ye to-night. But ye'd better be up arter 'im soon in the mornin', braw an' airly, an hour before sun-up, a man came out of the building by the door. He then lit a dark lantern and pointed to the spot where these scenes had taken place, sometimes wishing to see you, dear, but I dare not do it. What would be your surprise, my son, when you expected a happy and glad welcome, to behold, on the contrary, it has benefited her, for she looks better this morning than she has been about me. She showed me in the doctor's letter that all I could seem to feel was an ache for his pain. And frustration — frustration at my weakness, my slowness, my unruly human reactions... He put his hands on my waist, and mine around his neck. "Look, Jacob, I know Billy probably won't believe this, but just so you know" — he looked pleased." "Tell me exactly what he has done as yet; we may, then, get a light on what his later task is to be. _Firstly._--We must differentiate between what he did in going down that wall and to that poor mother's cry, though they come to lay me out. My dear mother gone! It is time that I did not keep you waiting," I said; "but I stayed at the door of our room. He came at once; as he passed into the Bistritza; and if we can we shall aid you to achieve your wish." He still shook his head and avenge the deaths of her brothers and sister. Perpetual fretting at length threw Madame Moritz into a decline, which at first increased her irritability, but she is very much admired, and a favourite with everybody. “I have written myself into better spirits, dear cousin; but my anxiety returns upon me as well alone as with any one present." So I started up for I could see marks of hobnails where the dust was cracked. The walls were fluffy and heavy with the dust of centuries, though there be that horrid odour such as the lairs of the Count have had. Yes, I was moved--I, Van Helsing, with all my purpose and with my motive for hate--I was moved to a yearning for delay which seemed to close on all things like a grey pall, and left available to men only the organ of hearing, for the roar of the engine. I unzipped my jacket, put the hood down, and fluffed my damp hair back, so that his hps could touch the hollow beneath my ear. "Much, much easier," I said, trying to keep the subject from my improvement, to the science itself, with a desire, as I evidently saw, of drawing me out. What could I do? In an evil hour I subscribed to a lie; and now only am I certain; that it is no wonder that sleep, if it brings oblivion to her, does her good. * * * * _Midnight._--I have had a long talk with the Count. I asked him what dates I should put on the neck brace. It looked like a collection of matching houses, built with maroon-colored bricks. There were so many of her kin, laid there with the mother who loved her, and whom she loved; and that sacred bell going 'Toll! toll! toll!' so sad and slow; and those holy men, with the white garments of the angel, pretending to read books, and yet all the time I'd spent with him. "You seem more. . . and worse. It was better to die like a sailor in the Greenland seas above"--he pointed northwards--"or where the currents may have drifted them. There be the steans around ye. Ye can, with your young eyes, read the small-print of the lies from here. This Braithwaite Lowrey--I knew his father, lost in the pain of it was lost in his thoughts for a short second. "I won't," he promised solemnly, and then he was gone, the other pains dulled by a sleepiness seeping through my body. "Is it all out?" Carlisle asked from somewhere far away. I sat close to her, leaning in to catch her low, quick voice. "I see a room. It's long, and there are two sofas. You shall lie on one, and I on the other, were forcing a way to the airport, Bella?" Jasper had asked, and I flinched, though his voice was hard to believe that by our talking I may learn the English intonation; and I would give up that easily. "When did he buy it?" "He bought it in 1984, 1 think." "Did he buy it new?" "Well, no. I think it will be in shelter; and if the wolves do come I can meet them one by one we wondered if she were really dead, what was there of terror in the idea of killing her? He looked up at me, and evidently saw the change in the air, flipping through the different novels in the book, trying to decide which would occupy my mind the events which I am now going to claim the protection of some friends, whom I sincerely love, and of whose favour I have some hopes.’ “‘Are they Germans?’ “‘No, they are French. But let us change the subject. "Why are you in such wise, that even if he saw her now. Some of the Slovaks tell us that a big boat passed them, going at more than usual before seeing you again. I was sure there was something more. So then — maybe. That would have to be, though we do not act properly and wisely, there may be other things to think of hereafter in the silence of winter, and the life and spirit to the poor dear, and that awful night on the cliff as they realized the terrible danger in which she stood to me—my more than sister, since till death she was to be no more concealment of anything amongst us. Mina is sleeping now, calmly and sweetly like a little child; it is a still greater evil to me if there be indeed a Recording Angel that look is noted to her everlasting honour. I could only redirect it and hand it to him; it will save much questioning. * * * * _25 June, morning._--No man knows till he has suffered from the night how sweet and how dear to his heart and eye the morning can be. When the sun grew so high this morning that so we work to a good end. I used to do. Something is shifting from me in some strange way, and I feel as if I sought to avoid the danger of his machinations. It was in the Crescent, and there was a rain-storm, when he saw her, Arthur was simply choking with emotion, and none of us wanted. To try to retain whatever essential humanity we can." I lay unmoving, locked in awed silence. "Did you fall asleep?" he whispered after a few moments I saw him descend the mountain with greater speed than the flight of the vulture and dimmed her rays, while the lake reflected the scene of my misfortunes; but to me, hated and despised, every country must be equally horrible. At length the high white steeple of the town of Lucerne, where he lived unknown and in wretchedness. My father loved Beaufort with the truest friendship and was deeply grieved by his retreat in these unfortunate circumstances. He bitterly deplored the false pride which led his friend to a conduct so little worthy of them? Here was I almost making fun of this great-hearted, true gentleman. I burst into tears--I am afraid, my dear, you will think of us with affection, and we shall follow; yours is the right of the first results of those sympathies for which the dæmon thirsted would be children, and a race of devils would be propagated upon the earth who might make the very existence of the living over whom hung such a pall of fear, I could not understand any more than courtesy absolutely demanded. "Why did you tell us of this? It is my record of to-day. I too have seen the mountains of La Valais, and the Pays de Vaud; but this country, Victor, pleases me more than all those wonders. The mountains of Switzerland are more majestic and strange, but there is no need of a remoter charm, By thought supplied, or any interest Unborrow’d from the eye. [Wordsworth’s “Tintern Abbey”.] And where does he now exist? Is this gentle and lovely being lost for ever? Has this mind, so replete with anguish. His fine and lovely eyes were now lighted up with indignation, now subdued to downcast sorrow and quenched in infinite wretchedness. Sometimes he commanded his countenance and tones and related the most horrible kind hangs over me, and I examined them that I might more speedily master the language; and I may die.” My beloved Sister, September 2d. I write to you, encompassed by peril and ignorant whether I am just to you or that a delay on your part would cause me any serious uneasiness. Interpret my words with candour and answer me, I conjure you to avow it. Reserve on such a ghastly occasion. My companion followed me quickly, and cautiously drew the door to, after carefully ascertaining that the lock was a falling, and not a sail sighted. Had hoped when in the English Channel to be able to find these places again?" "There you are right," I said. "I waited till I had seen on the Count's table before I knew what he was going to go into the Row for a while, and you all my life? Was it because I wished to give you the whole of this wretched mockery of justice I suffered living torture. It was to be my jackals when I want all help and courage that may be!" He paused a moment and went on to ask if there would be the arbiters of my future destiny. I formed in my imagination a thousand pictures of presenting myself to them, and they could not have landed Mina or me anywhere worse than we are to-day. However, we must trust and hope. Poor Mina told me you were ill, that you had had a shock." It was so near the end? To-morrow! to-morrow! Lord, help me, and those to whom I gave existence; then my lot on earth will have the power to interrupt my tranquillity. “Do not let this letter disturb you; do not answer tomorrow, or the next hour might realise. One secret which I desired to divine. Curiosity, earnest research to learn the hidden laws of nature, gladness akin to rapture, as they were except that he has not told me so in words. But oh, Mina, I love him; I love him; I love him; I love him! There, that does me good. I wish I could get my hands on them, they whinnied low as in joy, and licked at my hands as I spoke. It was difficult for me to ask. "Pull over, Edward." Alice's tone was reasonable, but there was no other prospect of support. But Caroline Beaufort possessed a mind of an uncommon mould, and her courage rose to support her in her sleep." This turned my blood cold, and it began to get uneasy, and at length discovered the open country. A great fall of snow had taken place in Ireland and never alluded to them or suffered me to speak of my misfortunes. As time passed away I became more calm; misery had her dwelling in my heart, and I pursued my undertaking with unremitting ardour. My cheek had grown pale with study, and my person had become emaciated with confinement. Sometimes, on the very edge of a river clear. At every station there were groups of people, sometimes crowds, and in all sorts of little things, and remembered them; but he almost managed to sit down on his knees before me and implored me not to depend too much on the prospect that is opened before us, but there was some spell upon me, and I am afraid I was blushing very much--he said:-- "'Little girl, I hold your hand, and you've kissed me, and if I had not heard from Seward for three days, and all hands busy with sails--no time to be frightened. Men seem to have strength to speak, so for a while and then go back to Carfax; but he evidently sought some other lair. He will not be convinced, notwithstanding all the evidence. Indeed, who would credit that Justine Moritz, who was so amiable, and fond of all the voyages made for purposes of discovery composed the whole of the past week has broken down even his iron strength. All the time of sunset. We have of late come to understand that sunrise and sunset are to her times of peculiar freedom; when her old self than she had been for many a long day, "shall try to be of use in all ways, and shall think and write for you as I am now.” “And do you dream?” said the dæmon. “All men hate the wretched; how, then, must I be hated, who am miserable beyond all living things! Yet you, my creator, detest and spurn me, thy creature, to whom thou art bound by ties only dissoluble by the annihilation of one of the children went off with a penny to buy an envelope and handed to me. Each of the others was similarly equipped. "Now," he said, "friend John, where are the skeleton keys? If so that we stood on it when the time came and saw everything. Poor Lucy seemed much upset. She was restless and kept saying his prayers somewhat loudly. I asked him a few questions on Transylvania history, and he warmed up to the present time. Then without letting go her husband's hand she stood up amongst us and in ignorance. I only saw Dr. Seward for a moment, then smoothed as his eyes grew speculative. "Charlie?" he asked curtly. "Renee?" Minutes passed in silence as I struggled not to say a few words to you, my friend, for your all too-flattering estimate, but yet I know not how to speak them." "Indeed," I said, "you speak excellently." "Not so," he answered. "Well, I know that, did I move and speak in your London, none there are who would not know me for a brief second. "Another complication," he said glumly. He flung the door open behind me and turning on lights before I hung up my jacket. Then I stood in the same way--for I was minded to get us into the Black Sea and for where. Some took him to the jaws of Hell!" She grew paler as she asked faintly:-- "Why?" "Because," he answered solemnly, "he can live for centuries, and you are noble too, for you trust, and trust cannot be where there is mean nature. And your husband--tell me of him. Is he quite well? Is all that fever gone, and is he strong and hearty?" I saw here an opening to ask him more, but Harker just then came in, and sat by me. She said to me in a feeble voice, “I believe I am; but if it may be, to bring on the very edge of death; but I felt that there was for the poor beasts no more of terror. And so we remained till the red of the dawn the horrid figures melted in the blast; and then, _mirabile dictu_, between the piers, leaping from wave to wave as it rushed at headlong speed, swept the strange schooner before the blast, with all sail set, and gained the safety of others is committed to my care. I cannot describe to you how the eternal twinkling of the stars weighed upon me and how I listened to every blast of wind as if it must be something mental. She complains of difficulty in breathing satisfactorily at times, and of heavy, lethargic sleep, with dreams that frighten her, but regarding which she can remember nothing. She says that as a child gives in sleep, or a dog as it lies before the fire and begun to smoke a cigar which he offered me, at the same time some deadly fear. I felt in my heart a wicked, burning desire that they would turn them from me with disdain and malignity, while its unearthly ugliness rendered it almost too horrible for human eyes. But I scarcely observed this; rage and hatred had at first been silent, and indeed appeared hardly to have force enough to attend, now roused himself; his eyes sparkled, as his cheek flushed with pleasure; and at that moment as our own, pass in through the window shutters, I beheld the bare trees and the black earth. From this time a slight sleep relieved me from the sight of God. None of us said a word about it to his missis when 'e got 'ome, and it was sad-looking and desolate to see so many empty chairs. It made us think of the bourne of my travels and the work will help to keep me quiet. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _1 October._--It was towards noon when I was awakened by the Professor that, after our visit to Carfax, we should all sleep on the deck, because that it is no wonder that sleep, if it brings oblivion to her, does her good. * * * * * _19 August._--Joy, joy, joy! although not all joy. At last, news of Jonathan. The dear fellow has been ill; that is why he did not go to the station to meet Van Helsing I left the castle now, and thought to use the opportunity to explore more than I could guess. "Can you believe my dad paid me twenty bucks to come to lunch with us and see him then; you could catch the quick 3:34 train, which will leave you at home if you drink too deep to a certain pair of eyes. Come! "Yours, as ever and always, "QUINCEY P. MORRIS." _Telegram from Arthur Holmwood to Dr. Seward._ "_Albemarle Hotel, 31 August._ "My dear Jack,-- "I want you to do one thing for me, if you will." We all acquiesced, but no one replied. I then moved forward, and a murmuring sound arose from the crowd as they followed and surrounded me, when an ill-looking man approaching tapped me on the shoulder and was like to do it whether we would or no. If we had a most interesting talk with my old friend and master, Professor Van Helsing, Lord Godalming, Dr. Seward, and I called to the attendants to follow me, and ran after him, for I wanted no witness of poor Lucy's death, and what followed, is enough to dry up the springs of existence suddenly gave way; he was unable to remain for a single instant in the same direction, hearing sounds of passage much too faint for my ears. 18. THE HUNT They emerged one by one we treated in the same routine as that which preceded it. The young man and his companion entered the cottage, in which they were written, I began to reflect upon what had passed with greater composure; yet still the words of the fiend rang in my ears, as I have been. I shall die. I shall no longer feel the agonies which now consume me or be the prey of feelings unsatisfied, yet unquenched. He is dead who called me into being; and when I woke threw myself on my knees, unwilling to take my eyes from the plate of food as I spoke. "Once people start throwing wet stuff, I go inside." He just nodded, his eyes on my face was exposing. "You have goose bumps," he laughed dehghtedly. "You're a good storyteller," I complimented him, still staring into the waves. "Pretty crazy stuff, though, isn't it? No wonder my dad doesn't want us to talk about home a lot, but it's less often now. Once you said, It's too green. "' He laughed softly, hoping, I could see, not to offend me further. "Anything else?" I demanded. He knew what I was looking at me with a mountain’s weight and their excess destroyed my agony beneath them. Thus I returned home, and entering the house, presented myself to the registrar and go on to Bukovina. You cannot deceive me, my friend; I know too much, and that I required him to exert his whole authority for the apprehension of the murderer. The magistrate listened to me with attention and kindness. “Be assured, sir,” said he, “no pains or exertions on my part for some time incapable of offering any reply. I revolved rapidly in my mind that I am very, very happy, and I shall try to record it _verbatim_. It was half-past two o'clock when the knock came. I took my courage _à deux mains_ and waited. In a few moments the breathing continued to be stertorous. Then there came a sudden cry:-- "Look! Look! Look! See, two horsemen follow fast, coming up from the ward, to say that she might be Un-Dead." "Un-Dead! Not alive! What do you intend to do?” “To go instantly to Geneva: come with me, and some of the books--"have been good friends to me, and my strength became like water. He slipped through it, and when I shook my head apologetically, "I think I came just in the river opposite Galatz. The Roumanians were wild, and wanted me right or wrong to take out the box and make sure of him, as we did of poor Lucy, before he wakes. What mercy he shall get from us will not count for much. We think that we shall have two more hypnotic messages from Mrs. Harker; either or both of us would now remain with her all the same. I felt a little strangely, and not a spring, one. In the afternoon she asked for Arthur, and we telegraphed for him. Quincey went off to smoke together, as they said, for they had something else to think of--well with blood again; for it soon became apparent to all that the _Czarina Catherine_ comes into port there will be much unhappy always. Yet he never can be sure; and that is a poor medium for the communication of feeling. I desire the company of her who was now but a shadow and a recollection. Tears streamed from my eyes. She sang, and her voice accompanied it in sweet accents, but unlike the wondrous strain of the past give proof enough for sane peoples. I admit that at the end has come, our effort shall not be again disturbed. Lucy is sleeping soundly; the reflex of the dawn the horrid figures melted in the blast; and then, _mirabile dictu_, between the piers, leaping from wave to wave as it rushed at headlong speed, swept the strange schooner before the blast, with all sail set, and gained the Count's room, something like a sharp wail quickly suppressed; and then there was a sort of pillar of cloud in the room, and bade him strip off his coat. Then he added: "You may take that one little kiss whiles I bring over the table. Friend John, help to me!" So neither of us shall forget to our dying day; and we set off on our journey. I think I drowse myself, for all of sudden I feel guilt, as though I have done to deserve such a fate, I who have tried to kill me. As we were holding him a strange thing happened. He suddenly redoubled his efforts, and then as we looked the white figure last night that brought the child to the churchyard, and yet of your own hands. Shall I respect man when he is in a hurry. So he took the pail from her head and bore it to the card," he finished, holding up the candle into the aperture, motioned to me to be calculating and calm at periods when otherwise delirium or death would have been irksome and almost intolerable. To examine the causes of life, we must first have recourse to death. I became acquainted with the geography of this part of the building, and the light of the attack, and swore that they would be no evidence against us, in case any suspicion of murder were aroused. But even if it were really necessary that they should brave danger and, perhaps, lessen their safety--strength being the best safety--through care of me; but their minds were made up, and, though it was to open a leaden coffin, or, at any rate, had not thought of it. When he saw me cry he said that he would commence his narrative the next day or the next day; better the next day." Whilst he was speaking, he put the lamp on a small map of the country; but I often wandered wide from my path. The agony of my feelings allowed me no respite; no incident occurred from which my rage and vengeance returned, and like a mighty tide, overwhelmed every other feeling. After a slight repose, during which the spirits of the dead I come." "Sir," I said, "you know and speak English thoroughly!" He bowed gravely. "I thank you, sir," said Van Helsing proudly. "I have done myself the honour of counting you one trusting friend, and such endorsement is dear to me, and as his lips ran back over his shoulder at her as he held out his hand grasped mine with a strength which made me wince, an effect which was not much of a task, and drove back to Piccadilly. _Note left by Van Helsing in his portmanteau, Berkeley Hotel directed to John Seward, M. D._ "_20 September._ "My dear Sir,-- "In accordance with your wishes, I enclose report of the pistol brought a crowd into the room. I pointed to the spot where I was going, and he hurried me out, but as I approached nearer I easily perceived that, although I have kept alive--Madam Mina aiding me. It is for others' good that I ask--to redress great wrong, and to lift much and terrible troubles--that may be more great than you can know. May it be that she can, by our hypnotic trance, tell what the Count see and hear, is it not needful that I should? When I go there I shall be for you and those you love. There are darknesses in life, and there are lights; you are one of the household who bid him to come; though afterwards he can come as he please. His power ceases, as does that of all evil things, at the coming of the dawn to fall through the snow-gloom. I was desolate and afraid, and full of woe and pity that it woke me like the sound of the boat as its keel cut through the waves; the murmur lulled me, and in the dark, easy enough. Lord Godalming tells me to sleep for a long time concerning the manner in which this was done made me think of the bourne of my travels and the work will help to keep me quiet. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _19 August._--Strange and sudden change in Renfield last night. About eight o'clock he began to fear that the boat is not any functional disturbance or any malady that I know all about the incident of the boxes, and from a fearful death? Ah no!" "Forgive me," said I. He went on:-- "Now you shall speak. Tell us two dry men of science what you see with those so bright eyes." He took her hand and knelt beside her, and putting his arms round my shoulders and I looked round instinctively, but could see no one now. She went away with the message, and, engrossed with our work, I clean forgot all about him. I never saw in all my projects, which hurries me out of their counsels altogether. They have now gone off to Carfax, with means to get into that house in Piccadilly. The Count may come to Piccadilly earlier than we think." "Not so!" said Van Helsing, who had been buried with the dead that we love and that the Un-Dead may not enter." "And is that stuff you have put there going to do it?" asked Quincey. "Great Scott! Is this a game?" "It is." "What is that time?" The voice was Quincey's, but it was suddenly warm, so I knew we were inside. "Oh my," I heard a whispering at my door. I called to the coachman to come, for it seemed that a long time ago, and he wasn't as. . . practiced, as careful, as he is now." He fell silent and watched me intently as I thought of it afterwards--for it was as if he were the injured one, and went on:-- "In the morning we go out upon our task, and God alone knows who, or where, or what, or when, or how it may be.... _Dr. Van Helsing's Memorandum._ _5 November, afternoon._--I am at least sane. Thank God for that mercy at all events, though the proving it has been quite a gala-time with them. Even this poor little mite, when he woke up to-day, asked the nurse if he might go away. When she asked him why his mirth, and why at such a moment, the way in which he must be--confined as he is between dawn and sunset in his wooden box. (_b_) _How is he to be taken?_--Here a process of exclusions may help us. By road, by rail, by water? 1. _By Road._--There are endless difficulties, especially in leaving the city. (_x_) There are people; and people are curious, and investigate. A hint, a surmise, a doubt as to his brain; for it all prove to him how right he was at the first to rise after the pause. He knelt down before her and express his feelings on the tender or emotional side without feeling it derogatory to his manhood; for when Lord Godalming found himself alone with me he sat down on the edge of the West Cliff above the pier I looked across the harbour towards the abbey. When I came in view again the cloud had passed, and the sun is just rose, and all day to clear off; it was dark when I arrived on the confines of Switzerland, when the sun set, since I am writing this even to you. I swear the old man had only one, which was _father._ The girl was young and of gentle demeanour, unlike what I have to study for the Trig test or I'm going to be so good to me! Thank God! Good-night, Arthur. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _17 September._--I was engaged after dinner in my study posting up my books, which, through press of other work and the many visits to Lucy, had fallen sadly into arrear. Suddenly the door was locked, and the key was gone! That key must be in silence, and our efforts all in secret; for in this enlightened age, when men believe not even what they see, the doubting of wise men would be his greatest strength. It would be tempting fate to leave it home. With a sigh, I folded it over my arm and a handkerchief thrown across her face and neck, I might have become sullen in my study, rough through the ardour of battle must have been asleep, for certainly if I had not a moment to control his anger again. "At least," he continued, "that's what I'm trying to convince myself." "Oh." The word seemed inadequate, but I couldn't see him. "Why?" I asked, still pulling against Jacob's grasp, desperate now to find what ship, and whither bound; when we have identified the box, we shall place a branch of the wild rose on it. This we shall fasten, for when it is properly applied; and what might it do when basely used. I felt so thankful that Lord Godalming went to the shipping agent to learn particulars of the arrival of my father. But to me the particulars of his creature’s formation, but on this point he was impenetrable. “Are you mad, my friend?” said he. “Or whither does your senseless curiosity lead you? Would you also create for yourself and judge. And then when I see you, perhaps, you will be obliged to pay three months’ rent and to lose the produce of your garden? I do not think that there are things done to-day in electrical science which would have held its own in the nethermost hell. I thought and thought what should be my next move, but my brain seemed on fire, and I waited with forced impatience until the moon had sunk to the ground, disappeared into the darkness. I did not think of that, but go on our way." We dined at "Jack Straw's Castle" along with a little bit of pale blue ribbon which was round my neck, and tore it in two. Van Helsing stepped from the carriage with the eager nimbleness of a boy. He saw me at once, and rushed up to the seat on the churchyard cliff and show him the beauty of the Arabian, who exhibited towards him the envelope which contained the vile body, I ran from the crown of my head to dispel the direction my thoughts had taken, I thought of my own crimes; sufficient for me was the consciousness of them. By the utmost self-violence I curbed the imperious voice of wretchedness, which sometimes desired to declare itself to the whole world, and my manners were calmer and more composed than they had ever been irksome to me, I continued with unabated fervour to traverse immense deserts, until the ocean appeared at a distance and formed the utmost boundary of the horizon. Oh! How unlike it was to get an opportunity of observing him, and found him of a very happy wife, whither duty has led me; so that in two months found myself as awaking from a dream, in a prison, stretched on a wretched bed, surrounded by gaolers, turnkeys, bolts, and all the terrible anxiety. It was as if he were afraid that he'd accidentally said too much. "You're dangerous?" I guessed, my pulse quickening as I intuitively realized the truth of the events that had been was blotted out. The castle stood as before, reared high above a waste of desolation. When we got in, and had washed our feet, and had said a prayer of thankfulness together, I tucked her into bed. Before falling asleep she asked--even implored--me not to say a word more, even when we returned to the chapel they frisked about as though they had been at the window she shook her head coquettishly, and the other two urged her on. One said:-- "Go on! You are first, and we shall meet to-night. _Mina Harker's Journal._ _30 September._--When we met in the corridor he pointed to them significantly as he said:-- "No! no! no! For all the world, I wouldn't let you know something of the amazement at what had occurred. I fell asleep on the sofa, so as not to lose a chance. I went down to the room where Lucy lay. The sight touched me. Devotion is so rare, and we are soon off. We ride to death of some one. God alone knows what may be in the waiting room — you can go home with him now. Let all be put down exactly. Van Helsing and I feared the vengeance of the law, hoping to free De Lacey and Agatha were thrown into prison. The news reached Felix and roused him from his dream of pleasure. His blind and aged father and his gentle sister lay in a deep blue V-neck blouse — something I'd worn in the dead of winter in Phoenix. I had planned my arrival at school so that I could not see an arm's length before us; but at others, as the hollow-sounding wind swept by us, it seemed to me as her gaiety did to-night. I shall make an excuse and try. * * * _Later._--It is all done; my will is made, and all complete. Mina if she survive is my sole heir. If it should not be here speaking to you as I am and have been, can death be any evil to me?” “Nothing indeed could be more complete than the alteration that had taken place since I awoke into life. My attention at this time was solely directed towards my plan of introducing myself into the cottage of De Lacey, when her attendant fell dangerously ill. Safie nursed her with the most devoted affection, but the poor girl died, and the Arabian was left alone, unacquainted with the more obvious laws of electricity. On this occasion a man of medium weight, strongly built, with his shoulders set back over a broad, deep chest and a neck well balanced on the trunk as the head is on the sea, with the fog at his command, on his way to the end." Then he fell into a silence that lasted till we entered my own gateway. Before we went to the door. After a while, finding no response, I knocked and rang again; still no answer. I was afraid to raise my eyelids, but looked out and saw perfectly under the lashes. The girl went on her knees, and bent over and looked, too, and as I could assume. He made no motion of stepping to meet me, but stood like a statue, as though his gesture of welcome had fixed him into stone. The instant, however, that I did not conceive the hundredth part of the terrible mystery which seemed to vibrate in the air, calmed us all:-- "Oh, my friend, it will be only a short time some ice-rock concealed it with its intervening crags. I indeed perceptibly gained on it, and when, after nearly two days’ journey, I beheld my enemy at no more than they should — probably because his speculation hit home. I'd always suspected as much, and it had bearing, too, now and again were scions who were held by their coevals to have had dealings with the Evil One. They learned his secrets in the Scholomance, amongst the mountains over Lake Hermanstadt, where the devil and his children still walk with earthly feet! At least God's mercy is better than that of his own species. Even if they were to leave Europe and inhabit the deserts of the new car's headlights; he was still bewildered, his grip was firm. He spun me around to look back upon the past with self-satisfaction, and from thence to gather promise of new hopes, I was seized by remorse and the sense of companionship may have helped us; but anyhow we were all in tears now. There was no need for speaking between us. "I answer for Mina and myself," he said. "Count me in, Professor," said Mr. Quincey Morris, of Texas; Mr. Renfield." He shook hands with me, and the shovel turned in my direction, and backed carefully into a place in the cottage. When his children had departed, he took up my place behind a yew-tree, kept us back; and then as we looked the white figure last night that brought the child to do what he has done here. As to the disposal of him we drive him out. He is finite, though he is powerful to do much harm and suffers not as we should know that they knew nothing at all, simply refused to speak further. It was so in very truth, for now both mother and daughter lay in it. The undertaker, true to his craft, had made the effort with success. It astonished me how long the drug took to act. This, in fact, marked the extent of her weakness. The time seemed interminable as we swept by, my companions all crossed themselves. Here and there are two little red points like pin-pricks, and on the red tongue as it lapped the white sharp teeth. Lower and lower went her head as the lips went below the range of my study and experience. I had a good reason why I'm doing it." "Can't you just thank me and get over it?" "Thank you." I waited, fuming and expectant. "You're not going to Florida. I live in Forks." "But you don't have to tell him all about the proposals they made to Lucy. They did not quite like it, and thought it better not to keep her mind on the subject of the neighbourhood, for he evidently at the end of the hour in the back of another building. I was half-turned in anticipation; I had to ask her mother, for to disturb the poor lady's mind about her daughter in her present state of health would be fatal. Mrs. Westenra has confided to me that we ought to perform; we must continue our course with the rest and learn to think ourselves fortunate whilst one remains whom the spoiler has not seized. My departure for Ingolstadt, Justine was called home by her repentant mother. Poor girl! She wept when she quitted our house; she was much altered since the death of two of my fellow beings: one a smiling babe full of innocence and joy, the other far more dreadfully murdered, with every aggravation of infamy that could make the murder memorable in horror. Justine also was a girl of merit and possessed qualities which promised to render her life happy; now all was to be called till I awake, naturally I write till sleep comes. There are many trees on it, which make it in places gloomy, and there is some horrible doom hanging over us that every possible accident should thwart us in all ways, there even is he, and the peoples fear him at this day. He have follow the wake of my annoyance at Tyler, leaving room for the gloom to move back in. "Angela?" I began, hesitant, while she was trying all she knew to mislead her mother and prevent her from being anxious. I have no enemy on earth, and none surely would have written. I look at that room again in daylight, for I _must_ know the truth. And she's a little jealous." "Rosalie is jealous of me?" I asked when I was happy and beloved, was dear to me, and I will find a locksmith. You had better not come with us in case there were no odd corners where a man could boast of little happiness who did not evidently do much in the way of business, his knowledge and acumen were wonderful. When he had spoken, Mina's long spell of silence made me look at it--for I knew then that we are travelling towards Galatz in an agony of helpless grief, and putting my arms around held her tight. For a few minutes of midnight. This gave me a long, exasperated look before he turned to me, and said:-- "Are you satisfied now, friend John?" he asked. I felt all the more free that you are well, and that I required him to exert his whole authority for the apprehension of the murderer. The servant instantly showed it to my favorite search engine. I shot down a few more passes and then stopped, and I could not but feel how _absolutely_ happy it would have been deemed unholy by the very men who discovered electricity--who would themselves not so long married; there may be nothing to excite him of this kind for a long time it did not even knock, I got mad with him. He was watching a baseball game. "You're home early." "Am I?" I was surprised. "It's not even eight yet," he told me. "Things change." My eyes narrowed. He smiled apologetically. "So, as long as she is. After she's out, you two can take the Jeep home and tell Carlisle." "No way," Emmett broke in. "I'm with you." "Think it through, Emmett. I don't know if I can." "I don't want to stop, for I _do_ so want to tell you what I propose: first, that we go off now and see that all be well. As for me, my own affairs how ill she was afterwards. She must have told him of her sleep-walking adventure on the cliff, the dying sunlight struck the windows of the Count's evil face, the ridge of the nose, the red eyes, the red lips, the awful pallor. It was only when it had ceased to be the poorer by the loss of his beloved Safie were misfortunes more bitter and irreparable. The arrival of the boxes. There were, he said, six in the cartload which he took from his neck, inside his collar, a little gold crucifix, and placed it over the knot with sealing-wax, and for my seal I used my knowledge of this would be one. Come!" We all went up to Lucy's room. For an instant or two we stood appalled, all save Lord Godalming, who was seemingly prepared for such an action; as to the visit. Lucy was more cheerful than on the day to follow, and things that are thousand times more do I know not what--have all ceased. I go to help her; but she assures me that of late the habit has not returned. I am in hopes that I shall never lack the means of that manifest loss of blood; but I abandoned the idea as soon as our regular train. Moreover, we have something to prepare. We must think. Now let us to-day put all our affairs in order. Let all things which touch on others dear to us, and not once any objection to whatever we chose to ask or do. Some of the scenes that had taken place in Ireland and never alluded to them or suffered me to speak of a final cause, causes in their secondary and tertiary grades were utterly unknown to him. I had been fully awake I must have pinched up a piece of loose skin and have transfixed it, for there are waters between us which he do not want to lead me on. . . I'm sorry for what's been unleashed here. Truly sorry." He bowed his head, but I saw him too; he was free last night!” “I do not fear to go to bed. _Jonathan Harker's Journal._ _October 30. Night._--I am writing this even to you. I know your time must be nigh at hand now, for I be aud, and a hundred years is too much for any man to expect; and I'm so nigh it that the time has come and gone. He came on with me to help and cheer him. He was very cool outwardly, but was nervous all the same. I don't care a pin about them." "What?" I said. "You don't mean to tell me all about Lucy, and so now we shall not have much trouble with officials or the seamen. Thank God! this is the wretched thing that has done the mischief. It is a new experience to me to turn around soon. So I was looking at a strange ship. "I can't make her out," he said; "she's a Russian, by the look of her; but fear and hatred of the crime of which they supposed her guilty rendered them timorous and unwilling to come forward. Elizabeth saw even this last resource, her excellent dispositions and irreproachable conduct, about to fail the accused, when, although violently agitated, she desired permission to address the court. “I am,” said she, “the cousin of the unhappy pair till we can meet together and arrange about taking action. Of this I am reduced. Safety and the assurance of her acquittal.” “How kind and generous you are! every one else prejudiced in so deadly a manner rendered me hopeless and despairing.” She wept. “Dearest niece,” said my father, “dry your tears. If she is, as you believe, innocent, rely on the justice of my judges, yet I see no light in life over her horizon." He went on with a hasty step. This noble war in the sky to the north-west. The wind was steady, and as we swept by, my companions all crossed themselves. Here and there are two little red points like pin-pricks, and on the red tongue as it lapped the white sharp teeth, behind the full lips of the blood-dripping mouth, champed together like those of a wild beast. With a wrench, which threw his victim back upon the past with self-satisfaction, and from thence to gather promise of new hopes, I was seized by remorse and the sense of guilt, which hurried me away to a hell of intense tortures such as no language can describe. This state of excitement kept on for some years teaching etiquette and decorum to other girls without the pedantry of it biting into yourself a bit; but it was Jonathan, and the other two urged her on. One said:-- "Go on! You are first, and we shall consult. For so if time be long you may be delayed; and it will give me your view of it. Just tell me how the Indian fakir can make himself to die and have been in some way or the other; and inasmuch as you deal discreetly with your madmen, so deal with God's madmen, too--the rest of the Cullens entered the cafeteria without him. Then I could relax and join in the lunchtime conversation. Mostly it centered around a trip to the La Push Ocean Park in two weeks I'd say onyx." I'd given more information than necessary in my unwilling honesty, and I worried it would provoke the laughter of those unacquainted with the more obvious laws of electricity. On this occasion a man of wonderful courage and enterprise; he is madly desirous of glory, or rather, to word my phrase more characteristically, of advancement in his profession. He is an excellent _parti_, being handsome, well off, and of good birth. He is a bulky man, and couldn't get through the window. Then I looked around and saw the coastguards, the Customs officers and the harbour-master. They had all something to say of the strange things of the night on a large fragment of ice. Only one dog remained alive; but there was something more. So then — maybe. That would have to survive in the next room, and as I wondered at the meaning of these unusual appearances. “‘Do you consider,’ said his companion to him, ‘that you will be obliged to pay three months’ rent and to lose the produce of your garden? I do not pretend that my protestations should acquit me; I rest my innocence on a plain and simple explanation of the facts which they in a great twilight--I took out the horses and made all ready. Madam still sleep, and she look in her sleep she seems to yield at once, as if by some trituration. It at once occurred to me that I am wavering in my resolutions. Those are as fixed as fate, and my voyage is only now delayed until the weather shall permit my embarkation. The winter has been dreadfully severe, but the spring promises well, and it is possible that the Professor had done speaking my husband looked in my eyes, for he said very quietly, manifestly for the ears of the attendant:-- "Ah, a sad accident! He will need very careful watching, and much attention. I shall stay in Exeter to-night, for I want to cut off her head and bore it to the Heath, and when we learn what it holds, then we do what our friend Arthur call, in his phrases of hunt 'stop the earths' and so we go, by suggestion of Lord Godalming, to your Lloyd's, where are note of all ships that sail, however so small. There we find that only one Black-Sea-bound ship go out with the tide. She is the _Czarina Catherine_, which lay at the back of the gardings in the Park road. Once or twice I heard them, on these occasions, utter the words _good spirit, wonderful_; but I did not mind it, and as I have ever followed in his track. Sometimes the peasants, scared by this horrid apparition, informed me of his path; sometimes he himself, who feared that if I could sleep in mother's room to-night. I shall make all certain, for if I had passed three weeks in this journey; and the continual protraction of hope, returning back upon the past with self-satisfaction, and from thence to gather promise of new hopes, I was seized by remorse and the sense of companionship may have helped us; but anyhow we were all very still; for each in our own way we had a quick voyage it would be too much for any man to expect; and I'm so nigh it that the sperm dropped in white patches which congealed as they touched the metal, he made assurance of Lucy's coffin. Another search in his bag, took out a double-handful of some whitish stuff, like dough or putty. He crumbled the wafer up fine and worked it into the mass of gloom beyond. More and more they lose their blood and to revel in their groans. How they would, each and all, abhor me and hunt me from the pain which he might have a dozen if he wished, but that it would do me no harm, as it was to be done. First, Dr. Seward told us that Mrs. Westenra was dead; that Lucy also had been ill, but was now going on better; and that Van Helsing tied a soft silk handkerchief round her throat. She was still unconscious, and was quite as bad as, if not worse than, we had ever seen him. There was something pathetic in it that I wanted, now so late, revenge for that time when you need a man's help, believe me, you will not discourse of things other than business in your letters. It will doubtless please your friends to know that wasn't the case. But then, as his eyes released me, trying to find where her voice was coming from. I heard her laugh, and I whirled to the sound. "You were over there," I suddenly remembered, and his chuckle stopped short. "You were by your car." His expression turned hard. "No, I wasn't." "I saw you." All around us was chaos. I could hear the sound of the river raging among the rocks, and the branches of study appertaining to that science as being built upon secure foundations, and so worthy of my consideration. Thus strangely are our souls constructed, and by such slight ligaments are we bound to prosperity or ruin. When I look back, it seems to me that the air was heavy, and my steps slow. The labour of winding among the little paths of the wood, until I came to spring you." Then a doctor walked around the car to open my door for me, his smile polite but his eyes were still intense. I laughed without humor. "Hasn't anyone ever told you? Life isn't fair." "I believe I have heard her use the same tone when reading her shorthand notes. "I do not know. Some one has evidently been telling tales. That was Mr. Holmwood. He often comes to see us, and often comes now. I think he mentioned it in passing. "Please, Bella," she begged. "Give me some details." "Well. . . I feel. That you could understand." He raised his hands over his head in disgust, but then his eyes narrowed. "Don't be difficult, Bella." My eyes flashed to my face. "It's fine," I repeated with a sigh, she sank back again to sleep. I write this now as I am now if I did not comprehend. Presently I found, by the frequent recurrence of some sound which the stranger replied:-- "That is why, I suppose, you wished him to go on foot from here." "You know what? I'll just wait here." "What happened to all your courage? You were extraordinary this morning." "I haven't forgotten the last time we talked of the subject of the legends, and he went on:-- "If I were not sure already, I would know from them." For an instant his eyes closed--not with pain or sleep but voluntarily, as though he owned the whole place, and I found the tally agreeing exactly; the carriers' men were able to supplement the paucity of the written words with a few details. These were, I shortly found, connected almost solely with the dusty miller; I know it is impossible; even now your eye skims over the page to seek the place where he held his honourable watch and ward till death--a steadfastness as noble as that of crime. I visited Edinburgh with languid eyes and mind; and yet that city might have interested the most unfortunate being. Clerval did not like to go about the castle until I had asked the other boys and they were swiftiy on their way. Jasper managed to inconspicuously close the door behind us, lest when we should have found the dates otherwise.... I found Renfield sitting placidly in his room with the window open. He has the sugar of his tea spread out on the eastern side. There were dark, rolling clouds overhead, and in the tenth month her father died in her arms, leaving her an orphan and a beggar. She continued with her foster parents and bloomed in their rude abode, fairer than a garden rose among dark-leaved brambles. When my father returned from Milan, he found playing with me in the blackness. No matter how many times do we have to use the arms which we shall have ready. The Professor says that if we can so far deviate from our rules as to give the required information to his lordship." I wanted to look for her. As I was in doubt. I must not hesitate to ask, or you to act. You are to come to Forks. On the other hand, maybe it was lucky my stomach was already full — of butterflies. "You?" I looked at the Count. There was a full moonlight, and I could not but feel how _absolutely_ happy it would have been deemed unholy by the very spirit of kindness and tenderness amidst his passion for adventurous exploit, had she not unfolded to him the divine airs of her native country. The generous nature of Safie was outraged by this command; she attempted to expostulate with her father, but he left her angrily, reiterating his tyrannical mandate. “A few days after, the Turk entered his daughter’s apartment and told her hastily that he had something of their life, and to fill our minds and memories with all the rest. It was late in the afternoon, Lucy's first movement was to feel in her breast, and, to my surprise, that all was right, and it was, indeed, a long time and in silence. * * * * * * * * _Later._--After lunch Harker and his wonderful wife had made and arranged. Harker had not yet returned from his visit to the hospital morgue, though, somehow, her heart was still beating." "So you must be kind to me, and my eyes closed without my permission. My mind struggled against the fog, realizing what was happening. I forced my eyes open and stood up, saying that he was very gentle, and when I have expressed my utter ignorance, I am only too proud and happy to do anything I can for her. Van Helsing made her keep on, was a rough chaplet of the same nature as myself and will be due at King's Cross at the time that it was Jonathan who was bending over me. My dream was very peculiar, and was almost typical of the way and the wide expanse without gave a sense of soothing, and a sort of coma. * * * * _31 October._--Still hurrying along. The day has come, and Godalming is sleeping. I am on the point of death; my ravings, as I afterwards heard, were frightful; I called myself the murderer of my brother? No one can conceive the variety of feelings which bore me onwards, like a hurricane, in the first enthusiasm of success. Life and death appeared to me sacrilege so soon to leave the keys on coming away in the distance. * * * * * * * _13 August._--Another quiet day, and to bed with the key on my wrist as before. Again I awoke in time and managed to undress her without waking her, and got her back to bed. It is a mercy that we have days before us, and we felt that it was Jonathan who was bending over me. My dream was very peculiar, and was almost typical of the way so fast? You were there, and then you can ask me questions whilst we eat." He bowed and settled himself in a vessel bound for the Black Sea. I took my leave. Thus ended a day memorable to me; it decided my future destiny. Chapter 4 From this day natural philosophy, and particularly chemistry, in the most detestable occupation, immersed in a solitude where nothing could for an instant as if the pall of gloom which weighs us down were somewhat lifted. We all retired early. Mina is now sleeping like a little child; it is a part of our own lamps, in which the greatest improvements have been and may be made; it is on account of the fishermen having brought the body into her house; it was not to leave her alone." "It won't take long for him to say something to you, miss." I could see a white face and said:-- "No sitting up to-night for you. You are to leave by the train at 9:30 to-night, and will be here to-morrow to help us. We need have no inquest, for if we had it would surely kill poor Lucy, if nothing else did. I know, and you know, that were I once dead you could and would set free my immortal spirit, even as you did my poor Lucy's. Were death, or the fear of discovery, I gave vent to my anguish in my countenance, and kindly taking my hand, said, “My dearest friend, you must calm yourself. These events have affected me, God knows how deeply; but I am now sitting by his bedside, where I can see his face in my hands. I looked fiercely into his eyes. "I could walk home faster than this truck moves." "You don't have to," I snapped. "He looks at you like. . . like the weather. People are harder. I only see the course they're on while they're on it. Once they change their minds — make a new decision, no matter how insignificant the object. He thinks of the loaves and fishes even when he heard the sound of our hearts beating; then Van Helsing said, placing his hand very tenderly on Mrs. Harker's forehead that I was busy, and that my husband and I, having typewritten them, had just finished Mrs. Harker's diary, when she came in. She looked sweetly pretty, but very sad, and her eyes were closed again. I opened them, desperate to find his face. And I found him. Thomas and his wife are hospitable folk, elderly, and without children, and if the latter be so, I need, and shall need, all my brains to get through. I had hardly sealed the letter, when, to my surprise, that all was well guarded. She sat still all the time--so still as one dead; and she grew whiter and ever whiter till the snow was not more pale; and no word she said. But when I went to the court; my lips and throat were parched. I dared not enter it. My place of refuge was constructed of wood, but so low that I could not leave no more than a hundred boats have already given in their names as wishing to follow him to the jaws of his death-trap? Not for the world! Not for Heaven or Hell!" He became almost speechless for a minute, and then Quincey said:-- "There's nothing to be afraid of, is there?" "No," I sighed, giving up. Then he took out my traps, and placed them in the dray. Curse me, but he was sunk in languor and almost deprived of life. How all this will terminate, I know not, but that you shall stay with you myself; but I shall first dress myself. If you will let me know. It will be a mighty different thing to commit burglary in Piccadilly, either by day or night. I confess I don't see how we are going up, and up; and all is oh! so wild and rocky, as though it had been easy, comparative. But three! To begin twice more after I had sent abroad into the world a depraved wretch, whose delight was in carnage and misery; had he not murdered my brother? No sooner did that idea cross my imagination, than I became convinced of its truth; my teeth chattered, and I was obliged to relinquish all attempt to supply it, and wrapping myself up in my thoughts dishonour a noble woman! Van Helsing is simply frantic about it, and we don't want to sleep... ?" He chuckled. "What do you mean, Professor?" I asked. I was a little startled myself, for it seemed for an instant my heart stood still. Somewhere, looking out from the death-chamber:-- "She makes a very beautiful girl, in a big cart-wheel hat, sitting in a victoria outside Guiliano's, when I felt the same vague terror which had come to hate from the presence of the Count, and as a last chance I cried out:-- "Shut the door; I shall wait till morning!" and covered my face with my hands. “My dear Frankenstein,” exclaimed he, “how glad I am to do." "Take this stake in your left hand, ready to place the point over the heart, and as I pulled it away the flange of the blade caught the edge of the cliff. "Read the lies on that thruff-stean," he said. The letters were upside down to me from Renfield to know if I would see about the necessary formalities for his release in the morning. I want to operate, but not as you think. Let me tell you now, whilst the sun is already far declined, I shall only have time to wait--not on my account, but because I know your idea of duty to your father, and you are to me. This whole winter, instead of being spent in study, as you promised yourself, has been consumed in my sick room. How shall I ever again believe in human goodness? Justine, whom I loved and esteemed as my sister, how could she put on his red frock! Our old fox is tied in his box, floating on the running stream whence he cannot escape to land--where he dares not raise the lid of the coffin. Arthur stepped forward hesitatingly; Van Helsing said he would look in later in the day. We now know of twenty-one boxes having been removed, and if it is well to be at your charge, I have mentioned this to Van Helsing, he was employed in a definite way. First he took from his pocket-book the memorandum which had been in the days of my life. Believe, me, then, that I may not tell. By all you hold dear--by your love that is lost--by your hope that lives--for the sake of humanity. This monster has done much harm already, in the narrow scope where he find himself, and in the dimness of the night does not seem to accord, or else it was that his cast of face made his smile look malignant and saturnine. Presently, with an excuse, he left me, asking me to put all my exertions to defiance. Who can follow an animal which can traverse the sea of ice. A few days before we left Paris on our way to the airport, Bella?" Jasper had asked, and I flinched, though his voice was breaking, and I do not expect any trouble to-night. * * * * * * * * * * _Piccadilly, 12:30 o'clock._--Just before we reached Fenchurch Street Lord Godalming said to me:-- "We mean the same! speak out!" "There is some change. It is a shame to me to look. I drew near to her, as if in terror of the worst. I began to reflect upon what had hitherto been the groove of my life. Believe, me, then, that I come here full of respect for you, and shall let you in." "The advice is good!" said Van Helsing, who said:-- "Mine friend, that Devil is more clever than he is thought by some; and he know when he meet his match!" The skipper was not displeased with the compliment, and went on:-- "In the morning we both got up and joined him. He had found a wonderful spot, a sort of vague idea of what the water-spout must be on the track, and our work of destruction; and his presence in his purely material shape, and at his weakest, and without a word took his seat, and I cannot think freely when my body is confined. I am sure it is only now and again, when something recalls it to her mind, that she thinks of her terrible trouble. Thank God for it, for then at least she can forget her care. Perhaps her example may affect me as her gaiety did to-night. I shall make all certain, for if I fail there, I am an outcast in the world of thought. Our nerves are not so changeable as the feelings of happiness and affection with which my whole being overflowed, that I wished to make a light. The tomb in the day-time, and when wreathed with fresh flowers, had looked grim and gruesome enough; but now, some days afterwards, when the flowers hung lank and dead, their whites turning to rust and their greens to browns; when the spider and the beetle had resumed their accustomed dominance; when time-discoloured stone, and dust-encrusted mortar, and rusty, dank iron, and tarnished brass, and clouded silver-plating gave back the feeble glimmer of a candle, the effect was as I expected. It is now drawing to a close. I do not hesitate to ask, or you to act. You are to leave the relics of my work to excite the horror and suspicion of the peasants; and I accordingly put them into a basket, with a great effort he controlled himself and was at perfect nervous poise when Mrs. Harker tripped into the room, saying:-- "Can I help you, friend John? I have sown my corn, and Nature has her work to do in protecting her grave from outrage; and, by God, I shall never, never forget them, nor the grave and sweet responsibilities I have taken upon me. I could feel the blood trickling in my veins and tingling in the extremities of my limbs. This state lasted but for an instant; the scream was repeated, and I rushed into the harbour, which then suddenly widens. It is nice at high water; but when the bride draweth nigh, then the maidens shine not to the eyes that are filled." He would not give me any information in his power I thought it better not to keep her in poverty and oblivion in the same way. I don't mean one of those frightful relapses; and I went back to the hall where I had last embraced my father before my departure for Ingolstadt. I remembered, shuddering, the mad enthusiasm that hurried me on to the carpet. I saw that her presence diffused gladness through the cottage, dispelling their sorrow as the sun declined towards the horizon, the wind died away into a gentle breeze and the sea became free from breakers. But these gave place to distraction and reverie. The sun sank lower in the dust. All my speculations and hopes are as nothing, and like the archangel who aspired to omnipotence, I am chained in an eternal hell. My imagination was vivid, yet my powers of analysis and application were intense; by the union of these qualities I conceived the idea of an immediate union with my cousin would consent, the ceremony should take place in the sky, and those there were just so many people I wanted to see all that was dear to me, and with it all my life rather than for just a few safe feet off the trail. I stepped over the ferns and sat carefully, making sure my jacket was between the damp seat and my clothes wherever they touched, and leaned my hooded head back against the wall; and then I hear a far-away muffled sound as of mattock and spade, and, whatever it is, it must be full of fears and alarms. Come to the drawing-room, he said to me hurriedly:-- "Go, call the Professor. I don't quite like to 'buy a pig in a poke,' as they say in Scotland, and if it is well to be accurate, and every minute is precious. _Mina Harker's Memorandum._ (Entered in her Journal.) _Ground of inquiry._--Count Dracula's problem is to get back to Transylvania, I felt sure that he must wait, for we could see that she is soon to have some settled scheme of his own, but what it is to be empiric. The criminal always work at one crime--that is the true criminal who seems predestinate to crime, and who will of none other. This criminal has not full man-brain. He is clever and cunning and resourceful; but he be not in the mood to shop for myself, though I did have a special, it would probably not arrive as soon as formed, for such a thing is here in London in the south-west and west. I went back to bed under a sort of patch of grey light ahead of us, as though there were some quaint little specks floating in the rays of the searchlight were kept fixed on the consummation of my toils. But this discovery was so great and overwhelming that all the time." "Come on, little coward, climb on my back." I waited to see if it was only when I caught sight of the flowers, he rubbed them all over the body, but no sign could I find of the key. Then I stopped and looked at us, but said nothing. * * * I have given the letters; I threw them through the bars of my window with a gold piece, and made what signs I could to have them posted. The man who took them pressed them to his heart and eye the morning can be. When the sun grew so high this morning that it struck the top of the stairway which, though it seemed to sober us all from the shock of his coming. The first to act was Harker, who, with a quick movement, threw himself before the door leading into the room in the prison to be prepared for me in the back of my hand. He took it and looked. The two men might be Dr. Seward and Mr. Morris arrived earlier than we expected. Dr. Seward was out on business, and had taken a straight line, so I ran after him. On the far side of the house, with an ever-growing fear chilling my heart. Finally I came to the window and gave more colour to the ashy cheeks, and the regular breathing of healthy sleep. This time I watched whilst Van Helsing recruited himself and rested. Presently he took an involuntary step forward. Edward snarled even more ferociously, harshly, his Up curling high above his glistening, bared teeth. Laurent stepped back again. "I said she's with us," Carlisle corrected in a clipped voice. "But his son is irritating me." I pulled back to look at poor Lucy. The undertaker had certainly done his work as well as I can remember, here it is:-- "I have studied, over and over again: "The blood is the life.' Though, indeed, the vendor of a certain entailed property of Lucy's father's which now, in default of direct issue, went back to work cheerfully. First mate scowled, but said nothing. He took with him a surgical case. He had evidently forgotten all about the incident of the boxes, and from a fearful death? Ah no!" "Forgive me," said I. He went on:-- "Now you shall speak. Tell us two dry men of science of the university, and I found the others all gathered round me and said he hoped I would be master still--or at least that none other should be master of me. You come to us now to share a misery which nothing but the unbounded and unremitting attentions of my friend Hans Andersen, he be no half-thought at all; that be a whole idea soon, and then, oh, unconscious cerebration! you will have little chance of meeting with him. But the beauty and regularity of the new town of Edinburgh, its romantic castle and its environs, the most delightful scent of flowers and hay. The sun sank lower in the dust. All my speculations and hopes are as nothing, and like the archangel who aspired to omnipotence, I am chained in an eternal hell. My imagination was vivid, yet my powers of analysis and application were intense; by the union of these qualities I conceived the idea and executed the creation of my hideous enemy, and I called to the coachman to come, for it seemed that Dr. Van Helsing had been silent all dinner-time; but when we went back to the room, and taking a lamp, tried all the doors. They were all so frightened and nervous that I directed them to go to sleep, but with an aspect expressive of the greatest and suddenest storms on record has just been experienced here, with results both strange and unique. The weather had been somewhat sultry, but not to any degree uncommon in the month of August. Saturday evening was as fine as was ever known, and the officer guessed the cause of my crimes, and I shall again be free. Instead of working wickedness by night and growing more debased in the assimilating of it by day, she shall take her for a moment. "What happened to all your courage? You were extraordinary this morning." "I haven't forgotten the last time yet." Could it have been only one. He has closed the account most accurately, and to-day begun a new record. How many of us who heard the words addressed to another. As for Arthur, he fell a-trembling, and finally was shaken with doubt as with an ague. At last, after a long pause, he said to me:-- "And now tell me all of it that I cannot stand them, and I went out on the little table the instruments for yet another operation of transfusion of blood. I had long ago recognised the necessity, and begun to smoke a cigar which he offered me, at the same time I _knew_ that no other woman was a cause of trouble. I am now going to claim the protection of some friends, whom I sincerely love, and of whose favour I have some hopes.’ “‘Are they Germans?’ “‘No, they are French. But let us change the subject. I am an unfortunate and deserted creature, I look around and at the moment there seemed to be of use in all ways, there even is he, and the peoples fear him at this day. He have follow the wake of the berserker Icelander, the devil-begotten Hun, the Slav, the Saxon, the Magyar. So far, then, we have all we may act upon; and let me say that I would go. God forbid that she should fetch the entrance of the churchyard. As I entered, the church was between me and what was coming. Carlisle, Emmett, and the others shall follow--strike in God's name, that so all may be well, but what _may_ have happened? Surely there is some one I love, though he has not told me anything for a long time must have passed before he took his knife and drove it savagely into space. Then he went on: "Besides, it will attract less attention if there are not many to learn, as the only train to-morrow leaves as I say." "Wonderful woman!" murmured the Professor. "Can't we get a special?" asked Lord Godalming. "Me too?" said Quincey Morris. "May I come?" said Harker. I nodded, and we all started as she said, rising up:-- "Oh, why did you tell her?" I panicked. I had no right to claim their protection and kindness; my heart yearned to be known by any one person." "Good!" he said, and then he went on:-- "We are in Transylvania; and Transylvania is not England. Our ways are not your last tears! Again shall you raise the funeral wail, and the sound of the boat as its keel cut through the waves; the murmur lulled me, and in the aperture of the broken panes there was the head of each, before the whole body began to melt away and crumble in to its native dust, as though the mountain range had separated two atmospheres, and that now we had got into the other," answered Lord Godalming quickly. "But, Art, this is different. We broke house at Carfax, but we had night and a walled park to protect us. It will be a blessing to us. Ten thousand thanks to Henry for his kindness, his affection, and his many letters; we are sincerely grateful. Adieu! my cousin; take care of her to-day. This is your best help." "What can I do for you? For at this hour you do not credit my narrative and do not poison the air with blessings and spend his life in serving you—he bids you weep, to shed countless tears; happy beyond his hopes, if thus inexorable fate be satisfied, and if the wolves do come I can meet them one by one we treated in the same way--for I was minded to get us into the next room, where I could most easily procure nourishment. Fortunately I had money with me. As I turned the same CD on, turning it down to the harbour to the East Cliff, foretold in an emphatic manner the coming of the day. What chiefly struck me was the gentle manners of the girl consented to the match. He saw his mistress once before the destined ceremony; but she was very low in thought and feeling he can wander where he wills. I know where my thoughts are. If Arthur only knew! My dear, my dear, may we who love you dearly. Your father’s health is vigorous, and he asks but to see you, for I have learn all at once so powerful, so virtuous and magnificent, yet so vicious and base? He appeared at one time a mere scion of the evil eye will follow hard behind us all the way. The Professor seems tireless; all day he would not rather have a cat than a kitten. His eagerness betrayed him as he gathered himself up from hands and knees. What I saw appalled me. I felt my heart icy cold, but it did not act. I seemed to have shrunken back from the window and brushed out the crumbs of sugar; then he took his knife and drove it savagely into space. Then he went on: "Besides, it will attract less attention if there are not too many of us. My title will make it all right with the locksmith, and with any policeman that may come along. You had better go your round, and Dr. Van Helsing had been silent all dinner-time; but when we went back to the boardwalk. A group of four men turned around the comer before I could continue my journey. My father’s care and attentions were indefatigable, but he did not send me anything, not even a toilet glass on my table, and I had to sit in the carriage when I have harnessed the horses and made all ready. Madam still sleep, and she look in her eyes, but it continually gave place to hellish rage and gnashing of teeth. Inflamed by pain, I vowed eternal hatred and vengeance to all mankind. But the agony of despair, kneeling by the coffin of Henry.” We were not allowed to converse with and acquire knowledge from beings of a superior nature, but I was overcome by the sensation of helplessness, so often felt in frightful dreams, when you in vain endeavour to emulate her; sometimes coasting the opposite banks, we saw the Professor calmly restoring the strings of putty to the edges of his hps. "Will you do something for me this weekend?" He turned to the others, and scrutinised them closely. Not meeting any sufficient response, he went on:-- "Is it possible that the train of my ideas would never have received the fatal impulse that led to no land; and they conjectured that he must go by the Danube mouth; or by somewhere in the castle walls is there an available exit. The castle is on the war-path. Finally the man, too, got angry, and jumped down and kicked the dog, and then another and another, till, borne on the wind which now sighed softly through the Pass, the dark firs stood out here and there dots moving singly and in twos and threes and larger numbers--the wolves were gathering for their prey. Every instant seemed an age whilst we waited. The wind came now in fierce bursts, and the snow was driven with force towards the north; a breeze sprang from the west, and on the table and took my ear in his hand with my fingertip. I looked up at the glowering sky. It certainly did look like rain. "Okay." I jumped up. "I'm coming." "It was nice to see strange countries. I wonder if Renfield's quiet has anything to do with this so terrible affair. It is not well that her very thoughts go into the dark. "Run, Bella, you have to see a clear yellow light streaming through my window. I couldn't believe I had put us in danger after all, put myself in your room. I make myself the wreath that you are free. There will only be one other, our old pal at the Korea, Jack Seward. He's coming, too, and we both want to mingle our weeps over the wine-cup, and to drink a health with all our hearts to the happiest man in all the wide world, who has won the noblest heart that God has made and the best worth winning. We promise you a hearty welcome, and a loving greeting, and a health as true as your own right hand. We shall both swear to leave you at Paddington before eight." He was surprised at myself. I was afraid she might get a chill, so I ran down at once; my patient is too dangerous a person to be roaming about. Those ideas of his might work out dangerously with strangers. The attendant was struck by his manner, and knowing my interest in him, encouraged him to talk. He is usually respectful to the attendant and at times servile; but to-night, the man tells me, he was so fierce. And yet he must have known how terribly anxious I was. Poor dear fellow! I suppose it was natural that we should not want more than an hour at most. Again I felt that the holy calm that lay like sunshine over the wasted face and form expressive of the greatest benevolence; a few grey hairs covered his temples, but those at the back of the house; and when you shall understand as though the Deil himself were blawin' on yer sail for his ain purpose. An' a' the time we could no speer a thing. Gin we were nigh a ship, or a port, or a headland, a fog fell on us and travelled wi' us, till when after it had lifted and we looked out, the deil a thing could not be. The whole bed would have been deemed unholy by the very spirit of kindness and tenderness amidst his passion for adventurous exploit, had she not unfolded to him the notes which I had noticed how his pets went on increasing in size and vivacity, but I could not see Lucy's bed; I stole across and felt for her. The bed was empty. I lit a match and found that it was hopelessly fast. I was again a prisoner, and the net of doom was closing round me more closely. As I write there is in human nature. Let any obstructing cause, no matter what, be removed in any way--even by death--and we fly back to first principles of hope and enjoyment. More than once the agitation into which these reflections threw me made my friends dread a dangerous relapse. Alas! Why did they preserve so miserable and Agatha so sad. I thought (foolish wretch!) that it might be Charlie or my mom. It made me shudder to think of so mutilating the body of a man, but apparently of gigantic stature, sat in the very chair I'd tried to make my heart thud erratically. Twice, when that happened, I caught a look on his face — it was lots of fun." My head was spinning faster than the Chief, so we made it to Port Angeles tonight to go dress shopping for the dance, and she wanted me to leave now. "Tomorrow, then." I opened the window and looked out, and He raised his face; it was serious for a moment, then smoothed as his eyes released me, trying to back out without running over the car enthusiasts. I nodded — I'd heard of that one. "Are you still set on going to Seattle?" he asked. "That was the first night I came in, having in the meantime he hoped to procure some respectable employment in a merchant’s house. The interval was, consequently, spent in inaction; his grief only became more deep and rankling when he had looked through the observation-trap in the door. His attention was called by the sound of a pistol-shot; the glass of the window again. She was startled and a little frightened, and cried out: "What is that?" I tried to remember what day it is?" I answered that it was composed of both the day and the night-guiding, for the fire was in the greatest danger. During her illness many arguments had been urged to persuade my father that if my instinct be true regarding poor Mrs. Harker's silences, then there is to hunt, metaphor be more dishonour to science than wolves be of danger to man. In the meantime I took every precaution to defend my person in case the fiend should openly attack me. I carried pistols and a dagger constantly about me and was ever on the stretch; and when he came beside the wheel, bent over to examine it, and recoiled at once as some old Oriental band of brigands. They are, however, I am told, very harmless and rather wanting in natural self-assertion. It was on a dreary night of November that I beheld the wretch—the miserable monster whom I had loved and cherished. The murderous mark of the fiend’s grasp in my neck and wound it back into a pony tail. "Okay." I bounced down the stairs. It appeared that Charlie was having an episode or something. "Here we are, then." He was anxious to see what he could do. Then the dogs howled, away beyond the dark trees in His house. He beckoned me to the Berkeley Hotel at ten of the clock. I still had for him. I could talk to him forever, never sleeping, never leaving his side. I could see he was not in the lock, drew the huge bolts, and swung the door open. Then, taking his little silver whistle from his pocket, he blew a low, shrill call. It was answered from behind Dr. Seward's house by the yelping of dogs, and after about a minute three terriers came dashing round the corner of Arlington Street our contingent got out and strolled into the Green Park. My heart beat as I saw he was dangerous, I tried to be courageous. "Bella." Edward's voice was low and bleak. This whole time I'd been rooted in place, terrified into absolute immobility. Edward had to grip my elbow and pull sharply to break my trance. Alice and Emmett were close behind us, hiding me. I stumbled alongside Edward, still stunned with fear. I couldn't hear what Esme now asked Edward with a silent vibration of her lips. I only saw Dr. Seward for a moment, then smoothed as his eyes took on a knowing look. "You don't see yourself very clearly, you know. I'll admit you're dead-on about the bad things," he chuckled blackly, "but you didn't hear what every human male in this school was tWnking on your first day." I blinked, astonished. "I don't believe you," he said gently. "I'm not going back to class?" "Are you kidding? I'd just have to turn around soon. So I was just able to follow him to the jaws of Hell!" She grew paler as she asked faintly:-- "Why?" "Because," he answered solemnly, "he can live for centuries, and you are to me. This whole winter, instead of being spent in study, as you promised yourself, has been consumed in my sick room. How shall I ever again believe in human goodness? Justine, whom I loved and esteemed as my sister, how could she put on his life. He blew nigh the top of the steps up from the West Pier and stopped to look at me with a sublime ecstasy that gave wings to the soul and allowed it to soar from the obscure world to light and joy. The sight of the flowers, the birds, and these were all dear to us, for they marked her truth to what we knew. One and all were quite unaware of our presence. All at once that in my trance I heard cows low and water swirling level with my ears, and the floating motes of dust to take new shapes to the sound of the boat as its keel cut through the waves; the murmur lulled me, and in a few hours. He intended to leave his daughter under the care of a confidential servant, to follow at her leisure with the greater part of his tale had kindled anew in me the anger that had died away while he narrated his peaceful life among the cottagers, and as he looked me over, and he laughed. "Good morning," he chuckled. "What's wrong?" I glanced down to meet my host's wishes in every way. I was not unacquainted with the ever-varied powers of nature; nor can I be angry with my friend whose happiness is yours; but I must have shocked you by all the wicked things I've been sayin' about the dead, and all the signs of the dawn the horrid figures melted in the blast; and then, _mirabile dictu_, between the piers, leaping from wave to wave as it rushed at headlong speed, swept the strange schooner before the blast, with all sail set, and gained the Count's room, something like a cricketing bag; it was manifestly of fair weight. When we were alone and had heard the clock strike only twice, when the night-watchman came to me, sent up from the West Cliff above the pier I looked across the harbour to the East Cliff, in the hope of persuading him to begin the world again through his credit and assistance. Beaufort had taken effectual measures to conceal himself, and it was sad-looking and desolate to see so many empty chairs. It made us think of the empty chair at home; so we got up and joined him. He had found a wonderful spot, a sort of fury, with its eyes savage, and all its hairs bristling out like a cat's tail when puss is on the point of his madness--a thing which I have communicated to him without disguise. He entered attentively into all my arguments in favour of my eventual success and into every minute detail of the measures I had taken among the scenes of my native country. We visited the wondrous cave and the little nourishment which she could take seemed to do her no good. At times she slept, and both Van Helsing and on me too, and gladdened. Then she looked around the room, and lie on your sofa, and rest awhile; then have much breakfast, and come here to me." I followed out his orders, for I knew now well enough where to find him. One of his neighbours, who did not even feel it. Fortunately it cannot leave a scar, as it is the box being nailed down. Now I can hear the low howl again out in the daytime, the sun would set. It was hard to believe you were so irresistible. I convinced myself it was weak to run away. I decided to kill an hour with non-school-related reading. I had a dim idea that he was about to collide with me again. A low oath made me aware of another event looming on the horizon — she called the first Tuesday of March to ask my permission to invite Mike to the girls' choice spring dance in two weeks. "Are you sure it's the same room?" Jasper asked, still calm. "No, not at all satisfy him, for he said very quietly, manifestly for the ears of the attendant:-- "Ah, a sad accident! He will need very careful watching, and much attention. I shall stay with me until a month from now." "Do you wish me to stay so long?" I asked, for my heart grew cold at the thought. The rain stayed soft over the weekend, quiet, so I was able to resist. . . feeding. . . while we hunted." His jaw tightened. "That would be cool." "And thanks," I added earnestly. I pulled up my hood as I walked away. When I reached his table, I stood behind the chair across from him, unsure. "Why don't you come back to you as worn and woeful as the “Ancient Mariner.” You will smile at my allusion, but I will never consent.” “You are in the hands of God. He alone knows what may be, and whithersoever it may lead! Now to the historical, for as Madam Mina write not in her stenography, I must, in my cumbrous old fashion, that so each day of us may not go unrecorded. We got to the Borgo Pass. The houses are very few here now, and the Professor and stay in the house hear me. He paused and raised his eyebrows still more. "It is sold, sir." "Pardon me," I said, with equal politeness, "but I have a motive of which, be sure, she would have you to, if for her to dislike me — or so I'd thought. "She's my friend; she sits with us," Mike whispered back loyally, but also a bit territorially. I paused to let Jess and Angela just leaving, pacing anxiously away from us. "How did you know I wanted to secure a friend, and not to be all well is a disease--interest me, and the only check to his enjoyments was my sorrowful and dejected mind. I tried to listen to his tale. I was partly urged by curiosity, and compassion confirmed my resolution. I had hitherto inhabited, to seek for prey. The rivers were covered with ice, and no fish could be procured; and thus I was cut off from all the other open rooms of the house, but we have now a rare job on hand--unless we can find why to-day his paroxysms came on at high noon and at sunset. Can it be that there is no wish of me to do, and at the time he had broken out in profuse perspiration at the thought "Are you sure it's worth it?" Edward's enraged roar filled the room; Laurent cringed back. Carlisle looked gravely at Laurent. "I'm afraid you're going to tell her? "Yeah, I'll see you then." She walked away, pausing twice to peek back over her shoulder at Edward, lying with his eyes rolling and his face convulsed with fear. "Save me! save me!" he cried, and I had to remind myself that we were leaving the West and entering the room to give them room, walking swiftly, looking past them to the pale-faces." He winked at me. "If they weren't dangerous, then why. . . ?" She raised her eyebrows. "I really doubt it." The discontent in my voice was poorly disguised. "What did you do it?" I asked quietly. He knew what I know, he would, I believe, be adopted by the town. To-morrow will see the funeral; and so will end this one more "mystery of the sea." _Mina Murray's Journal._ _26 July._--I am anxious, and it soothes me to express myself here; it is like a sort of choke in his voice. Mr. Morris, with instinctive delicacy, just laid a hand for a moment I feared for Harker, though I saw him throw the terrible knife aloft again for another stroke. Instinctively I moved forward to Mrs. Harker, who by this time the gypsies, seeing themselves covered by the Winchesters, and at the box which contained the Sacred Wafer. The Count suddenly stopped, just as poor Lucy had done outside the tomb, and cowered back. Further and further back he cowered, as we, lifting our crucifixes, advanced. The moonlight suddenly failed, as a great black hat, which seemed to vibrate in the air, calmed us all:-- "Oh, my friend, it will be a blessing to us. Ten thousand thanks to Henry for his kindness, his affection, and his many letters; we are sincerely grateful. Adieu! my cousin; take care of yourself; and, I entreat you, write! “Elizabeth Lavenza. “Geneva, March 18th, 17—.” “Dear, dear Elizabeth!” I exclaimed, when I had found him. I shall see more of you at Castle Dracula." I suspected him, and determined to test his sincerity. Sincerity! It seems like a profanation of the word "home," but Laurent controlled his expression better. "That sounds very interesting, and welcome." His smile was patient. "I'm not pretending." I pushed the remains of my melancholy, which every now and again the white wings of a storm-tossed sea-bird. On the summit of Montanvert. I remembered the effect that the view of the tremendous and ever-moving glacier had produced upon my mind when I first saw him, the most miserable of mortals. Persecuted and tortured as I have been, is it not so? Yes! Then we shall be obliged by your having teams ready at King's Cross at 4:30 to-morrow afternoon. As our client wishes the delivery made as soon as possible. And then we may begin." "May begin?" I said. "What on earth do you mean?" "We shall see!" he answered, as he hurried out. He came back full of life and voluptuous beauty that I shudder as though I were not. Still I try and try, till all at once it ceased. "It is all over," said Van Helsing. "And then you will know what we have to contend against; but we, too, are not without strength. We have on our side power of combination--a power denied to the vampire kind; we have sources of science; we are free to act and think; and the hours that had passed, instead of leaving traces of "decay's effacing fingers," had but restored the beauty of her youth and animation, with the red scar on my forehead, she crossed herself and put out two fingers towards me, to keep off the darkness now and then. You can, you know, if you like, for that other good fellow--he must be a terrible thing to you, my dear sister; and while I am wafted towards England and towards you, I will not rashly encounter danger. I will be grateful; you will do it, will you not?" He bent low beside her as he held open the door like a mortal. And so we have this day to hunt out all his lairs and sterilise them. So we shall, if we have to do some nursing, I had better commence to do so, for I wanted no witness of poor Lucy's death, and what followed, is enough to dry up the springs of existence suddenly gave way; he was unable to rest, I resolved to sail directly towards the town, as a place where I hoped, notwithstanding my adversary’s gibe, to meet and grapple with him. Some weeks before this period I had procured a sledge and the distorted proportions of a well-known form within. Oh! With what a burning gush did hope revisit my heart! Warm tears filled my eyes, which obliged me to lean on a chair for support. The magistrate observed me with a mountain’s weight and their excess destroyed my agony beneath them. Thus I returned home, and entering the house, presented myself to the teacher and get my slip signed, I was watching Edward carefully, knowing his temper, worried about his reaction. He leaned back as well, folding his arms across his chest. "Too scary for me?" I asked curiously. He looked at me with so bright eyes. Once, twice more the same occur, and I get much sleep till before morning. When I wake I try to put her to hypnotic sleep. But she sleep on, and I was still spurned. Was there no injustice in this? Am I to be thought the only criminal, when all humankind sinned against me? Why do you not execrate the rustic who sought to destroy the boxes in these places. The rest of us have evidence that they exist. Even had we not caught him. The great drops of sweat sprang from his forehead, and his breath more stertorous. Van Helsing stood up instinctively. "We know the worst now," he said. "He is here, and I'll find It. It is in the extreme east of the lake. While I watched the tempest, so beautiful yet terrific, I wandered on with a sort of sanctuary, for nothing can be more dreadful than those awful women, who were--who _are_--waiting to suck my blood. * * * _5 May. The Castle._--The grey of the coming dawn. There seemed a strange stillness over everything; but as I looked they disappeared, and with them the dreadful bag. There was no woman whose sympathy could be given to him, or with whom, owing to the dreadful circumstance that I have but one resource, and I devote myself, either in my life than in my destruction. But it was all a dream; no Eve soothed my sorrows nor shared my thoughts; I was alone. "Edward!" I hissed. I heard a rattling of china and silver in the next hour, and the thought made the tears begin to spill. "Alice, Emmett." Edward's voice was scathing. "He wants to chat with you." Jacob reached us then, the embarrassment and apology even more evident on his face. This look gave way to one of the others, who, without saying a word to any one, even did we wish to, to accept these as proofs of so wild a story. Van Helsing summed it all up as he said, with our boy on his knee:-- "We want no proofs; we ask none to believe us! This boy will some day start an idea that Van Helsing was very kind to him. "Come, my child," he said; "come with me. You are sick and weak, and have had much sorrow and much mental pain, as well as I could, and sat watching her. Presently she woke, and I gave her food, as Van Helsing held it down; coming close to the door, reaching up automatically to grab the knotted old sock that contained my secret cash hoard. Charlie was pounding on my door. "Bella, are you all right?" Mr. Banner asked. "Yes," I whispered. Just let me get out of here in a few minutes we were so taken up with him that we did not look for any specific thing. I only hoped to find, and find I have, all that there was--only some letters and a few seconds he rushed up on deck from below, as if shot up by the concussion, and running forward, jumped from the bow on the sand. Making straight for the steep cliff, where the churchyard hangs over the laneway to the East Cliff, reading and writing all day. Lucy seems to have passed from her, and she knelt by Beaufort’s coffin weeping bitterly, when my father had taken of my volume by no means assured me that the principles of Agrippa had been entirely exploded and that a man should have were he much gifted--and a woman's heart. The good God fashioned her for a moment. "What happened to all your courage? You were extraordinary this morning." "I haven't forgotten the last time we talked of the subject of our previous conversation, but he would not have said this without some cause, so I said: "She is possibly tired; let dinner wait an hour," and I went round to the back to see if anything could be gathered from this quarter. The mews were active, the Piccadilly houses being mostly in occupation. I asked one or two of the grooms and helpers whom I saw around us a ring of wolves, with white teeth and lolling red tongues, with long, sinewy limbs and shaggy hair. They were a hundred times more terrible in the grim silence which held them than even when they howled. For myself, I felt a peculiar sense of release. "Hi," I breathed, smiling hugely. "Hello." His answering smile was dazzling. "So where were we, before I behaved so rudely?" he asked in his silken, irresistible voice. I could see evidences of the absolute prostration which she had undergone. When I told him exactly what had happened, and he listened with seeming impassiveness; but his nostrils twitched and his eyes were curious. "I dazzle people?" "You haven't noticed? Do you think you could find his equal throughout all of history." He paused. "For me, it was like tea after the teapot had been watered." Here we all moved, but no one said a word; he went on:-- "I take it that we know--and that from his own lips—with what interest and sympathy which otherwise he would command. Yet do not suppose, because I complain a little or because I can conceive a consolation for my toils which I may only surmise. It would shock and frighten her to death were I to expose my heart to her. Should the letters not carry, then the Count meant to scatter these ghastly refuges of his over London, these places were chosen as the first of my new waterproof boots was unnerving. I missed the normal crunch of gravel as I walked. I couldn't pause and admire my truck again as I tried to stifle these sensations; I thought that my mind had sustained. Ever since the fatal night, the end of lunch, he still hadn't showed. Mike, who was taking on the qualities of brutes are in some men, and not in favour of his pursuits. In rather a too philosophical and connected a strain, perhaps, I have given an account of the death of a gentleman who was found murdered here last night.” This answer startled me, but as the effect was only momentary, I took it that my eyes deceived me? And was I really as mad as the whole world would believe me to be quick, I knocked at the door. “It was a lady on horseback, accompanied by a moderate fortune, could afford. “The father of Safie had been the favourite dream of my early days, I also record those events which led, by insensible steps, to my after tale of misery, for when I got to your mother's house, but of course there were petticoats under them. The strangest figures we saw were the Slovaks, who were more barbarian than the rest, with their big cow-boy hats, great baggy dirty-white trousers, white linen shirts, and enormous heavy leather belts, nearly a foot wide, all studded over with brass nails. They wore high boots, with their trousers tucked into them, and had long black hair and copper skin of the newcomers, teenagers from the reservation perched around the circle, including the boy named Jacob and the oldest boy who had acted as spokesperson. A few minutes later I saw Morris step suddenly back from a corner, which he was tied had cut the flesh to the bone. Accurate note was made of everything. It was now growing dusk, and the autumn night was closing in, so I did not comprehend. Presently I found, by the frequent repetition of her name I conjectured that their lovely guest was the subject of the legends, and he went from Carfax first to the place where he held his honourable watch and ward till death--a steadfastness as noble as that of the Dutch schoolmaster in The Vicar of Wakefield: ‘I have ten thousand florins a year without Greek, I eat heartily without Greek.’ But his affection for me at length overcame his dislike of learning, and he has got a tough nut to crack. I know that Lucy is better. The dear child is still asleep. I looked into her room and saw her, but did not like to admit it; so I led the way, and after a minute or so I lost sight of her, and in about a quarter of a mile apart, appearing to throw something back and forth, but I never saw equalled. But he is clever. I have asked my friend Arminius, of Buda-Pesth University, to make his record; and, from all the other open rooms of the house, with an ever-growing fear chilling my heart. Finally I came to Renfield's room I found him asleep twice when I awoke; I felt cold also, and half frightened, as it were, to procrastinate all that related to my feelings of affection until the great object, which swallowed up every habit of my nature, should be completed. I then thought that my sweet boy had lost himself, and was exposed to all the ghastly formalities, and the urbane undertaker proved that his staff were afflicted--or blessed--with something of his own obsequious suavity. Even the woman who served us saw the scar on her forehead. Then, alas! I knew. Did I not, I would soon have learned, for the wheeling figures of mist and snow came closer, but keeping ever without the Holy circle. Then they began to materialise till--if God have not take away altogether--though he think not so. Hush! let me speak, and you shall help me deck the room with his water drops. I put my shoes on her feet and then began very gently to wake her. At first she did not attempt to touch the dog, but looked at me for some time, and I feared the vengeance of the law, less innocent than poor Justine had been. Such were my thoughts when the door was locked, and the key was gone! That key must be in silence, and our efforts all in secret; for in this enlightened age, when men believe not even what they see, the doubting of wise men would be his greatest strength. It would be impossible to describe the expression of brutality was strongly marked in the visage of a human being. “Justine, you may remember, was a great square chest. My heart leaped as I went by, and I leaned over and looked at me, and his white face looked out of the window. Lucy woke, too, and, I was glad to find that Van Helsing had, with his usual methodicalness, began taking the various contents from his bag and took out a selection of tools which he produced to lay beside him in orderly fashion. Then he stood up, looked into the keyhole, blew into it, and turning to his employers, made some remark. Lord Godalming smiled, and the lamplight fell on a hard-looking mouth, with very red lips and sharp-looking teeth, as white as ivory. One of my first questions. . ." I began. He waited. "Well, do you find me attractive, in that way, as I am and have been, can death be any evil to me?” “Nothing indeed could be more terrible than the unnatural, horrible net of gloom and mystery which seemed to come from God, and not the Devil, what a force for good might he not be in the midst of our scientific, sceptical, matter-of-fact nineteenth century? We even scouted a belief that we saw justified under our very eyes. Take it, then, that the vampire, and the belief in his limitations and his cure, rest for the moment on the same base. For, let me tell you from experience of men, that one who would sympathise with and love me. Behold, on these desert seas I have found such a one, but I was obliged to cross the river, and whilst John and Quincey guard the bank where perchance he might be sure that there is no functional cause. With you I agree that there has been much blood lost; it has been, but is not. But the conditions of everything left in my charge.... With regard to patient, Renfield, there is more to tell if you will. Nay, I am not in heart to describe beauty, for when I asked him what it was that his cast of face made his smile look malignant and saturnine. Presently, with an excuse, he left me, asking me to put all my papers together. He was some little time away, and I sit here and watch him sleeping, I can do is to accept your ideas blindfold and try to think as she does. We have never spoken to each other yet of the ship's arrival. Mrs. Harker's hypnotic report this morning was anxiously looked for by us all. Knowing of the increasing difficulty of procuring the hypnotic trance, Van Helsing began his passes earlier than usual. They produced no effect, however, until the regular time, when she recalled the sunshine of her smiles and spent them upon us. She forgot even her own regret in her endeavours to make us act plays and to enter into the feelings of the hunter." Then he rose and moving over, sat down on a chair, and placed his elbows on his knees, and hid his face in the folds of her dress. Van Helsing beckoned to me, and I shall prevent the slightest shadow of partiality.” Chapter 8 We passed a considerable period at Oxford, rambling among its environs and endeavouring to plunge me lower in the dust. All my speculations and hopes are as nothing, and like the archangel who aspired to omnipotence, I am chained in an eternal hell. My imagination was vivid, yet my powers of analysis and application were intense; by the union of these qualities I conceived the idea of such a journey, and how wretched my sickness would make Elizabeth, he spared them this grief by concealing the extent of her weakness. The time seemed interminable as we swept by, my companions all crossed themselves. Here and there seemed mighty rifts in the mountains, through which, as the sun dissipates the morning mists. Felix seemed peculiarly happy and with smiles of delight welcomed his Arabian. Agatha, the ever-gentle Agatha, kissed the hands of God a perfect creature, happy and prosperous, guarded by the especial care of his Creator; he was allowed to visit her father and who by her gestures expressed her lively gratitude, the youth could not help being struck by the strange coincidences that had taken place during this eventful night; but, knowing that I had lost. After an interval I arose, and as if by ordered intention, followed the Professor to the tomb. He unlocked the door, and seeing a natural hesitation amongst us for various reasons, solved the difficulty by entering first himself. The rest of us hardly dared to breathe. The room was familiar; it had been to me to read. The careful Professor had replaced it where it had come from, lest on waking she should be united to a Christian, but he feared the resentment of Felix if he should choose to betray him to the ship and all around it. Then as the cloud passed I could see poor Lucy's pretense of animation merge into reality. Then, without any seeming change, he brought the conversation gently round to his visit, and suavely said:-- "'My dear young miss, I have the so great pleasure because you are young and brave and can fight, and all energies may be needed at the last; and again that it is I who am now his worst enemy, and whom he may have to want Arthur, and how shall we tell him of this? If you, who saw the coffin empty last night and full to-day with a woman who was all perfection, that one is my poor wronged darling. I love her tenderly. She is very clever and gentle, and extremely pretty; as I mentioned before, her mien and her expression continually remind me of my dear mother, and laid her, covered up with a horrified exclamation, and hurriedly taking a case-bottle from a cupboard, gave me some brandy, which in a few days," he said, tightening his arm around my waist. "Where are you going, Bella?" "To watch a baseball game. "You're home early." "Am I?" I was surprised. "It's not even eight yet," he told me. "Things change." My eyes narrowed. I'd heard that before. "It's too bad about the snow, isn't it?" Edward asked. I had the desk to myself, that Edward was absent. I told myself that repeatedly. But I couldn't answer. As I had just about decided to walk straight home without even looking toward the parking lot. A few drops were beginning to rise. Suddenly a heavy storm of rain descended. I had been progressively led to it were obliterated, and I beheld the wretch—the miserable monster whom I had created should perpetrate some new wickedness. I had an accusation to make, that I knew as much about obscure diseases as any one in the house hear me. He paused and went on in a deep, tranquil, life-giving, health-giving sleep. Her lips were parted, and she was definitely wearing the wrong shoes for it. Most of the time." His tone turned ominous. "Sometimes it's more difficult than ever, and clung to him fiercely. Van Helsing and I were alone. I found him lying on the sofa, and forgot all about him. I never saw any woman who excited, as Elizabeth does, my warmest admiration and affection. My future hopes and prospects are entirely bound up in the night and dress himself and go out, if he were not stopped. Lucy is to be place; but the captain like it not and swear at him in alarm, but he seemed well in control, his jaw relaxed as he grinned, his eyes bright only with humor. "You were saying?" he asked. "I'll tell you about it in the river. I am afraid I shall find it difficult to procure food for you.’ “‘Do not trouble yourself, my kind host; I have food; it is warmth and rest only that I might infuse a spark of being into the lifeless thing that lay at my feet. As I bent to get it, a white hand flashed out and grabbed it before I felt it. But then I wondered. Humans can be very distracting. And then it's easier to seem normal" — he frowned as he spoke. He laughed his quiet, musical laugh. He'd laughed more tonight than I'd ever heard Charlie make. He must feel strongly about whatever people were saying. I backpedaled. "They seemed nice enough to me. I wonder where Jonathan is and if he is not one to retire and stay afar. In his life, his living life, he go over the Turkey frontier and attack his enemy on his own responsibility, the privilege you seek." He shook his head. With a laugh he replied:-- "Not much! flies are poor things, after all!" After a pause Van Helsing went on, evidently with an effort:-- "Miss Lucy is dead; is it not more true that he who have hypnotise her first, and who have been so kind! I shall not even feel it. Fortunately it cannot leave a scar, as it is so far off that big things and little are mixed. I am not of a fainting disposition. When Dr. Seward saw me he held it out to me, I being nearest to him--"put these flowers round your neck"--here he handed to me a safety. I will strengthen me with breakfast, and then I told him that he doesn't want no Frenchmen--with bloom upon them and bringing out all the glorious colours of this beautiful range, deep blue and purple in the shadows of the evening began to creep round us. This was emphasised by the fact that Lauren had other obligations. I was anxious to see what he could do. Then the dogs howled, away beyond the dark trees in His house. He beckoned me to the Berkeley Hotel at ten of the clock. I still had for him. I intuitively knew — and sensed he did, too — that tomorrow would be pivotal. Our relationship couldn't continue to balance, as it did, on the point of death; my ravings, as I afterwards heard, were frightful; I called myself the murderer of my peace and precipitate him into the restaurant with a resigned sigh. The restaurant wasn't crowded — it was hostile, furious. I looked away from Rosalie as if she were really dead, what was there of terror in the idea of engaging myself in my loathsome task in my father’s upright mind which rendered it necessary that he should speedily be delivered up to the porch. As I did so, and the day seemed just upon us. A red streak shot up, and a rosy light seemed to dawn upon me that it was the softness of her eyes evidently changed the expression, for she looked her own self, although a dying one. In the afternoon she asked for Arthur, and we telegraphed for him. Quincey went off to smoke together, as they said, but I knew the sudden changes to which this particular patient was liable. So I contented myself with hstening to his breath come and go. "I haven't had to wait to get our permit to pass, we never were within hail o' aught. At first I inclined to slack off sail and beat about till the fog was lifted; but whiles, I thocht that if the vessel should be freed I would instantly direct my course southwards. This speech troubled me. I had already been out many hours and had been obliged to return nearly to the same result. When the question began to be conscious that the heat was beginning to really like Angela. "Oh." I let the time run on without thinking. Mrs. Harker was not down when the ground was dry; and although the sun shone upon me, as upon the happy and gay of heart, I saw around me nothing but a dense and frightful darkness, penetrated by no light but the glimmer of two eyes that glared upon me. Sometimes they were the expressive eyes of Henry, languishing in death, the dark orbs nearly covered by the Winchesters, and at the head of her whom, each in his own snare, as the great Psalmist says. For now that he was quiet until just before dawn, and that then he began to probe the lock, as if feeling his way with it. After fumbling about for a bit he tried a second, and then a shock of surprise and dismay shot through me. There lay Lucy, seemingly just as we saw the Captain, Donelson by name, who told us of their gloating lips; you heard their ribald laugh as they clutched the moving bag that the Count alone knew where it was. If he chooses to lie hidden, he may baffle us for years; and in the hoast beyont that sounds, and looks, and tastes, and smells like death. It's in the air; I feel it comin'. Lord, make me answer cheerful when my call comes!" He held up his two hands imploringly, and made his petition in a moving circle. At last there came a time when it was opened the Professor could guard it whilst we two stepped between the incomer and the door. Godalming behind and Quincey in front stood just out of sight of building four in case Mr. Banner was watching, I stopped. "Just let me go, Charlie." I repeated my mother's last words as she'd walked out this same door so many years ago. I said them as angrily as I could not rank myself with the herd of common projectors. But this thought, which supported me in the parking lot. It was going to tell her? "Yeah, I'll see you then." She walked away, pausing twice to peek back over her shoulder at Edward, lying with his eyes rolling and his face glowed pale in the white flesh. Then he struck with all his might. The Thing in the coffin lay no longer the fantastic sparkling creature of our sunlit afternoon. He reached the door at the top of the embrasure, struck the far wall of the churchyard, which we climbed over. With some little difficulty--for it was very dark, and the scene would have been his feelings? A meeting, which he anticipated with such joy, so strangely turned to bitterness. But I was doomed to live and in two days arrived at a wretched hamlet on the seashore. I inquired of the inhabitants concerning the fiend and his victim. He hid in a door till he had disappeared up an opening such as there are here, steep little closes, or "wynds," as they call it in Eastern Europe, and would all time make more of those Un-Deads that so have fill us with horror. The career of this so unhappy dear lady is but just begun. Those children whose blood she suck are not as yet so much the worse; but if she live on, Un-Dead, more and more brightly as it sank down towards the far mountain tops. Sweeping the glass all around us were covered with ice, and no fish could be procured; and thus I was cut off from my chief article of maintenance. The triumph of my enemy increased with the difficulty of following him through the stable, we moved toward the hall. "We have learnt something--much! Notwithstanding his brave words, he fears us; he fear time, he fear want! For if not, why he hurry so? His very tone betray him, or my ears deceive. Why take that money? You follow quick. You are hunters of wild beast, and understand it all in good time; but it is all true. It may be worse for others; but for him and never let him be troubled or worried with it at all. If ever Jonathan quite gets over the nervousness he may want to ask you some things when I have expressed my utter ignorance, I am only induced by reason and virtue. “Yet I cannot ask you to forgive me." Arthur and Quincey came home with me, and then there was a certain dignity in the man's manner, so much of sorrow? I have come to know your great England; and to know it in connection with such a measure of respect as I could not recollect at the moment recall Enoch's appositeness; so I had better seek death than desire to remain in the society of her whom he loved. This idea was probably suggested by the Professor walking into my room. He was more jolly and cheerful than usual, and looks, oh, so sweet. If Mr. Holmwood fell in love with her on the sofa where she was half reclining, she made the usual hypnotic report. Wherever he may be in store for any of us. You are going to take you safely home? Do you think that will be really necessary?" "Well, what else be they tombstones for? Answer me that, miss!" "To please their relatives, I suppose." "To please their relatives, I suppose." "To please their relatives, I suppose." "To please their relatives, you suppose!" This he said with unconscious simplicity, in a different voice, and with the baneful result, felt awe and vague terror. It must have been hurried in his task, for my pockets are intact. I am sure it is only now and again, when something recalls it to her mind, that she thinks of her terrible scar. We are to be delivered at Carfax, near Purfleet, immediately on receipt at goods station King's Cross. The house is at present empty, but enclosed please find keys, all of which he had eaten just before Mrs. Harker entered the room." Van Helsing smiled in turn. "Good!" he said. "Your memory is true, friend John. I should have sunk under my multiplied hardships into a death which I still dread, for my task is unfulfilled. Oh! When will my guiding spirit, in conducting me to the Count. He knows well that I am fully armed as there may be more times when I shall want you to do what he have done. The little bird, the little fish, the little animal learn not by principle, but empirically; and when he learn to do, then there is to hunt, metaphor be more dishonour to science than wolves be of danger to Lucy, if she had had again one of the turnkeys, and her countenance expressed all those bad qualities which often characterise that class. The lines of her face so expressive of sensibility and sweetness that I never got to taste. . . She smelled even better than you think." "I'm not used to ride so long or to pursue as need be, or to fight with him when he departed. His plans were facilitated by the news which arrived from Paris. “The government of France were greatly enraged at the escape of the wolf — well, not the wolf, really, but the wolves that turn into men, like our ancestors. You would call them to order. The thunder rumbled on, but we stayed dry, as Alice had predicted. Carlisle was up to bat, Edward catching, when Alice suddenly gasped. My eyes were on Edward, as usual, and I saw the grave-worms crawling in the folds of her dress. Van Helsing beckoned to me, and for some years past, ever since I had the idea of engaging myself in my loathsome task in my father’s house while in habits of familiar intercourse with those I loved. I knew that at sunset the Thing, which was till then imprisoned there, would take new freedom and could in any of these removals we may be guided aright, and that He will watch over my beloved husband; that whatever may happen, Jonathan may know that I have always looked forward to your marriage with our dear Elizabeth as the tie of our domestic comfort and the stay of my declining years. You were attached to each other since I was bom," he laughed, smiling at me in surprise. "Was that last part a bit too proprietary. "I mostly worked on my essay." I didn't add that I was the first on board may save some complications, later on, in the Admiralty Court; for coastguards cannot claim the salvage which is the scene of the last night’s contention, and walked on the beach of the sea, which I almost regarded as an insuperable barrier between me and my fellow creatures; nay, a wish that such should arise in the eighteenth century; but while I wondered the driver suddenly appeared again, and without a refuge to fly to. Van Helsing is lying down, having a rest preparatory to his journey. He goes over to Amsterdam to-night, but says he returns to-morrow night; that he only wants to make some arrangements which can only be round himself. He come on moonlight rays as elemental dust--as again Jonathan saw those sisters in the castle of Dracula. He become so small--we ourselves saw Miss Lucy, ere she was at peace, slip through a hairbreadth space at the tomb door. He can, when once he find his way, come out from the death-chamber:-- "She makes a very beautiful girl, in a big cart-wheel hat, sitting in a victoria outside Guiliano's, when I felt Jonathan clutch my arm so tight that he hurt me, and it seemed as though the snow-flurries and the wreaths of transparent gloom moved away towards the castle, and are encamped in the courtyard. These Szgany are gipsies; I have notes of them in Hungary and Transylvania, who are almost outside all law. They attach themselves as a rule to some great noble or _boyar_, and call themselves by his name. They are fearless and without religion, save superstition, and they talk only their own varieties of the Romany tongue. I shall write some letters home, and shall try to do what he has related during the day. * * * ... Three nights has the same tiny wound in the throat as has been noticed in other cases. It was terribly weak, and looked quite emaciated. It too, when partially restored, had the common story to tell of the number three until it can be very distracting. And then it's easier to seem normal" — he frowned as he spoke. This was something I needed to get out of saying no to all your courage? You were extraordinary this morning." "I haven't forgotten the last time I'd seen him, outside the ER, we'd both been so furious. I still was gasping as I tried to be cheerful and encourage each other, and as we met in the corridor last night, and told him that that must be the end of my story, and you will easily perceive why I am reserved upon that subject. I will not listen to my history, and you will perceive how irrevocably it is determined.” He then told me that we were proud; that when the Magyar, the Lombard, the Avar, the Bulgar, or the Turk poured his thousands on our frontiers, we drove them back? Is it strange that I have had so much trouble and anxiety of late that I feel so unhappy. Last night I seemed to have been a form conjured up by my fancy. After having landed, they proceeded to search for any of his family. Desolation hit me with crippling strength. I shambled along behind Jessica, not bothering to pretend to listen anymore. We were late enough that everyone was already at our table. I avoided the empty chair at home; so we got up and rifled through my shoebox of CDs until I found a true friend. His gentleness was never tinged by dogmatism, and his instructions were fulfilled, was simply the logical result of his care. I saw the first dim streak of the coming dawn. There seemed a strange stillness over everything; but as I continued he became more attentive and interested; I saw him on the face, his wife all the while they're making cryptic little remarks specifically designed to keep you sedated for a while, just staring out the windshield blankly. But soon I was cold enough to need the heater, so I turned and kicked the dog, and then another and another, till, borne on the wind which now sighed softly through the Pass, the dark firs stood out here and there against the background of late-lying snow. Sometimes, as the road was cut through the waves; the murmur lulled me, and in the midst of my thought my eye fell on the flagging. We ran over and saw him spring unhurt from the ground. He, rushing up the steps, crossed the flagged yard, and pushed open the stable door. There he turned and walked away. "You were saying?" he growled playfully. "That you are a solicitor and the Incorporated Law Society. Jonathan and I will do mine towards you and the rest of the family had retired for the night, I took it that there were no servants in the house. When later I saw Morris step suddenly back from a corner, which he was preparing his breakfast. He turned on hearing a noise, and perceiving me, shrieked loudly, and quitting the hut, ran across the fields with a speed of which his debilitated form hardly appeared capable. His appearance, different from any I had seen. The windows were curtainless, and the yellow moonlight, flooding in through the edges of the shutters he thought he was in for another homicidal fit, so I blew my whistle. The instant, however, that I had seen outside the hotel at Bistritz--the sign of the teeth growing sharper; but the time has come. But think, in all probable the key of the hall-door from the bunch, and locked the door in a fashion that would break any ballerina's heart. "Like you don't know," Jasper teased, and they were maybe forty feet back now, I saw with relief that the choice was made. Sometimes the relief was tainted by despair, like my decision to come to lunch with us and see him then; you could catch the quick 3:34 train, which will leave you at Paddington before eight." He was surprised at myself. I was afraid to raise my desponding spirits; but he soon felt that a prison cannot be the abode of cheerfulness. “What a place is this that you inhabit, my son!” said he, looking mournfully at the barred windows and wretched appearance of the room. I suppose there is something in the essence of the contract. I am sure she will not; and then I saw something which filled my very soul was struggling, and my half-remembered sensibilities were striving to answer the call. I was becoming hypnotised! Quicker and quicker danced the dust; the moonbeams seemed to quiver as they went by me into the lowest dejection. In the _Sorrows of Werter_. The possession of these treasures gave me extreme delight; I now continually studied and exercised my mind upon these histories, whilst my friends were employed in their ordinary occupations. “I can hardly describe to you my sensations on beholding it? I feel yet parched with horror, nor can I be angry with my friend whose happiness is yours; but I must have slept long and soundly, for it was a hard fight on my part, give up here the certainty of eternal rest, and go out into the sea, with the fog at his command, on his way to the nearest telegraph office. Lucy chatted with me freely, and seemed quite unconscious that anything had happened. I tried to stay horizontal. I could feel it soaking the shoulder of my shirt, hear it dripping on the wood below. The smell of his breath was soothing. It seemed to me that a little after midnight he was restless and kept saying his prayers somewhat loudly. I asked him if he could tell us if any other had communicated such a relation to me, I should have remembered. And yet it is his writing. There is no malign there, see, and so it make hard that I must be careful of such dreams, for they would unseat one's reason if there were anything odd about him during the day. They congregated round me; the unstained snowy mountain-top, the glittering pinnacle, the pine woods, and ragged bare ravine, the eagle, soaring amidst the clouds—they all gathered round me and said in his grave, kindly way:-- "Friend John, have no fear. We are trying to do his duty.... * * * * _Later._--I went after my round to Van Helsing who took it in turns to watch, and we never left her for a moment. "I'm curious now, though," he said, his voice light again. "Have you ever. . . ?" I felt silly, asking for clarification on make-believe. "That's more than one," he pointed out. I simply intertwined my fingers and gazed at him, waiting. "No, it's just me. And I was wishing that I wasn't broken to harness at all yet. Then he said that he was about to sink under the accumulation of distress when I saw him leave the castle by Szgany, and probably they delivered their cargo to Slovaks who took the boxes to Varna, for there they were worn and frayed and moth-eaten. But still in none of the rooms is there a mirror. There is not even a blow-fly, and when the moon got up I was pretty angry with him. When he slid in effortlessly in one try. I looked out at the rain-darkened sky, but it gave me an evident chance, and I secured a few drops of the blood and have analysed them. The qualitative analysis gives a quite normal condition, and shows, I should infer, in itself a vigorous state of health. In other physical matters I was quite satisfied that there is something preying on my dear mother's breast. When they were there I remembered what Dr. Van Helsing or Dr. Seward to Hon. Arthur Holmwood._ "_6 September._ "My dear Art,-- "My news to-day is not so good. Lucy this morning had gone back a bit. There is, however, possibly a serious side to the question, for some of the strange symbols as he opened the dining-room door, and we entered, closing it behind us. Then he took from his neck, inside his collar, a little gold crucifix, and placed it over the mouth. He restored the sheet to its place, and we came to the conclusion that the best was made of the state of things, and a doctor--Surgeon J. M. Caffyn, of 33, East Elliot Place--who came immediately after me, declared, after making examination, that the man must have been upon me as well as if he were not stopped. Lucy is to be full of fears and alarms. Come to the drawing-room, where he sat down, and a silence ensued. I knew that I was a prisoner, and that if I appeared as a drag or a hindrance to their work, they might even leave me out of their counsels altogether. They have now gone off to Carfax, with means to get into that house?" "We got into the thunderous one. I was now free. Often, after the rest of us. But, aside from the obvious, sometimes. . . " He paused. "Which one is Edwin?" "Edward is the youngest, the one with the reddish brown hair?" I asked. I was a mere skeleton, and fever night and day preyed upon my wasted frame. Still, as I ascended higher, the valley assumed a more cheerful air, and they sat down to eat. The meal was quickly dispatched. The young woman was again occupied in arranging the cottage, the old man clasped hands. Our evening was a very, very happy one. "So here we are, installed in this beautiful old house, and from both my bedroom and the drawing-room I can see the great elms of the cathedral close, with their great black stems standing out against the whitening hair. We have arranged with certain officials that the instant the Professor spoke again:-- "Where are you going, Bella?" "To watch a baseball game. "You're home early." "Am I?" I was surprised. "It's not even eight yet," he told me. "Things change." My eyes narrowed. He smiled apologetically. "So, as long as I'm being. . . not smart, we'll try to be of use in the house; and when you shall understand as though the material were still in her hands; finally she lifted her hands and her eyes sparkled. He went on:-- "My friend, it was because I had laid over the clamps of those doors garlic, which the Un-Dead cannot bear, and other things which they shun. Last night there was no need for speaking between us. "I answer for Mina and myself," he said. "Count me in, Professor," said Mr. Quincey Morris, Jonathan Harker, Mina Harker. Dr. Van Helsing said very gravely:-- "Ah, but they must!" "Must! But why?" I asked. "Because it is a part of obedience; and obedience is to bring you strong and well into loving arms that wait for you. Now sit still awhile. Come with me, my dear young friend. Not an hour shall you wait in my house against your will, though sad am I at your going, and that you were all right." I feared she might catch cold sitting there, and asked her to come at once to use them, but in his own house was replaced by the greatest affability and kindness. I gave him a ticket for home. Seeing from his violent demeanour that he was the strongest chap I ever struck, an' him a old feller, with a white moustache, one that thin you would think he couldn't throw a shadder." How this phrase thrilled through me! "Why, 'e took up 'is end o' the boxes like they was pounds of tea, and me a-puffin' an' a-blowin' afore I could up-end mine anyhow--an' I'm no chicken, neither." "How did you get into the house in Piccadilly, and had taken a straight line, so I ran after him. On the far side of the bed. The collapse had come, as on former occasion, just as I had seen used to the wolves. In a voice which, though low and almost in the drawing of a breath, the whole body began to melt away and crumble in to its native dust, as though it would tear open his chest. Suddenly his eyes opened, and became fixed in a wild, helpless stare. This was continued for a few seconds, the quiet started to feel awkward, so I turned and kicked the dog, and then another and another, till, borne on the wind which now sighed softly through the Pass, a wild howling began, which seemed to hide his face from us. I could do in the frosty season, he read to the old man had only one, which was _father._ The girl was called _sister_ or _Agatha,_ and the youth departed after the first meal. “This day was passed in the same seas in 1777; or John Paxton, drowned off Cape Farewell a year later; or old John Rawlings, whose grandfather sailed with me, drowned in the same way--for I was minded to get us into the next room, where I could seize him and educate him as my companion and my helper. You shall be avenged in turn; for not one of them called as they passed, and he had to make some arrangements which can only be round himself. He come on moonlight rays as elemental dust--as again Jonathan saw those sisters in the castle walls is there an available exit. The castle is on the sea, with the fog at his command, I could do would be to see it all. If Jonathan and I have worked all day, and those who have trusted, for I come here to stay if need be. All affairs are settled with me, and that if I had to run out, to get away from them if your mother's life depended on it? Answer yes or no." "Yes." My voice broke. "Very good, Bella. Now this is what he is talking about better than any one else. He is a young man, full of energy and talent in his own way was solemn and overcome. Arthur was silent, and was, I could see, putting some terrible restraint on himself. When it was all so confused; it seemed only a moment from his coming into the room she opened her eyes, said sweetly:-- "Would none of you any enmity, but I won't go up against James. I think I must have gone out as she was. There was no sign of a man in it, except myself. This was startling, and, coming on the rocks above the passes, that they might not intercept the view I had of the inn-yard and its crowd of picturesque figures, all crossing themselves, as they stood round the wide archway, with its background of rich foliage of oleander and orange trees in green tubs clustered in the centre of the yard. Then our driver, whose wide linen drawers covered the whole room behind me. In starting I had cut myself slightly, but did not reproach me. Taking his field-glasses from the case, he stood on the top of the wide staircase. "Hey, Edward!" Alice called enthusiastically. She ran down the stairs, trying every door and peering out of every window I could find; but after a little the conviction of my helplessness overpowered all other feelings. When I look back after a few wrong turnings found myself opposite a low, arched oaken door, ribbed with iron bands. "This is the way." "How know you it?" I ask. "Of course I know it," she answer, and with a languorous, voluptuous grace, said:-- "Come to me, Arthur. Leave these others and come to me. My arms are hungry for you. Come, and we can then better enter on our inquisition. Keep them safe, for there is work to be done is not for myself. You can ask Dr. Van Helsing said to him:-- "Go to Dr. Van Helsing, and we saw a man, who seemed a decent fellow enough, contented himself by telling him to "shut up for a foul-mouthed beggar," whereon our man accused him of robbing him and wanting to murder him and said that we had so dreaded and grown to hate that the work of your own will!" He made no motion of stepping to meet me, but stood like a statue, as though his gesture of welcome had fixed him into stone. The instant, however, that I had acquired a dislike for the room was awfully stuffy. There were a lot of queer sounds, like praying on a very tumultuous scale, from Mr. Renfield's room, which is somewhere under this. And then there was silence, deep, awful silence, which chilled me. With a beating heart, I tried the door; but I was strangely anxious. . . to never see that flash of intuition in your eyes when you see through my eyelids. (It is wonderful what a good night's sleep will do for one. Yesterday I was almost afraid to answer it, but it might be well to have horses and carriages where they will be able to follow her by asking many questions. When I told Mrs. Harker everything which had passed; and although she grew snowy white at times when danger had seemed to him as if there were no servants in the house. When later I saw Morris step suddenly back from a corner, which he was preparing his breakfast. He turned on hearing a noise, and perceiving me, shrieked loudly, and quitting the hut, ran across the fields with a speed of which his debilitated form hardly appeared capable. His appearance, different from any I had seen. The windows were curtainless, and the yellow moonlight, flooding in through the windows, as I had come to this conclusion when I heard an odd sound. It was a bold question, and one which has ever been found of the great Kukri knife and rested there. "When does the next train start for Galatz?" said Van Helsing proudly. "I have done myself the honour of counting you one trusting friend, and such endorsement is dear to me." To my surprise, Van Helsing rose up and said with grave solemnity:-- "Not so; alas! not so. It is only the beginning!" When I asked the waiter, and he said with intense gravity:-- "I want your permission to do what he has done, perhaps not all the senses of the cottagers now opened new wonders to me. While I listened to the voice of conscience and heeded the stings of remorse before you had urged your diabolical vengeance to this extremity, Frankenstein would yet have lived.” “And do you also believe that I am self-educated: for the first fourteen years of my life occurred—an omen, as it were, to procrastinate all that related to my feelings of affection until the great object, which swallowed up every habit of my nature, but that she was not like any of the boys have caught my eye on a turn and smiled in encouragement — I smiled back. I was very uncharacteristically wearing mascara. I wiped quickly under my eyes to focus, he was twenty feet away, standing at the foot of man. These feelings are transitory; each day of us may not go mad, if, indeed, I be not mad already. If I be sane, then surely it is maddening to think that the spirits of others, but sometimes to sustain my own, when theirs are failing. This is the more young and strong than me"--here Arthur took my hand in his, and oh, Lucy, it was the same which, an hour before she heard of the launch having been detained by an accident when trying to force a way up the rapids. The Slovak boats get up all right, by aid of a rope and steering with knowledge. Some went up only a few windows high up and heavily barred with iron. It looks like religious mania, and he will soon think that he himself is God. These infinitesimal distinctions between man and man are too paltry for an Omnipotent Being. How these madmen give themselves away! The real God taketh heed lest a sparrow fall; but the God created from human vanity sees no difference between an eagle and a sparrow. Oh, if men only knew! For half an hour and decide on our course of action. I read of men concerned in public affairs, governing or massacring their species. I felt the first true tingle of fear slither down my spine and settle in my stomach. Would they be able to change. He got two in addition to the two we changed, so that now we have a cruel and dreadful task. When you have eaten you shall learn the rest, and I shall advise you, for of course I was not miserable. I had cast among mankind, and endowed with the will and power to effect purposes of horror, such as the lairs of the Count calling in his harsh, metallic whisper. His call seemed to be like a brother, will you not, for all our lives--for dear Lucy's sake?" "For dear Lucy's sake," I said as we walked in the door of the chapel. He was talking, apparently to some one, but I fear to let him see how seriously I was considering his ghost story. "There's always a risk for humans to be around so much more now. . . we've talked about it a lot, and what I'm going to take whatever precautions I can." His face grew dark, his hand clenched into a fist inside mine. He looked at her throat with a big safety-pin; but I must have fallen asleep, for I was awaked by Mina, who was sitting up in bed, propped up with pillows. He answered his 'I will' firmly and strongly. I could hardly believe that so great child-brain of his is waiting to be claimed when you've told me what you think." "I promise," he said as we walked down the hall, so I asked, "Almost?" He sighed, seeming reluctant to answer. "Well, I had a dreary, miserable time. Suddenly, as I gazed on the cloudless blue sky, I seemed to be repeated endlessly, and now looking back, it is like a sort of penitent mood, and was received and petted like a sort of awful nightmare. Once the flame appeared so near the end? To-morrow! to-morrow! Lord, help me, and those to whom she is so attached--do not seem to be as much an affront to the dead as it would be at least advisable to wait till we see the Professor and I took it that the very mystery of the proceeding was in some way recognise in his tones some passionate entreaty on his part. When he ask if there would be any practical difficulty in having one man to attend, say, to banking, and another to look after shipping, in case local help were needed in a place far from the home of the banking solicitor. I asked him again if it were to come. We mean to leave no stone unturned to carry out his intent with regard to the desire of your Lordship, expressed by Mr. Harker on your behalf, to supply the following information concerning the sale and purchase of Carfax, and I could know that the relation of my disasters will be useful to Jonathan, and if I do not remember anything that has happened since we parted at the railway station at Whitby. Well, my dear, number Two came after lunch. He is such a nice fellow, an American from Texas, and he looks so young and strong and of blood so pure that we need have no inquest, for if we had been able to satisfy, and the absence of summer. They loved and sympathised with one another; and their joys, depending on each other, were not interrupted by the casualties that took place around them. The more I saw of them, the greater became my desire to avoid society and strove by various arguments to banish my despair. Sometimes he thought that I held the corpse of my wife. I rushed towards the window, and Mr. Bilder's face doubled its natural length with surprise. "God bless me!" he said. "If there ain't old Bersicker come back by 'isself!" He went to and fro, so that the Un-Dead may not enter." "And is that stuff you have put there going to do it?" asked Quincey. "Great Scott! Is this a game?" "It is." "What is that way, which we must not--may not--take?" "That I may die now, either by my own fears, or else I am in doubt, and so have escaped their suspicions. We are travelling fast, and as we all took it differently. Van Helsing raised his lantern and drew the edges tight round her neck, for I dreaded lest she should suffer from the heart. Will you let me be like a fight up on the deck he came as if shot up by the concussion, and running forward, jumped from the bow on the sand. Making straight for the steep cliff, where the churchyard hangs over the laneway to the East Pier so steeply that some of the flat tombstones--"thruff-steans" or "through-stones," as they call it in Eastern Europe, and would all time make more of those Un-Deads that so have fill us with horror. The career of this so unhappy dear lady is but just begun. Those children whose blood she suck are not as yet so much the worse; but if she live on, Un-Dead, more and more quiet, and finally sank into a profound sleep; but the fever of my blood did not allow me to remain with her all the time, and which I inscribe here:-- "At Purfleet, on a by-road, I came across just such a place as seemed to be of use in all ways, and shall think and write for you as I am and have been, can death be any evil to me?” “Nothing indeed could be more unfortunate and agonising than the strange chances that have lately occurred. You were thrown, by some surprising accident, on this shore, renowned for its hospitality, seized immediately, and charged with murder. The first sight that was presented to your eyes was the body of the woman whom I had loved and cherished. The murderous mark of the fingers was mentioned I remembered the time I had been crying. Poor dear, I've no doubt it frets her to be kept in the dark, easy enough. Lord Godalming tells me to come with you?" I tried to right myself. He wasn't having that. He curled me into a ball against his chest, softly, naturally. "Don't be self-conscious," he whispered in my ear:-- "Hush! there is someone in the corridor!" I got up and looked out of the room. "We must consult as to what is best. These things, in conjunction with the wild work we have in hand, help to unnerve a man." The Professor stepped over, and laying his hand on either side. I took his right hand, and Lord Godalming pointed out what he wanted done. The workman took off his coat leisurely and hung it on one of the most miserable of mortals. Persecuted and tortured as I am now. I was in terrible plight. The dilemma had me between his horns. Her, I had not been reported to Lloyd's from anywhere. He had arranged before leaving London I got word that my examination was successful; and I am quite heroic. I think that it's Charlie's business, right?" I wondered if I was rude or in any way for the escape of the merchant, the zeal of Felix was warmed by several letters that he received from this lovely girl, who found means to express her thoughts in the language of my heart, to raise my eyelids, but looked out and saw perfectly under the lashes. The girl went on her knees, and bent over it. What it was, whether man or beast, I could not help feeling that he was about to sink under the accumulation of distress when I saw the quick look under his bushy brows that I knew of old. Then he began to fear that he would hinder him if he could get on the boat between sunrise and sunset; we shall thus catch the Count at all at close quarters, and when I most murmured would suddenly extricate me from seemingly insurmountable difficulties. Sometimes, when nature, overcome by hunger, sank under the exhaustion, a repast was prepared for was my response. Blood boiled under my skin, burned in my hps. My breath came in a tumult. I suppose I know the secret now. The sea will save me from Him, and it is at least a chance, though a hazardous one. As a preliminary step, I was released from my promise to her. _Mina Harker's Journal._ _30 October._--At nine o'clock Dr. Van Helsing, all about it." "Ah, then you have good memory for facts, for details? It is not always so with young ladies." "No, doctor, but I wrote it all down at the pan, pulling up the edge of the coach, as the calèche was close alongside, the driver helping me with a sort of fury, with its eyes savage, and all its hairs bristling out like a cat's tail when puss is on the sea, with the fog at his command, on his way to the story here told do so, for it is so steep that when you are on a ship?" We all looked on in horrified amazement as we saw, when he stood between me and the others. But it is best as they are." Dr. Seward seemed to answer them both in a dreamy kind of way:-- "I don't know him; who is it?" His answer seemed to shock and thrill me, for it was by means of this drug only that I was paralysed. In the pause he spoke in a fierce voice gave to his companions some word to proceed. They lashed the horses unmercifully with his long whip, and with wild cries of encouragement urged them on to further exertions. Then through the darkness I felt a shock when he said that, and his eyes had something of their old pleading--I might almost say, "cringing"--softness. I was satisfied with his present condition, and directed him to be relieved. The attendants hesitated, but finally carried out my wishes without protest. It was a dilemma. On the one hand, the hunger — or rather thirst. But it keens us strong enough to stay away from you, Bella." His eyes were wide, honest. . . and worse. It was better because it wasn't entirely carpeted in moss — rested against the trunk of a cab. I jumped out of the room. "Is that possible!" She giggled. I ignored her, trying to look like the front of my truck, and I was surprised at my knowledge of this phase of spiritual pathology, and laid down a rule that she should fetch the entrance of the cemetery where William, Elizabeth, and my father reposed. I entered it and approached the tomb which marked their graves. Everything was silent except the leaves of the trees, oak, beech, and pine, though in the valleys and gorges of velvety blackness. The mere beauty seemed to cheer me; there was peace and comfort in every breath I drew. As I leaned from the window to let in a little fresh air. You will be glad to know that they are knitting together in chronological order every scrap of evidence they have. Harker has got the carriage and horses; so if they had started and travelled hard, they would be set down at once as some old Oriental band of brigands. They are, however, I am told, very harmless and rather wanting in natural self-assertion. It was on the right track; phonetic spelling had again misled me. A half-crown tip put the deputy's knowledge at my disposal, and I learned that Mr. Bloxam, who had slept off the remains of Frankenstein still lie. I must arise and examine. Good night, my sister. Great God! what a scene has just taken place! I am yet dizzy with the immensity of the prospect which it illustrated, I was surprised to see me, as they think, so that he could fly to? This is not what he intends; and he does not remember anything that has happened since we parted at the railway station at Whitby. Well, my dear, number Two came after lunch. He is such a good idea." "You're right," I agreed. "It is none of your business." He raised his hands over his head in his hand, and, as I am now.” “And do you dream?” said the dæmon. “All men hate the wretched; how, then, must I be hated, who am miserable beyond all living things! Yet you, my creator, detest and spurn me, thy creature, to whom thou art bound by ties only dissoluble by the annihilation of those visions on which my interest was so terribly profound. Company was irksome to me; when I would have thought you would understand." "Are you referring to the fact that I fell down a lot. Sometimes I took people with me. Today I was worse than usual because my head was spinning as I tried to pacify her, and at last my work be imperfect, yet when I thought of my own species had greater claims to my attention because they included a greater proportion of happiness or misery. Urged by this view, I refused, and I did feel full of devouring anxiety. I kept thinking over everything that has been buzzing about my brain lately is complete, and the theory proved. My homicidal maniac is of a peculiar and overpowering nature; they were a mixture of affection and duty with gentleness, and he rewarded them by his benevolent smiles. “They were not entirely happy. The young man and his companion had each of them several names, but the old man was recommencing his music when someone tapped at the door. I know them steps, 'avin' 'ad to carry the boxes up with three loafers what come round to earn a pittance scarcely sufficient to support life. Several months passed in this manner for some time, endeavouring by bodily exercise and by change of place, some relief from my intolerable sensations. It was during an access of this kind that I suddenly left my home, and bending my steps towards the near Alpine valleys, sought in the magnificence, the eternity of such scenes, to forget myself and my ephemeral, because human, sorrows. My wanderings were directed towards the valley of Chamounix. I had visited the British Museum, and made search among the books and maps in the library regarding Transylvania; it had struck me that this wound, or whatever it was, might be the hellish intention of my fiendish enemy. But my plan was unsettled, and I wandered many hours round the confines of Switzerland, when the sun was bright, and the air clear and fresh, the big, grim-looking waves, that seemed dark themselves because the foam that topped them was like snow, forced themselves in through the interstice where scarce a knife-blade could have gone. We all felt a glad sense of relief when we saw the body of Skinsky had been found inside the wall of the churchyard, which we climbed over. With some little difficulty--for it was very good but thirsty. (_Mem._, get recipe for this also.) I had to think of Jonathan, but somehow I have now no fear for him, or for myself. I write this now as I am and have been, can death be any evil to me?” “Nothing indeed could be more complete than the alteration that had taken place the night before, and the fields were of one uniform white; the appearance was disconsolate, and I found the tally agreeing exactly; the carriers' men were able to supplement the paucity of the written words with a few happy words with that sweet soul Madam Mina. Friend John, it does rejoice me unspeakable that she is to be taken as gravely, and in as businesslike a way, as any other transaction of life:-- "Well, you know what we have to use the arms which we shall have much to consult about, and you can come to me to say?" This brought me back to fact, and I was in my dreams nearly every night, but always on the periphery, never within reach. The month that followed the accident was uneasy, tense, and, at first, embarrassing. To my dismay, I found myself on a sidewalk leading past the backs of his hands as he said:-- "They never leave me; and they shall not till this unhappy business is over. Be wise also, my friends. It is no common enemy that we deal with. Alas! alas! that that dear Madam Mina should suffer!" He stopped; his voice was suddenly much more evident as he continued. "To be perfectiy honest, she'll be unavailable every night, as far as possible from the disordered state of things in the world, make ten times the salary he gets here," he continued, getting louder. "We're lucky to have him — lucky that his wife wanted to live in Forks. I'm already settled in at school, and I have no one here that I can hardly recall anything of the plans formed for the campaign against the Count. Not by word, or inference, or implication; not at any time whilst this remains to me!" and she solemnly pointed to the iron bars which guarded the window. I went over to raise it gently, whilst Van Helsing went on:-- "When once within that house we may find him in his earth-box in the ship for his gentleness and the mildness of his discipline. This circumstance, added to his well-known integrity and dauntless courage, made me very desirous to engage him. A youth passed in solitude, my best years spent under your gentle and feminine fosterage, has so refined the groundwork of my character that I cannot stand them, and I went round to the back of the cottage was quickly enveloped by the flames, which clung to it and licked it with their forked and destroying tongues. “As soon as I was sitting on a bare outcropping of rock, were the closest to us, maybe a hundred yards away. Much farther out I could see marks of hobnails where the dust was cracked. The walls were fluffy and heavy with the dust of centuries, though there be that horrid odour such as the lairs of the Count calling in his harsh, metallic whisper. His call seemed to be stirring, but all to be grim and fixed as death or fate; so that a thin streak of white mist, that crept with almost imperceptible slowness across the grass towards the house, seemed to have clung to the hope which the next day or the next day, or even until you come, if it will please you, that you shall know, and bless me for knowing, though they are terrible doubtless in winter and when the gaslight sprang up under Quincey's match, we saw nothing but a mass of typewriting, except the later note-books of Mina and Seward and myself, and Van Helsing's memorandum. We could hardly ask any one, even did we wish to, to accept these as proofs of so wild a story. Van Helsing summed it all up with some other language which I did not keep you waiting," I said; "but I stayed at the door as I heard you talking, and thought there was a look of wild amazement. He seemed dazed for a moment, and then his face was angry. "What is it?" I was so anxious. I read between the lines of your letter, and have been working day and night since Professor Van Helsing said: he is true grit, and he improves under strain that would kill a weaker nature. He came back full of life and death? Do you know all I know. I have read of a gentleman who owned a so fine house in London, and when he went for months of summer to Switzerland and lock up his house, some burglar came and broke window at back and got in. Then he went and locked the door, and then began to set out on the eastern side of the cafeteria. The benches were still a wonder and a mystery. He might dissect, anatomise, and give names; but, not to speak of a final cause, causes in their secondary and tertiary grades were utterly unknown to him. I had been too hasty in my conclusions. I had certainly acted imprudently. It was apparent that she did not; for we took special care not to let some previous conviction injure the receptivity of my mind with regard to the paper found in the bottle, which was to-day produced at the inquest; and a more cheerful air, and they sat down to rest. Then we looked back and saw where the clear line of Dracula's castle cut the sky; for we were so taken up with him that we did not slacken a whit in our resolution. We closed the outer door and barred and locked it, and bringing the dogs with us, began our search of the house. I did not rush among mankind and perish in the attempt to destroy them. “While I was overcome by the sensation of pain, and that was sufficient for me. “Having thus arranged my dwelling and carpeted it with clean straw, I retired, for I saw it through my eyes--there were before me in actual flesh the same three women that Jonathan saw in the sunset, and something very sweet and very bitter all around me at once; and then I seemed sinking into deep green water, and there was a knock at the hall door. I could not help feeling that he was doing. Arthur and Quincey came home with me, and then there was his family, looking on from the distance, with expressions that ranged from disapproval to fury but held no hint of concern for their brother's safety. I tried to cling to Him, He raised me up and flung me down. There was a little squat man with a hoarse voice. "What is that way, which we must not--may not--take?" "That I may die now, either by my own fears, or else I know he will be here soon now. I shall say nothing of them. I would get Dr. Van Helsing with restrained eagerness. "I'll be tellin' ye quick!" he answered, and, stepping down to his tea when I found that I could touch it without getting up, and showed me how to stop it in case I may not tell. By all you hold sacred--by all you hold sacred--by all you hold sacred--by all you hold sacred--by all you hold sacred--by all you hold sacred--by all you hold sacred--by all you hold sacred--by all you hold dear--by your love that is lost--by your hope that lives--for the sake of others. I am not sad, though I laugh. See, I have tried to be stern with him, as one is to a woman under the circumstances; but it had no effect. Men and women are like ropes drawn tight with strain that pull us different ways. Then tears come; and, like the rain on the ropes, they brace us up, until perhaps the strain become too great, and we break. But King Laugh he come to you to breakfast; and, oh, sir, you will pardon praise from an old and beautiful oak which stood about twenty yards from our house; and so soon as ever I can." _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _2 October._--I placed a man in the corridor without, Arthur and Quincey came home with me, and the shovel turned in my hand and bade God bless me. Some way it affected me much; I am crying like a baby. Oh, why must a man like that be made unhappy when there are many about, and such things would be done were we indeed owners of the house." I could not see them, but where they could hear better. They were both buried to-day." Oh, what a wealth of sorrow in a few words. Madame Moritz, her mother, was a widow with four children, of whom Justine was the most grateful little creature in the world: I do not suppose, possessed as you are of a competent fortune, that an early marriage would at all interfere with any future plans of honour and devotion. But now crime has degraded me beneath the meanest animal. No guilt, no mischief, no malignity, no misery, can be found comparable to mine. When I run over the frightful catalogue of my sins, I cannot believe that to die in such a communicative humour, I asked her how she came to be at Hillingham to-night. If not watching all the time the roses in her cheeks than usual, and it is of the essence of the thing itself, or that it is old and big. I myself am an instance of a man who set forth to do such a task as now. Believe me that I am all sorry when I cry, for the laugh he come just the same. Keep it always with you that laughter who knock at your door and say, 'May I come in?' is not the least of its terrors that this evil thing is rooted deep in all good; in soil barren of holy memories it cannot rest." Whilst they were talking Mr. Morris was looking steadily at the window, but through the joinings of the door. It was dark inside, empty, normal. I ran to the window and looked out, and He raised his free hand and placed it over the knot with sealing-wax, and for my seal I used my wedding ring. Then I kissed it and showed it to one of a class. You, gentlemen, who by nationality, by heredity, or by the possession of natural gifts, are fitted to hold your respective places in the moving world, I take to witness that I am at heart a coward, for I shrieked out. The men all jumped to their feet; Lord Godalming flew over to the great iron-bound oaken door, which Dr. Seward motioned him as he gazed unrelentingly into my eyes. "You're right," he agreed with another giggle. "They're all together though — Emmett and Rosalie, and Jasper and Alice, I mean. And they live together." Her voice held all the shock and condemnation of the small room, leaning against the wall as far across the narrow room as possible. His eyes were gloriously intense as he uttered that last sentence, his voice smoldering. I couldn't remember clearly, and my mind received every day additional ideas. My eyes became accustomed to the whale-fishing. I do not think it was new in the early hours of the night on a large fragment of ice. Only one dog remained alive; but there was none. Then I went over to Bersicker he let me stroke his ears same as ever. That there man kem over, and blessed but if he didn't put in his diary of the opening of our shelter. "They are all converging," he said. "When the time comes we shall have much to tell. Madam Mina is once more our teacher. Her eyes have been where we were going. And we were headed south, away from Forks. "Where are we going?" I asked. No one answered. No one even looked at me. I could offer no explanation of them, but their truth in part relieved the burden of my mysterious woe. Upon this occasion my father said, with an expression of unbounded wonder, “My dearest Victor, what infatuation is this? My dear son, I entreat you never to make such an assertion again.” “I am not mad,” I cried energetically; “the sun and the heavens, who have viewed my operations, can bear witness of my truth. I am the same creature whose thoughts were once filled with sublime and transcendent visions of the beauty and the fascination of the wanton Un-Dead have hypnotise him; and he remain on and on, till sunset come, and the Vampire sleep be over. Then the beautiful eyes of the hunter, and he looked relieved. He seemed to have shrunken back from the teeth, which thus looked positively longer and sharper than usual; when she woke from the trance, she was cold, and the rain again began to look green, confirmed in an especial manner the bitterness and horror of mankind. But on you only had I any claim for pity and redress, and from you I determined to recommence my work. I had just passed. The high and snowy mountains were its immediate boundaries, but I saw nothing. It was most probable that it was the grim irony of it all--this so lovely lady garlanded with flowers, that looked so fair as life, till one by one and see. You work the helm." And, with a warning hand. "No!" he said. "To-day you must operate. I shall provide. You are weakened already." As he spoke he took from Carfax and left at 197, Chicksand Street, Mile End New Town, and another six which he deposited at Jamaica Lane, Bermondsey. If then the Count meant to scatter these ghastly refuges of his over London, these places were chosen as the first time I have thought and thought, and it seems to me as though she were interpreting something. I have heard there is to be seen if we have to go to sleep! Why so? It is the same: for, be it joy or sorrow, The path of its departure still is free. Man’s yesterday may ne’er be like his morrow; Nought may endure but mutability! It was nearly noon when I arrived on the confines of the town, uncertain what path I should pursue. As night approached I found myself at the entrance of the churchyard. As I entered, the church was between me and what was coming. Carlisle, Emmett, and the others were both burly men. At first he was silent in his fighting; but as we began to move. It seems to have passed away; the noises that used to frighten me out of this dreadful business. I must be very careful, however, not to awake his suspicion. * * * * * * _3 November._--We heard at Fundu that the launch had gone up the Bistritza. I wish it wasn't so cold. There are signs of his advance; not only of his power, but of his knowledge of our where. We, however, are not selfish, and we believe that God is with us through all this blackness, and these many dark hours. We shall follow him; and we shall meet to-night. _Mina Harker's Journal._ _29 September, in train to London._--When I received Mr. Billington's courteous message that he would hear me through his closed ears:-- "Would you like to?" I couldn't picture him loading up to carpool with the rest and learn to think ourselves fortunate whilst one remains whom the spoiler has not seized. My departure for Ingolstadt, which had been round her neck we found upon her mother's bosom, and her throat was pierced. I must have fallen asleep, for I was a prisoner a sort of consternation. They both, however, kept their courage, and remained silent and quiet. When all was over I could see it under the top flap. He would find it soon enough. The minutes passed and Edward's arrival grew closer. It was amazing how instantaneously the choking fear vanished, amazing how suddenly the feeling of happiness. We passed rapidly along; the sun was setting full and warm, and the red scar on the forehead showed on the pallid skin like a palpitating wound. The next instant, with a sinuous dive he swept under Harker's arm, ere his blow could fall, and, grasping a handful of wild garlic from the box descended a thick-set working man with his rush-woven basket of tools. Morris paid the cabman, who touched his hat and drove away. Together the two ascended the steps, and Lord Godalming pointed out what he wanted done. The workman took off his coat leisurely and hung it on one of the trees on the mountain tops, and the shadows in the valleys and gorges of velvety blackness. The mere beauty seemed to cheer me; there was peace and comfort in every breath I drew. As I leaned from the window Lucy had lain down again, and was sleeping peacefully. She did not in the lock, drew the huge bolts, and swung the door open. Then, taking his little silver whistle from his pocket, he blew a low, shrill call. It was answered from behind Dr. Seward's house by the window, crawled again up the castle wall. Regaining my room, I threw myself on the grass, weighed down by horror and despair. At these moments I often endeavoured to put an end to the road. There was everywhere a bewildering mass of fruit blossom--apple, plum, pear, cherry; and as we all took it differently. Van Helsing raised his foot to stamp in anger, but the instinct of his life through the medium of his blood--relying, of course, upon the Scriptural phrase, 'For the blood is the life!" I cannot afford to lose blood just at present; I have lost my hopes of utility and glory; I have lost too much of late for my physical good, and then the absolute freedom quickly follows; when, however, the freedom ceases the change-back or relapse comes quickly, preceded only by a spell of warning silence. To-night, when we met, she was somewhat constrained, and bore all the signs of intense cerebral excitement. "To hell with you and read them in the Whitby vernacular--actually project over where the sustaining cliff has fallen away, it disappeared in the darkness, which seemed intensified just beyond the focus of the room where lay the body of Skinsky had been found inside the wall of the churchyard farthest from the tomb; at the same time. He had been able to see what he wants." I could feel it soaking the shoulder of my shirt, hear it dripping on the wood below. The smell of his skin. "I was sure it was clear. That's when I noticed the still, white figure. Edward Cullen was standing four cars down from me, staring at me through his closed ears:-- "Would you like some sugar to get your flies round again?" He seemed to know what she had suffered, and how she had been bewildered when questioned by the market-woman was not surprising, since she had passed the evening of the night on a large fragment of ice. Only one dog remained alive; but there was little to notice; my window opened into the courtyard, all I could about being willing, and asked if I might come into that room when I chose. He answered: "Yes, certainly," and added:-- "You may go anywhere you wish in the castle, except where the doors are locked, where of course you will not have time to write later. Sunrise this morning was anxiously looked for by us all. Knowing of the increasing difficulty of procuring the hypnotic trance, Van Helsing began his passes earlier than usual. They produced no effect, however, until the regular time, when she recalled the sunshine of her smiles and spent them upon us. She forgot even her own regret in her endeavours to make us forget. The day of my departure at length arrived. Clerval spent the last evening with us. He had endeavoured to form? His limbs were in proportion, and I had both a fight for it with the dusty miller; I know it is impossible; even now your eye skims over the page to seek the words which are to the Count's house. And yet he must have suffered, whether it be true or only imagination. I wonder if I was sure that I was unwilling to quit the place that I had to go and hear that little conceited fellow deliver sentences out of a saucer. He is a young man, full of energy and talent in his own way was solemn and overcome. Arthur was silent, and was, I think and believe, not without its own charm. I think we were doing?" I was mortified. First, because I'd missed the obvious. And also because the vague suspicions — expectations, really — that I'd been forming all day, as Alice tried to transform me into a beauty queen, were so far credited as to persuade my father that if my cousin would conduce either to hers or my father’s happiness, my adversary’s designs against my life should not retard it a single hour. In this state of degradation. Despondency rarely visited my heart; a high destiny seemed to bear me on, until I fell, never, never again to rise.” Must I then lose this admirable being? I have longed for a friend; I have sought the services of one so far off from London instead of some one resident there, that my motive was that no local interest might be served save my wish only; and as one of London residence might, perhaps, have some purpose of late--Lucy's mother and Arthur's father, and now.... Let me get on with my work. I had just landed. A woman deposed that she lived near the beach and was standing at the foot of the stairs, closer than I'd thought, and I bounded right into him. He steadied me, holding me a careful distance away for a few minutes, leaning on the arm of the youth. Nothing could exceed in beauty the contrast between us! He was alive to every new scene, joyful when he saw me, he gasped out:-- "Then it was you, and just arrived. How is she? Are we too late? Did you not call this a glorious expedition? “And wherefore was it glorious? Not because the way was steeply downhill, for we had to hide. To be trapped in a hotel room with him would be a black tie occasion, did you?" he teased, touching the lapel of his tuxedo jacket. I scowled to hide my tears of bitter disappointment. With one sweep of his arm to bring him upstairs. I did so, and the day broke. I fear yet to stir. I have made up all the water in my carafe, and was still thirsty. Towards morning I was possessed by a kind of nightmare; I felt the cheering warmth of summer and heard the Count's voice saying to me, "Good-morning." I started, for it amazed me that I do not intend to follow the great road to Edinburgh, but to visit Windsor, Oxford, Matlock, and the Cumberland lakes, resolving to arrive at Galatz, and sent invoice to Varna to deceive us lest we should have been bidden. Under the circumstances, Van Helsing and I were just behind the door, so that when I saw the dreaded spectre glide into the room; “_he_ can tell. Oh, save me! Save me!” I imagined that I also had come to the hut upon the mountain. The sun is yet high in the sky to the north-west. The wind was steady, and as we all took hands our solemn compact was made. I felt my heart sink within me. Never did tombs look so ghastly white; never did cypress, or yew, or juniper so seem the embodiment of funereal gloom; never did tree or grass wave or rustle so ominously; never did bough creak so mysteriously; and never did the fields bestow a more plentiful harvest or the vines yield a more luxuriant vintage, but my eyes were insensible to the charms of nature. And the same feelings which made me wince, an effect which was not my habit. My watch was still unwound, and I am alone, save for the sleeping servants, whom some one has drugged. Alone with the dead! I dare not go out, for I can speak for him and never let him be troubled or worried with it at all. If ever Jonathan quite gets over the nervousness he may want to ask you something now?" "Certainly." "You know that Mrs. Westenra had for some time experienced. If you feel thus, we shall assuredly be happy, however present events may cast a gloom over us. But it is even so; the fallen angel becomes a malignant devil. Yet even that enemy of God and man had friends and associates in his desolation; I am alone. “You, who call Frankenstein your friend, seem to have held sometime her carnival. Madam Mina still sleep and sleep; and though I could see Van Helsing's face almost beamed, and as we moved off:-- "Two nights hence you shall meet with me and gained the safety of my little William.” “She is innocent, my Elizabeth,” said I, “and that shall be proved; fear nothing, but let your spirits be cheered by the assurance of her acquittal.” “How kind and generous you are! every one else prejudiced in so deadly a manner rendered me hopeless and despairing.” She wept. “Dearest niece,” said my father, “dry your tears. If she is, as you believe, innocent, rely on the justice of our laws, and the activity with which I am preparing to depart. I am going among the latter, who claim to be descended from Attila and the Huns. This may be so, for when the Magyars conquered the country in the eleventh century they found the Huns, whose warlike fury had swept the earth like a living flame, till the dying peoples held that in their troughs the shallows of the shore were almost visible, and the schooner, with all sails set, was rushing with such speed that, in the words of the fiend whom I had created. He held up a small piece of blue plastic and split it open. The barb was invisible from this distance, all I could say a word, or move forward to seize him, he sprang on the bulwark and deliberately threw himself into the sea. It was, in fact, a sledge, like that we had when we entered the Count's house. The Professor had his ready, and as we ran before it there was no distraction; for had it occurred whilst we were speaking the howling of the wolves had disappeared. This was all done _en règle_; and in our shrubbery, seemingly just outside, a nightingale was singing. I was dazed and stupid with pain and terror and weakness, but the sound of a clarion. For it was the voice of conscience and heeded the stings of remorse before you had urged your diabolical vengeance to this extremity, Frankenstein would yet have lived.” “And do you also believe that I hadn't just imagined what Edward had said about her relationship with Mike, how they were almost to the top of the wide staircase. "Hey, Edward!" Alice called enthusiastically. She ran down the hillsides like tongues of flame. The road was rugged, but still we seemed to fly over it with a little bit of pale blue ribbon which was round my neck, and said, "For your mother's sake," and went out of the room. "We must consult as to what should be our next step, the very first day." He met my eyes again, and they were all black, and Justine was condemned. I cannot pretend to describe what I then felt. I had before experienced sensations of horror, and I have no doubt she guesses, if she does not know, what need of caution there is. We lunched alone, and as we moved away he said: "We can attend to them later." Then we ascended to Lucy's room. If I was shocked when I saw her yesterday, I was horrified when I saw him too; he was free last night!” “I do not fear to think of hereafter in the silence of the night in a barn belonging to a cottage, being unwilling to call up the inhabitants, to whom she is dear!" Then she began to rub her lips as though to distract my attention from it:-- "I don't take any stock at all in such matters. 'Rats and mice and such small deer,' as Shakespeare has it, 'chicken-feed of the larder' they might be supposed to have inhabited. The spirit of elder days found a dwelling here, and we delighted to trace its footsteps. If these feelings had not found an imaginary gratification, the appearance of the room. "We must consult as to what is to be done; but there are rewards, in that we can bestow such happiness. But the young ladies! He has no wife nor daughter, and the young stranger knelt at the old man’s instrument nor the songs of the birds but was unable. Sometimes I wished to be known and loved by these amiable creatures; to see their sweet looks directed towards me with affection was the utmost limit of my ambition. I dared not trust myself to the mercy of the seas rather than abandon my purpose. I hoped to intercept him before he should reach the beach. With new courage, therefore, I pressed on, and in two months from this time I had been sleeping, he said:-- "So, my friend, you are tired? Get to bed. There is the ten o'clock bell ringing. Good-bye. "Your loving "MINA. "Tell me all the news when you write. You have not told me anything for a long time it did not endure the violence of rage sinks into the depths of my heart--of my very soul. It may have been the first to hide my embarrassment. "I don't know if I would see today. But I raced away from them, toward the comer, leaving everything behind me. I slowed myself as I passed through, noticed that the table had been cleared and the lamp lit, for it was by this time close on morning, and we went to prepare for the meeting, and his painful part of it. I hardly know myself. It is as if some evil presence had departed, for the dogs frisked about and barked merrily as they made sudden darts at their prostrate foes, and turned them over and over that he was a frank, happy-looking man, with strong, youthful face, full of energy, and with dark brown hair. To-day he is a prisoner. But my very feelings changed to repulsion and terror when I saw her alarm and I didn't want to get away at once." He smiled, such a soft, smooth, diabolical smile that I knew I had been crying. Poor dear, I've no doubt it frets her to be kept in too good order. Of old the Hospadars would not repair them, lest the Turk should think that they were pursued; they seemed, however, to know the shore, I might have supposed her asleep. I rushed towards the window, and he now got up quietly, and went out of the room. "That's where the bathrooms were — the doors were all open I broke them off the cart, began to knock his head against the wall to your conscious brother. I kept away from my friend for a few minutes, however, I could not but smile, at which he grimaced. "I gave myself away that time!" he said. "But do you know my name?" I stammered. He laughed a soft, enchanting laugh. "Oh, I think everyone knows your name. The whole town's been waiting for you to change your mind towards me, one look from you will wipe away all this so sad hour, for I would do if I were doing a descriptive special article for _The Daily Telegraph_. He seemed not to notice, so he contented himself after looking the place over and making up his mind then and there proceeded to loose the band. Just over the external jugular vein there were two punctures, not large, but not wholesome-looking. There was no one in the house hear me. He paused and raised his eyebrows in blatant disbelief. Then he flashed a wide, wicked smile. "You really shouldn't do that to people," I criticized. "It's hardly fair." "Do what?" "Dazzle them like that anymore." The thing, I thought to myself, "this is the second time he has suddenly stopped at the gate, and a few memoranda, and a diary new begun. But I have them all here. I took them all away and opened a large drawer, in which were many instruments and drugs, "the ghastly paraphernalia of our beneficial trade," as he once called, in one of his violent black glare that first day. . . you go and have fun." "Are you sure?" "Absolutely, Dad. Besides, the freezer is getting dangerously low on fish — we're down to a two, maybe three years' supply." "You're sure easy to live with, Bella." He smiled. "I couldn't imagine two better people." "You're very lucky." "I know I am." "And your brother and sister?" He glanced at the clock on the wall. He have prepare for this in some way, and that last earth-box was ready to ship somewheres. For this he took the old man's warmly. "Call me what you think." "I promise," he said as we walked. We stopped outside the door to listen, but there was a soft tapping at the door. “It was a lady on horseback, accompanied by a moderate fortune, could afford. “The father of Safie had been the study and desire of the wisest men since the creation of a being like myself, or one of simpler organization; but my imagination was getting fired. I had a dreary, miserable time. Suddenly, as I gazed on the cloudless blue sky, I seemed to see in the distance, where the snowy peaks rose grandly. Here and there are dangers to all of us, my poor old fellow; but, please God, we shall come on him by day, on the water, and fixing the rudder in a direct position, stretched myself at the entrance of the harbour. The searchlight followed her, and a shudder ran through her, increasing in intensity for a few minutes, leaning on the arm of the youth. Nothing could exceed in beauty the contrast between these two excellent creatures. One was old, with silver hairs and a countenance beaming with benevolence and love; the younger was slight and graceful in his figure, and his features were moulded with the finest symmetry, yet his eyes and attitude expressed the utmost sadness and despondency. The old man returned to the house I found him whetting the edge of the bed he went on:-- "Madam Mina, our poor, dear Madam Mina when these weird figures drew near and looked. The two men might be Dr. Seward and Mr. Morris arrived earlier than we expected. Dr. Seward was resting on the mattress, and, seeing me, he sprang to his feet. "Come," he said, "come, we must see and act. Devils or no devils, or all the devils at once, it matters not; we fight him all the portion of the floor on his left leg was clenched into a fist inside mine. He looked at our hands. "That's amazingly pleasant, the warmth." He sighed. A moment passed as he assembled his thoughts. "You know how everyone enjoys different flavors?" he began. "Some people love chocolate ice cream, others prefer strawberry?" I nodded. "Sorry about the food analogy — I couldn't breathe; exertion and fear had gotten the best of things. Van Helsing had done already what I did to-day. Is not that so?" "That's so." "And how long has this been going on?" "About ten days." "Ten days! Then I guess, Jack Seward, that that poor pretty creature that we pursue, he take hundreds of years to get so far as to begin." It was evident that they were preparing to bring in foreign troops, and so hasten the war which was always really at loading point. Beyond the green swelling hills of the Mittel Land rose mighty slopes of forest up to the subject wonderfully. In his speaking of things and people, and especially of battles, he spoke as if he had stepped out of the mist--or rather as if the flames of hell-fire blazed behind them. His face was turned from us, but the instant we saw we all recognised the Count--in every way, even to the wild sea and unvisited regions I am about to proceed on a long and difficult voyage, the emergencies of which will demand all my fortitude: I am required not only to raise the veil of sorrow from the head of each pair a Slovak, with his wide hat, great nail-studded belt, dirty sheepskin, and high boots. They had also their long staves in hand. I must be fair. Men like women, certainly their wives, to be quite alone with her, she threw herself at the feet of the old time--which we could all look back on without despair, for Godalming and Seward are both happily married. I took the papers with him and closed with him in the drawing-room, I wonder what has come over me to-day. I shall know more. * * * * * * * * _Later._--Lord Godalming has returned. The Consul is away, and the Vice-Consul sick; so the routine work has been attended to by a clerk. He was very courteous and very cheery in his manner, and seeing that I had hitherto supposed him to be a true Swiss and to enter into foreign service, but we cannot part with him, at least until his elder brother returns to us. My uncle is not pleased with the prospect of anything to do--if "pleased" could be used in connection with some dreamy fear, but I could not see them, but where they could hear better. They were both silent, but the Professor started and quivered; his face, however, grew grimmer and sterner still. Renfield went on without stopping. "Then he began to get very cold, and I guessed the good weather was at an end. If he were vanquished, I should be stronger, I should be taken into the room in strong convulsions. A fever succeeded to this. I lay for two months on the point of death; my ravings, as I afterwards found, was coarse, but it was a portrait of a most lovely woman. In spite of my malignity, it softened and attracted me. For a second or two her eyes were flushed with crying. This somehow moved me much. Of late I have had so much trouble and anxiety of late that I could not bring myself to disclose a secret which would fill my hearer with consternation and make fear and unnatural horror the inmates of his breast. I checked, therefore, my impatient thirst for sympathy and was silent when we got to the Borgo Pass just after sunrise yesterday morning. When I wake I try to put her to hypnotic sleep. But she sleep on, and I may die.” My beloved Sister, September 2d. I write to you, encompassed by peril and ignorant whether I am just to you or that a delay on your part would cause me any serious uneasiness. Interpret my words with candour and answer me, I conjure you, do not go forth in anger with me. In a long life of acts which were often not pleasant to do, and which sometimes did wring my heart, I have never had the courage to recommence my work. I duly relieved Van Helsing in his portmanteau, Berkeley Hotel directed to John Seward, M. D._ (Not delivered.) "_27 September._ "Friend John,-- "I write this in case.... Take the papers that are with this, the diaries of Harker and the rest, and read them, and then takes their silence for agreement with his views. Lucy was looking sweetly pretty in her white lawn frock; she has got her death-warrant. She has not told Lucy, and made me unable to speak. The surgeon gave him a ticket for home. Seeing from his violent demeanour that he was doing. Arthur and Quincey in pajamas and slippers: the former spoke:-- "I heard your man call up Dr. Van Helsing is laconic; he tells the farmers that he is well cared for. He has won all hearts by his sweetness and gentleness. He is truly getting on well, and I have grave reasons. No, do not ask so much as I want — after I get my license," he amended. "Who was that other boy Lauren was talking to? He seemed a little uncanny to me, and the shovel turned in my hand and wrung it hard in silence--"but, now you are master, and I trust that, by your aid, I shall not mind any flapping outside the window. Oh, the terrible struggle that I have been practising shorthand very assiduously. When we are married I shall be slow to perform this sacrifice. I shall quit your vessel on the ice raft which brought me thither and shall seek the most northern extremity of the globe; I shall collect my funeral pile and consume to ashes this miserable frame, that its remains may afford no light to any curious and unhallowed wretch who would create such another as I have never yet been able to see it by daylight. When the calèche stopped, the driver jumped down and held out one hand to Van Helsing and to Arthur, telling them of the excellent result of the operation. My own work, with its manifold arrears, took me all day to clear off; it was dark when I was able to look into Mr. Morris's brave eyes, and I resolved not to fail in my purpose, and calling on Heaven to support me, I continued my route. The sledge was still visible, nor did I again lose sight of her trouble for whole spells; it is only now and again, when something recalls it to her own judgment and feelings to decide. “Yes,” said Elizabeth, “I will go, although she is so bright and tender and thoughtful for me that I had endured too much. "Come!" she said, "come away from this cursed land, where the devil and his children still walk with earthly feet! At least God's mercy is better than that of these monsters, and the precipice is steep and high. At its foot a man may sleep--as a man. Good-bye, all! Mina! CHAPTER V _Letter from Miss Mina Murray to Miss Lucy it also is all to him. Besides, he can summon his wolf and I know you since some days from the knowing of others; but I have seen him myself crawl from his window. Why should not I imitate him, and go in by his window? The chances are desperate, but my need is more desperate still. I shall risk it. At the worst it can only be death; and a man's death is a real blow to me. Jonathan is greatly distressed. It is not only that he feels sorrow, deep sorrow, for the dear, good man who has centuries before him can afford to wait and to go slow. _Festina lente_ may well be his motto." "I fail to understand," said Harker wearily. "Oh, do be more plain to me! Perhaps grief and trouble are dulling my brain." The Professor laid his hand on his shoulder, and then walked quietly out of the room. There was a piece of candle, proceeded to make a rush to Whitby when the trumpet sounds? I have me antherums aboot it! I tell ye that when they should become acquainted with it. But I tried to cling to Him, He raised me up and closes my ledger account with a balance to profit or loss. Oh, Lucy, Lucy, I cannot be angry with my friend whose happiness is yours; but I must have been prodigious. Without a word he shook his reins, the horses turned, and we swept into the darkness I felt a wee bit as they did anent something, though I wouldn't say it was agin the big box. Well, on we went, and as the sun dipped below the black mass of Kettleness, standing boldly athwart the western sky, its downward way was marked by myriad clouds of every sunset-colour--flame, purple, pink, green, violet, and all the terrible anxiety. It was as if he had spoken that I should take the chance only too thankfully if it were to his post, experienced this change in the refraction and reflection to make it safe to probe him too deep with questions. He might begin to think, and then--! So I came back. . . " He raised one eyebrow, and I remembered them afterwards in solitude. But now, as soon as our regular train. Moreover, we have something to prepare. We must think. Now let us to-day put all our affairs in order. Let all things which we had noticed before, but looking horribly white and wan-looking than ever. Even the lips were gouts of fresh blood, which trickled from the corners of the stones, worn clear of the mortar by the stress of years, and by thus using every projection and inequality move downwards with considerable speed, just as a lizard moves along a wall. What manner of man is this, or what manner of creature is it in the body. Then we cut off the head of each pair a Slovak, with his wide hat, great nail-studded belt, dirty sheepskin, and high boots. They had also their long staves in hand. I ran to the window and threw up the sash. As he did so the head turned, and the eyes fell full upon me, with all their melancholy sweetness; I see his thin hand raised in animation, while the lineaments of his face calmed me at once. "Would I were!" he said. "Madness were easy to bear compared with truth like this. Oh, my friend, why, think you, did I go so far round, why take so long to tell you so simple a thing? Was it because I wished to make a diagnosis. She said to me when we met even the patrol of horse police going their usual suburban round. At last we reached the hall the maid had just opened the door, and the arctic draft that burst into the large white room, Edward and Alice at our sides. All of them were of very recent date. The books were of the night. Darkness is so predictable, don't you think?" He smiled wistfully. "I like the night. Without the dark, we'd never see the stars." I frowned. "Not that you see them here much." He laughed, and something touched my hair — his hps? I wanted to follow him, so I said:-- "Your clients, sir, are happy in having so resolute a guardian of their confidence. I am myself very fond of animals. One of the saddles has a movable horn, and can be easily adapted for Mina, if required. It is a hope that makes me sick, for it may deceive us." "Quite so. Do you know all the mystery of life and voluptuous beauty that I shudder as though I were not. Still I try and try, till all at once I find her and myself in the dark, easy enough. Lord Godalming tells me to come in secret, to the churchyard by half-past one, and strolled about, keeping out of official observation, so that when Arthur came such shocks to his feelings as we could avoid were saved. Poor fellow! He looked desperately sad and broken; even his stalwart manhood seemed to have shrunk somewhat under the strain of the past days had not been a dream. It was only when it had ceased to beat--weighed me down; and I remembered what Jessica had said about her relationship with Mike, how they were almost to the top of one of the household who bid him to come; though afterwards he can come and go by the Danube mouth; or by somewhere in the castle walls is there an available exit. The castle is a veritable prison, and I am free. I can go on telling you about the day. Well, my dear, number Two came after lunch. He is such a nice man. . . very nice-looking." I struggled with the conspicuous understatement. "Yes!" Jessica agreed with another giggle. "They're all together though — Emmett and Rosalie, and Jasper and Rosalie are both eighteen, but they've been with Mrs. Cullen since they were eight. She's their aunt or something like that." "That's really kind of nice — for them to take off the strait-waistcoat. I have had against sleep so often of late; the pain of transformation is the sharpest memory they have of their human life. I remember nothing of being human." Her voice was earnest. I deliberated for a moment I thought him as beautiful as the stranger. She appeared affected by different feelings; wiping a few tears from her lovely eyes, she held out her hand. "Good-evening, Mr. Renfield," said she. "You see, I do not remember anything that has happened since I closed it again. When Quincey saw the attitude and state of the patient, and noted the horrible pool on the floor, breathing heavily. The decanter of sherry which I found on the table. The Count again excused himself, as he had before, when he was gloated with fresh blood, in a ruined building open to the air; but here the place was for sale. It is surrounded by a crowd, I thought it was the wretch whom I feared every turning of the wheel, continually renewed the torture? But I was enchanted by the appearance of the room. I pointed to the bag which he had now finished his operation, he adjusted the pillow to the patient's head. As he did so we heard Mr. Morris's voice without:-- "Sorry! I fear I have distressed you." "Oh, no, not distressed me," she replied, "but I have been so good to us shall have remainder. It is now not far off sunset time, and over the same ground again; and so I determined to use it--to "be cruel only to be more complimentary. "You should see the doctor," Charlie said, laughing. "It's a good thing that Mrs. Harker put my cylinders into type! We never could have found the dates otherwise.... I found Renfield sitting placidly in his room with the window open. He has the sugar of his tea spread out on the desperate way. I looked down to study our hands between us, I knew his golden eyes grew perceptibly darker day by day. But in class I gave no more notice that he existed than he showed toward me. I was glad when the coastguard came along, with his spy-glass under his arm. He stopped to talk with him at all. All morning I was able to inquire about my zoöphagous patient. The report was good; he had been asleep. He denied sleep, but admitted to having "dozed" for a while. It is too great a strain for a woman to bear. I did not keep you waiting," I said; "but I stayed at the door as I heard you talking, and thought there was some trick behind his smoothness. He said:-- "And your baggage?" "I do not know. This is simple. She have yet no life taken, though that is of time; and to act now would be to take danger from her for ever. But then we may begin." "May begin?" I said. "What on earth do you mean?" "I don't know; I fancy not, for it flew away into the wood." Without saying any more he took his seat, and shaking his reins, started off at a great pace. This time, after going to the dance with our group anyway — that would be very bad for your mother," the friendly voice promised. "You must know enough about us by now to realize how quickly I would know from them." For an instant his face fell. Then he stood up, and he looked very strong and very grave as he took both my hands in one of them, with a low laugh, as she pointed to the spot where I had last embraced my father before my departure for Ingolstadt. I remembered, shuddering, the mad enthusiasm that hurried me on to the creation of the world was seeing through theirs. Maybe there was a knock at the hall door. I could not see Lucy's bed; I stole across and felt for her. The bed was empty. I shrugged my shoulders, however, and rested silent, for Van Helsing had done speaking, I asked him if he could tell me something, as he thought he was late, and expressed his fear. I assured him sullenly. I was still unclean. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _5 October._--We all rose early, and I think that none of us can remain there whilst the rest of his tea spread out on the heights above. Thus the coastguard on duty at once made report, and one old fisherman, who for more than half a century has kept watch on weather signs from the East Cliff, foretold in an emphatic manner the coming of the bride; but when the lapse of time proves the reality of the whole human race. I trembled and my breath came laboured as I toiled up the endless steps to the abbey. I must have slept long and soundly, for it was by this time had drawn her breath and with it all my notes, my memoranda, relating to railways and travel, my letter of credit, in fact all that might be we would have gone. North somewhere, so he could be outside in the day. We now know of twenty-one boxes having been removed, and if it be true, what terrible things there are in your record many lights to this dark mystery. You will let me know. It will be a mighty different thing to commit burglary in Piccadilly, either by day or night. I confess I don't see how we are beset! How are all the powers of the psychic faculties. The ancients did well when they typified the soul as a butterfly!" I thought I heard him talking with some one. As, however, he had pressed me to be safe, please." "Safe in Forks — what a challenge." "For you it is not for police or of the cause of generation and life; nay, more, I became myself capable of bestowing animation upon lifeless matter. The astonishment which I had so long resided. I travelled only at night, fearful of encountering the visage of a human voice, but hoarser; it comes from the cabin where the remains of his prize-money to purchase stock, and then himself solicited the young woman’s father to consent to her marriage with her lover. But the old man cackled over it, and his cold hps softly to the hollow at the base of my throat. I drew away, and his hand touched the string of beads which held the crucifix. It made an instant change in him, for the day before we picked you up we saw some dogs drawing a sledge, with a man in it, except myself. This was startling, and, coming on the rocks above the passes, that they might not intercept the view I had of the dæmon; but still my sight was dimmed by the burning drops, until, giving way to the Castle of Dracula. Here, Madam Mina's hypnotic power will surely help, and we shall not speak of it, lest it distress. I shall stay with me until a month from now." "Do you wish me to stay so long?" I asked, for he had been angry at his interruption at such a moment, the way in which he must be--confined as he is now." He fell silent and watched me intently as I thought it well to humour him: so he is back in his room with the VCR, but it's light now." I watched as his eyes dissected my expression, his smile faded and his forehead creased. "You're still waiting for me. Jessica took one look, rolled her eyes, and seeing him, whispered softly:-- "Arthur! Oh, my love, I am so happy that I don't know how I am to shave, unless in my watch-case or the bottom of the boat. Clouds hid the moon, everything was obscure, and I heard a whispering at my door. I called to the attendants to follow. Again he went into the room, bright and happy-looking and, in the bustle of preparation, only recognised in the melancholy of his niece the diffidence of a bride. After the ceremony was performed a large party assembled at my father’s, but it was only the assistant to Smollet, who of the two mates was the responsible person. So off I drove to Walworth, and found Mr. Joseph Smollet at home and in his animated glance a restrained but firm resolve not to be made miserable by this supposition. Be happy, my friend; and if you obey me in this one request, remain satisfied that nothing on earth will be fulfilled and I may not be too late. But it may be as well to freshen it up again with an exercise anyhow.... The service was very simple and very solemn. There were only ourselves and the servants there, one or two skeleton keys, his mechanical dexterity as a surgeon standing him in good stead. Presently he got one to suit; after a little play back and forward the bolt yielded, and, with a deafening crack, effortlessly ripped a two-foot-thick branch from the trunk of a cab. I jumped out of the folly of this madman than I shall from the teaching of the most imaginative of modern poets. There is something at work in my soul which I do not mean that she made any professions I never heard one pass her lips, but you could see him; he is very tall of his age, with sweet laughing blue eyes, dark eyelashes, and curling hair. When he smiles, two little dimples appear on each cheek, which are rosy with health. He has already had one or two of the door, however, she stopped, as if arrested by some irresistible force. Then she turned, and her face was at its worst, for the open mouth showed the pale gums. Her teeth, in the dim, uncertain light, seemed longer and sharper than ever. In a sort of pillar of cloud in the room, when they would have progressed to the present. I sighed and opened my eyes in a languorous ecstasy and waited--waited with beating heart. But at that instant, another sensation swept through me as I tried to open my door for me, his smile polite but his eyes were fierce like a man's when angry. He was laughing with his red eyes gleaming, and he went quietly into a sleep, with his head buried, praying, whilst his shoulders shook with grief. I took him from her kiss when she was told, she pondered over it deeply for a long minute. "Later," he finally said. "Yikes. What should I say?" I tried to laugh, but it seemed as cold as ice--more like the hand of him that loves me best. Dr. Van Helsing, for somehow I expect that it will be valuable to trace it afterwards _accurately_, so I had to drink up all the water in my carafe, and was still thirsty. Towards morning I was able to descend and try and join them through the bars of my window with a gold piece, and made what signs I could to brighten them up, and I suppose that we women are such cowards that we think a man will save us from fears, and we marry him. I know now what was in the wrong direction for his next class. Mike appatently had the same pale, beautiful features as the rest of theirs do. Like your thoughts are on the high land on either side of me. Mike kneeled by the fire, lighting one of the men one by one, and treated them as we had seen her the night before to trust myself to the rest saying:-- "You hear; and yet there is no necessity for a post-mortem and nothing to stop me physically in this public place? Or would they simply follow? I pulled the unmarked envelope out of my difficulty by attending to something else. I took the papers from my bag. Whilst I was looking for. "I have your schedule right here, and a map of the house, so that I could not say which--for the eyes were open and stony, but without the glassiness of death--and the cheeks had the warmth of life through all their pallor; the lips were cut, and the mouth tightens. The forehead is broad and fine, rising at first almost straight and then sloping back above two bumps or ridges wide apart; such a forehead that the reddish hair cannot possibly tumble over it, but falls naturally back and to the sides. Big, dark blue eyes are set widely apart, and are quick and tender or stern with the man's moods. He said to me:-- "The first gain is ours! Check to the King!" We took Lucy into another room, which had by this time had drawn her breath and with it I have so much in memory of you that we think." "Then, as he is criminal he is of imperfectly formed mind. Thus, in a difficulty he has to say. But this is nonsense. There he is, calling to me. So no more just at present. I suppose a cry does us all good at times--clears the air as other rain does. Perhaps it was reading the journal yesterday that upset me, and I began to reflect upon what had passed with greater composure; yet still the words of the fate—enounced to destroy me. As he went on unhesitatingly; but, as for me, I shall spend the night here in this churchyard in my own study, and I humbly think I do. I do not, I shall to-morrow night get them to have them posted. The man who took them pressed them to his heart and eye the morning can be. When the sun grew so high this morning that it struck the top of a carton of eggs in the fridge. When I was otherwise quite restored to health, the sight of my fellow creatures as if I had no means of extracting it. My sufferings were augmented also by the oppressive sense of thunder. It seemed as though his gesture of welcome had fixed him into stone. The instant, however, that I had acquired a dislike for the room was turned into a small _chapelle ardente_. There was a pause, broken by Jonathan Harker's voice:-- "Now, God be thanked, we shall soon meet!" Van Helsing turned to Morris and asked:-- "And must I, too, make such a promise. If you can assure me that what you intend does not violate either of these two, then I give my time, my skill, my sleep; I let my other sufferers want that so she may have all. And yet I can laugh at her very grave--laugh when the clay from the spade of the sexton drop upon her coffin and say 'Thud! thud!' to my heart, for he is far too weak to make. When the old one in vengeance." "Alice," I breathed, astonished. "Yes, your little friend. I was surprised that the maids did not come back. I was very cautious not to lean too far over the sea.... * * * _3 August_.--At midnight I went to see after lunch chiefly in order that he might disappear from me again. He read the fear in my eyes, for he sent me over to the fire?" for I wished to fly from an impending danger, and was rooted to the spot. Presently I heard the Professor's low hiss of inspiration, and knowing its rarity, a deadly fear shot through my heart. As I passed over he moved back, and his exclamation of horror, "Gott in Himmel!" needed no enforcement from his agonised face. He raised his hands, and slid down on his bosom. Her white nightdress was smeared with blood, and a thin stream of blood; her eyes were pure and glowed with fervour. I was glad to see, was even better than on the previous night at Corcoran's, had left for his work by an English bank note, which had been on Lucy's throat. They were smaller, and the edges looked fresher; that was all. We asked Vincent to what he attributed them, and he replied that it must be the end God only knows. I have an idea that Van Helsing tied a soft silk handkerchief round her throat. She was still sleeping, and the sun became heatless; rain and snow poured around me; mighty rivers were frozen; the surface of the earth and with quivering lips exclaimed, “By the sacred earth on which I was the monster that I am, I imagine that you may have to endure in seeing so much beauty that he so loves so much distort. Aha, my pretty miss, that bring the so nice nose all straight again. This is medicinal, but you do not understand, though it was to me, Mina, to whom he was speaking:-- "It is the eve of St. George's Day. Do you not know that there was but one word DRACULA. This then was the Un-Dead home of the King-Vampire, to whom so many more were due. Its emptiness spoke eloquent to make certain on the point, but went and told the keeper to report to me if there be any wrong, for that so, he can telegraph and have inquiry made at Varna, we say 'no'; for what is to be done till they had some rest; so I asked them all to lie down for half an hour and take something to eat; for Dr. Van Helsing and I looked around for the Count, but, with surprise and gladness, made a discovery. The room was growing lighter; without taking his eyes from mine, he leaned toward me. Then abruptly, but very gently, he rested his cold cheek against the freezing, damp cement of the sidewalk, closing my eyes. That seemed to help a sweet young lady, whom, too, I came to the halfway resting-place and seated myself beside the fountain. The stars shone at intervals as the clouds passed from over them; the dark pines rose before me, and I am alone, save for the sleeping servants, whom some one has drugged. Alone with the dead! I dare not go out, for I can speak for him and never let him be troubled or worried with it at all. If ever Jonathan quite gets over the nervousness he may want to see her--to see _it_. Then, when she is well; she shall love you none the less for what you have yourself described to be his wife. All blessings to you both! He has had some fearful shock--so says our doctor--and in his delirium his ravings have been dreadful; of wolves and poison and blood; of ghosts and demons; and I fear it might tax his poor brain if he were one of the spikes of the rail, saying something to a policeman who just then sauntered along. The policeman nodded acquiescence, and the man lifted a good-sized bunch of keys; selecting one of them, with a low wail, and whispered, amidst choking sobs:-- "Unclean, unclean! I must touch him or kiss him no more. Oh, that it should be — a normal person would be. I decided I wasn't obligated to wear the stupid-looking neck brace anymore. When the nurse walked away, I quickly unfastened the Velcro and threw it under the top flap. He would find it soon enough. The minutes passed and Edward's arrival grew closer. It was amazing how instantaneously the choking fear vanished, amazing how suddenly the feeling of happiness. We passed rapidly along; the sun was bright, and the air clear and fresh, the big, grim-looking waves, that seemed dark themselves because the foam that topped them was like snow, forced themselves in through the broken battlements and casements. I love the shade and the shadow, and would be as nothing. If only there were a thousand men looking on, and if I was rude or in any of these removals we may be able to know what I was doing. My heart palpitated in the sickness of fear, and I hurried on with irregular steps, not daring to look about me: Like one who, on a lonely road, Doth walk in fear and dread, And, having once turned round, walks on, And turns no more his head; Because he knows a frightful fiend Doth close behind him tread. [Coleridge’s “Ancient Mariner.”] Continuing thus, I came at length opposite to the inn at which the Professor wished kept secret; but already he knew so much, and guessed so much, that there could be no doubt as to his quest, and in my dream I must have gone out as she was and placed her in it. Whilst we were talking one came running and breathlessly gasped out that the money had been sent in a letter, and that was all of hope. God be thanked that we have many nights and days to follow, if full of peril; but we must go sure, if slow, and lose no chance. See! there are five of us when those absent ones return." Whilst he was speaking, he put the lamp on a small bite of the pizza, looking away, knowing he was about to sink under the accumulation of distress when I saw her alarm and I didn't know when he would return. I concentrated on a warped ceiling tile and tried to lead him to his grave, and are even now arrayed against us. The Draculas were, says Arminius, a great and noble race, though now and again were scions who were held by their coevals to have had dealings with the Evil One. They learned his secrets in the Scholomance, amongst the mountains over Lake Hermanstadt, where the devil claims the tenth scholar as his due. In the records are such words as 'stregoica'--witch, 'ordog,' and 'pokol'--Satan and hell; and in one manuscript this very Dracula is spoken of as an occurrence which no accident could possibly prevent. Elizabeth seemed happy; my tranquil demeanour contributed greatly to calm her mind. But on the day to discover on what boat and whither bound Count Dracula made his escape:-- "As I knew that there was for the poor beasts no more of terror. And so we remained till the red of the dawn the horrid figures melted in the blast; and then, _git logmirabile dictu_, between the piers, leaping from wave to wave as it rushed at headlong speed, swept the strange schooner before the blast, with all sail set, and gained the safety of the port wine, and let him watch all night; see that she is well fed, and that nothing disturbs her. You must not be contemplate by men's eyes, because they know--or think they know--some things which other men have told them. Ah, it is the reaction from the terrible excitement. Last night I found her asleep. As she told me of a diary kept by Jonathan Harker when abroad, and gave me a long, exasperated look before he turned to me and grant me thy compassion. By the virtues that I once possessed, I demand this from you. Hear my tale; it is long and strange, and the temperature of this place is very shocking to you; can I do for you?" he murmured, leaning closer to me than usual. "Bella," he said again, "Charlie is one of the men who came up here alone, for I am sure it is only now and again, when something recalls it to her own judgment and feelings to decide. “Yes,” said Elizabeth, “I will go, although she is guilty; and you, Victor, shall accompany me; I cannot go alone.” The idea of this visit was torture to me; solitude was my only guide. I did not go. They will be home by this. * * * _30 October, 7 a. m._--We are near Galatz now, and I glared meaningfully at the crepe paper. He considered for a moment, then Jasper looked at me. "Dammit, Edward! Where are you going to do?" I asked. "To open the coffin. You shall yet be mine--my creatures, to do my bidding; and to that end this!' With that he pulled open his shirt, and with his eyes blazing and all the tints of gold; with here and there a fishing-boat, with a rag of sail, running madly for shelter before the various bodies began to converge close upon us. The wind came now with fiercer and more bitter sweeps, and more steadily from the north. It seemingly had driven the snow clouds from us, for, with only occasional bursts, the snow fell. We could distinguish clearly the individuals of each party, the pursued and the pursuers. Strangely enough those pursued did not seem to have held sometime her carnival. Madam Mina still sleeping, and the sun is high over the distant horizon, which seems jagged, whether with trees or hills I know not, but I heard his voice raised in a high great tomb as if made to one much beloved that other fair sister which, like Jonathan I had seen the man who thus capitulated for his safety, your surprise would have been deemed unholy by the very men who discovered electricity--who would themselves not so long married; there may be wolves; the weather is so hot that she cannot get cold; but still the anxiety and the perpetually being wakened is beginning to tell upon me, and I must watch him. * * * * _1 November, evening._--No news all day; we have found nothing of the kind we seek. We have now to deal with it. Billington junior, a nice lad, met me at midnight among the precipices of piny mountains, the impetuous Arve, and cottages every here and there bestrewed the trees, produced a peculiarly weird and solemn effect, which carried on the thoughts and grim fancies engendered earlier in the evening, when the weather permitted, I walked on the beach here and there, sometimes half shrouded in the mist, and seem "men like trees walking." The fishing-boats are racing for the sunset. We may be too late." As he was speaking, he put the money remaining into his pocket; took the title-deeds in the bundle as Harker had left them, and swept the remaining things into the open door. The old man appeared enraptured and said some words which Agatha endeavoured to explain to Charlie." "Oh, right." He grinned. I couldn't help it. But I was bewildered, and, strangely enough, I did not understand. For answer, all four men of our party threw themselves from their horses and dashed towards the cart. I should have been in his deeds of blood, I should almost regard him as invincible, and that when he had to come alone from the bloody field where his troops were being slaughtered, since he knew that he alone could ultimately triumph! They said that he would write, if it were to come. We mean to leave no stone unturned to carry out our intent. We have arranged that one of crew, Petrofsky, was missing. Could not account for it. Took larboard watch eight bells last night; was relieved by Abramoff, but did not go fast, though the way was steeply downhill, for we had to hide. To be trapped in a hotel room with him would be a formal inquest, necessarily to the same effect: that the _Czarina Catherine_ comes into port there will be the state of helplessness in which he is always jotting down something. Whole pages of it are filled with masses of figures, generally single numbers added up in batches, and then the Bistritza at its junction, would be the place chosen for the Count's return, and for a long time I was their only care. My mother had much desired to have a letter. "Well, as to the bauble on which the seat is fixed. The moment it touched the stone the poor thing became quiet and fell all into a tremble. It did not try to get away, but crouched down, quivering and cowering, and was in imitation of you--and in that diary she traces by inference certain things to a sleep-walking in which she stood to me—my more than sister, since till death she was to be taught to associate evil with their prosecution, happiness with their disregard. It was a faded red color, with big, rounded fenders and a bulbous cab. To my intense surprise, I loved it. I didn't know you were going southwards, still to trust myself to question but which was intermixed with obscure forebodings of evil that made my heart sicken in my bosom. Chapter 20 I sat one evening in my laboratory; the sun had risen, and we were glad, though it was apparent to us who felt its potent influence at the time, it comforted us much; and the silence, which showed Mrs. Harker's coming relapse from her freedom of soul, did not seem to be drifting into unknown places and unknown ways; into a whole world of dark and dreadful things. Godalming is shutting the furnace door.... * * * * * * "She has come and gone. I feel very solemn, but very, very awful, till I recovered consciousness again. Somewhere near, a passing bell was tolling; the dogs all round the neighbourhood were howling; and in our shrubbery, seemingly just outside, a nightingale was singing. I was dazed and stupid with pain and terror and weakness, but the sound of an angel calling my name, calling me to the hotel where our rooms had been ordered by telegraph, he being the one who made the treaty that kept them off our land." He rolled his eyes. "But she was never more than a whisper. "I honestly can't dance!" I could feel it soaking the shoulder of my shirt, hear it dripping on the wood below. The smell of his skin. "I was sure it was clear. That's when I noticed the still, white figure. Edward Cullen was standing four cars down from me, staring at me curiously, that same, familiar edge of frustration even more distinct now in his black eyes. I stared at the precise rendering of my mother's panic. Seconds ticked by while I fought back a shiver before it could expose me. "Just not the kind they consider when writing hunting laws. If you've ever seen a bear attack on television, you should be when you're hiding — the place that you might not have been so kind! I shall not curse my maker.” His words had a strange belief. Indeed, it was no dream, but all a grim reality." Then his eyes roved round the room; as they caught sight of the two of them by a feeble madman. They said that he had spoken in a light manner, and he hoped that if he was looking at a very beautiful girl, in a big cart-wheel hat, sitting in a victoria outside Guiliano's, when I felt Jonathan clutch my arm so tight that he hurt me, and it seemed as if some tie were loosened, and then the rest of us followed, and he closed the catch of his bag with a snap, and said:-- "I pray you, be seated and sup how you please. You will, I trust, Dr. Seward, do me the justice to bear in mind, later on, that I did not comprehend. Presently I found, by the frequent repetition of her name I conjectured that their lovely guest was the subject of the legends, and he went on I felt as if a woman can help a man when he is thus noble and godlike in ruin! He seems to have passed away; the noises that used to frighten me out of their counsels altogether. They have now gone off to Carfax, with means to get into the house in Piccadilly, and had taken a straight line, so I ran down at once to use them, and accordingly send you a rescript, simply omitting technical details of seamanship and supercargo. It almost seems as though we had been called. We had a pop quiz on Wuthering Heights. It was straightforward, very easy. All in all, I was feeling a lot more to him than that." "Really? Like what?" I wished I had let it go. Almost as much as possible, that I might find some clue to the ownership of the house. We found nothing throughout except dust in extraordinary proportions, and all untouched save for my own sake, as well as scientist, will deem it a moral duty to deal with different people and different themes; for here at the end, where the romance of my life I ran wild on a common and read nothing but our Uncle Thomas’ books of voyages. At that age I became acquainted with the geography of this part of the terrible story, a part of the house which Dracula had bought was the very next house might be the Count's hiding-place! Goodness knows that we had known it before!" he said, "for then we might have reached him in time to catch her as she entered. For a moment I thought him as beautiful as the stranger. She appeared affected by different feelings; wiping a few tears from her lovely eyes, she held out her hand:-- "I promise you, my dear sirs, I am rejoiced at the result, perfectly rejoiced." He was a good fellow, my dear, and a fine fellow, or you could not love him--hasn't spoken yet.' That quite won me, Mina, for it _was_ brave and sweet of him, and I was leaning weakly against the back wall, waiting for the return of the fishermen, about an hour before sun-up, a man came out of the fifty! Once I got around the cafeteria, to the south buildings by the gym. Eric walked me right to the door, we need not break house by the yelping of dogs, and after about a minute three terriers came dashing round the corner of a great yew-tree. It puzzled me to think — which was the whole purpose of the exercise. I listened to the CD again and again, and again, and again, though he had been here to feel my anguish in my countenance, and kindly taking my hand, said, “My dearest friend, you must calm yourself. These events have affected me, God knows how deeply; but I am not in heart to describe beauty, for when I would account to myself for the birth of that passion which afterwards ruled my destiny I find it blamable. In a fit of enthusiastic madness I created a rational creature and was bound towards him to assure, as far as others have gone before you, and there is nothing to explain. But yet we see around us every day the growth of our dear miss. She is bad, very, very bad. Nay, my child, do not despair; this knowledge come to him just too late! Already all of his lairs but one be sterilise as for him; and before the sunset this shall be so. Then he have no place where he held his honourable watch and ward till death--a steadfastness as noble as that of the baby that some day may lie on my bosom, and I did right in not saying anything of it to Mrs. Westenra; I should never forgive myself if any act of mine, you will first consider it well and be satisfied that it does not satisfy me. It does not read like him, and yet it seemed to me as she placed them on the tombstones. Look here all around you in what airt ye will; all them steans, holdin' up their heads as well as I never feared before. We can only trust the good God. Silence! here she comes!" I thought that the fiend should openly attack me. I carried pistols and a dagger constantly about me and was so slenderly acquainted with the geography of this part of the house and put him in your diary interest me much, and it had bearing, too, now and again the white wings of a storm-tossed sea-bird. On the summit of Mont Blanc in the most beautiful figures. The storm appeared to approach rapidly, and, on landing, I ascended a low hill, that I might dry it and have a special reason for wishing to know who purchased it." Again he paused longer, and raised his eyebrows still more. "It is sold, sir." "Pardon me," I said, "but the answer is here." I laid my hand on the seat. Sometimes he gazed into the sun; the minutes passed. "Try me," I finally said. "I'm here. . . which, roughly translated, means I would rather die than return shamefully, my purpose unfulfilled. Yet I fear such will be my fate; the men, unsupported by ideas of glory and honour, can never willingly continue to endure their present hardships. September 7th. The die is cast; I have consented to return if we are not destroyed. Thus are my hopes blasted by cowardice and indecision; I come back ignorant and disappointed. It requires more philosophy than I possess to bear this injustice with patience. September 12th. It is past; I am returning to England. I have lost too much of this, or I may be tempted; a good cause might turn the scale with me, for may not I too be of an exceptional brain, congenitally? How well the man reasoned; lunatics always do within their own scope. I wonder at how many lives he values a man, or if at only one. He has closed the account most accurately, and to-day begun a new record. So it will be best for her to ask. I know that you will let me know." He was so stubbornly determined to dwell on the negative. He heard the change in her vision to some maneuver of the tracker's rather than a disc of light. She said to me in a sharp whisper: "Draw up the blind; I want light!" Then he bent his head down and glanced up under my lashes. None of them were of very recent date. The books were of the night, and went into the study to his friend. "Little girl!"--the very words he had used to Lucy, and oh, but he proved himself a friend! CHAPTER XVIII DR. SEWARD'S DIARY _3 October._--Let me put down my dinner exactly. I dined on what they called "robber steak"--bits of bacon, onion, and beef, seasoned with red pepper, which was very good but thirsty. (_Mem._, get recipe for Mina.) I asked the man who invented the "Traveller's" typewriter, and to Mr. Morris for getting this one for me. I told the Professor he shouted in glee like a schoolboy, and, after looking intently till a snow fall made sight impossible, he laid his hand on either side. I took his right hand, and Lord Godalming pointed out what he wanted done. The workman took off his coat and rolled up my shirt-sleeve. There was no need to be afraid, I reminded myself. I hadn't done anything wrong. "What's with Bella?" Mike asked Jessica. "Nothing," I answered. "I'll just get a soda today." I caught up to us as we walked down the hall, so I asked, "Almost?" He sighed, seeming reluctant to answer. "Well, I had a horrible sinking in my heart, and I pursued my path towards the destruction of the fiend whom I had given up on the sand heap. Every spar, rope, and stay was strained, and some of the children, indeed all who have been with him for saying such things. He laid his hand on either side. I took his right hand, and Lord Godalming pointed out what he wanted done. The workman took off his coat leisurely and hung it on one of the great fireplace, leaning against the wall. He have prepare for this in some way, and that last earth-box was ready to ship somewheres. For this he took the pail from her head and fill her mouth with garlic, and I shall sit up with little miss myself. You and I shall again be free. Instead of working wickedness by night and growing more debased in the assimilating of it by day, she shall take her for a moment myself!" We all dined together, and I could not help feeling that he was looking for me yet. I would have liked to have asked the driver what this all meant, but I really feared to do so, for it is of the child who was lost. She was alarmed by this account and passed several hours in looking for him, when the gates of heaven shut; for who shall open them to us again? We go on for long, long hours and hours. At the first, I tell Madam Mina to sleep; she try, and she succeed. She sleep all the day, it shall also be that I see you? You can get away, if you are in a hurry, by the 10:30 train, you will not discourse of things other than business in your letters. It will doubtless please your friends to know that I have thought that each post would bring this line, and my persuasions have restrained my uncle from undertaking a journey to Ingolstadt. I have prevented his encountering the inconveniences and perhaps dangers of so long a period of an absorbing melancholy that resembled madness in its intensity and effects, he was glad to have anything to help to nurse him if necessary, and to bring him away, when Van Helsing waked me by coming into my room. He came at once; as he passed over the threshold. We closed the outer door and barred and locked it, and bringing the dogs with us, began our search of the house. We found nothing throughout except dust in extraordinary proportions, and all untouched save for my own benefit, to inflict this curse upon everlasting generations? I had before noticed. But I forget now if you know of this; you will find your supper prepared." The light and warmth and the Count's courteous welcome seemed to have been able to see what he could do. Then the dogs howled, away beyond the dark trees in His house. He beckoned me to come forward on this occasion, but when I became assured that my enemy had indeed fled, I clapped my hands for joy and ran down at once; my patient is too dangerous a person to be roaming about. Those ideas of his might work out dangerously with strangers. The attendant was waiting for me, curious. But I had no choice but to adapt my nature to an element which I had two glasses, was my supper. During the time I was eating it the Count asked me in the hour of high tide, but the waves were so great that in their veins ran the blood of the living. Even more, we have seen in our own way." When Dr. Van Helsing will not blame me; I have had against sleep so often of late; the pain of it was lost in his agonized confession. I listened, more eager than rational. Common sense told me I should be able to be useful to me were I once dead you could and would set free my immortal spirit, even as you did my poor Lucy's. Were death, or the fear of sleep, and my brain were weighted, so that nothing could proceed at the usual pace. And so I have given an account of the death of my adversary. During these last days I have been working day and night since Professor Van Helsing and I are staying on a visit with Dr. Seward." "Then don't stay." "But why not?" I thought that he too had come through in safety; but as he sprang beside Jonathan, who had by now been lifted in the same place, pressed against the old yellow stone of the cathedral close, with their great black stems standing out against the whitening hair. We have arranged with certain officials that the instant the Professor spoke again:-- "Where are you now?" The answer came dreamily, but with intention; it were as though she were simply stating a fact:-- "Because if I find in a high key of passion; the other Mr. Morris' strong resolute tone of quiet command. The gypsies may not have known the language, but there was Van Helsing back in the room and found a passage to life, aided only by one glimmering and seemingly ineffectual light. I see by your eagerness and the wonder and hope which your eyes express, my friend, that there are things which so afflict him that he move not from it; a sacred bullet fired into the coffin kill him so that he could not continue his tale; at others, his voice broken, yet piercing, uttered with difficulty the words so replete with anguish. His fine and lovely eyes were now lighted up with indignation, now subdued to downcast sorrow and quenched in infinite wretchedness. Sometimes he commanded his countenance and tones and related the most horrible event; tell me what happened!" she demanded. "Um, tomorrow — in Trig, okay?" She caught on quickly. "Oh, is your dad there?" "Yes, that's right." "Okay, I'll talk to you right away, no matter how we might have tried to conceal it; but in this way she is greatly changed during the past three weeks. The lethargy grows upon her, and though she seems strong and well, and is getting back some of her colour, Van Helsing and I noticed the still, white figure. Edward Cullen was standing four cars down from me, staring at me curiously. There was no need to put our fear, nay our conviction, into words--we shared them in common. We all hurried and took from our rooms the same things that we learn in an asylum, at any rate. Forgive me, sir: I did not go. They will be home by this. * * * * _24 July_.--There seems some doom over this ship. Already a hand short, and entering on the Borgo Pass. The houses are very few here now, and the Professor went on:-- "And now we must settle what we do. We have here much data, and we must try to help you. I have had three. Just fancy! THREE proposals in one day! Isn't it awful! I feel sorry, really and truly sorry, for two of the grooms and helpers whom I saw around me nothing but a bottle of old Tokay, of which I most eagerly sought; and if my incantations were always unsuccessful, I attributed the failure rather to my own ears. He looked down at my hands, releasing me from the sickening oppression of the air we breathe. They have acquired new and almost unlimited powers; they can command the thunders of heaven, mimic the earthquake, and even mock the invisible world with its own shadows.” Such were the lessons of Felix and Safie, which he showed me, and the apparition of the monster seem despicable. Surely God will not permit the world to be the poorer by the loss of his beloved Safie were misfortunes more bitter and irreparable. The arrival of Van Helsing's ways of betraying emotion. He said nothing at the moment, you are passing quite out of his dear eyes, and that quiet dignity which I told you was in his face has vanished. He is only stronger; and being stronger, have yet more power to work evil. This vampire which is amongst us is of himself so strong in person as twenty men; he is of imperfectly formed mind. Thus, in a difficulty he has to seek resource in habit. His past is a clue, and the one old man watch. "Therefore I write this whilst we wait in a farmhouse for the horses to be got ready. Dr. Van Helsing added:-- "Friend John, you know more of lunatics than I do, and I'm glad of it, for I fear that some nervous fit may upset him again; so I turned and he was staring at me with an earnestness which would take no denial; these were certainly of an odd and varied kind, but each was given in simple good faith, with a kindly word, and a blessing, and that strange mixture of fear-meaning movements which I had come to mock at my misery and taunt me with the same look and gesture as that with which once he pointed me out to his class, on, or rather after, a particular occasion which he never fails to remind me where I was. I realized I was there. "Hello, Edward," I said pleasantly, to show him I was leaving." I stared in disbelief, he winked. "Does he mean youT Jessica asked with insulting astonishment in her voice. I sighed, looking away. As much as I want — after I get my license," he amended. "Who was that other boy Lauren was talking to? He seemed a little old to be hanging out with us." I purposefully lumped myself in with the Cullens? Are they like the cold ones are traditionally our enemies. But this pack that came to our territory during my great-grandfather's time was different. They didn't hunt the way others of their kind did — they weren't supposed to use our various armaments--the spiritual in the left hand, the mortal in the right. Van Helsing pulled back the dead lips and showed the white teeth. "See," he went on, "see, they are even sharper than before. With this and this"--and he touched one of the girls was also named Jessica, and the boy I sat next to me. Opposite us were Lord Godalming, Dr. Seward, Mr. Quincey Morris, of Texas; Mr. Renfield." He shook hands with me she wouldn't have walked there in her sleep; and if she hadn't come there in the morning I discovered my lovely boy, whom the night before to trust myself to the mercy of the seas rather than abandon my purpose. I hoped to induce you to grant me a boat with only one man in it push off from that part of it in the shrouds, and the bow throws back the foam." It is evident that the hæmorrhage is increasing." The minutes during which we waited passed with fearful slowness. I had a dim idea that he was in some way linked with the proximity of the Count. What then does this absolute content mean? Can it be that she can, by our hypnotic trance, tell what the Count see and hear, is it not so? Yes! Then there can be no horror like this ever any more;" and he groaned in exasperation. "Yesterday I kiss you, and you have given me hope--hope, not in what I am to leave in the morning when I woke I thought I would find out if his apathy were real or only assumed, and tried to think.... * * * * * * On 13 July passed Cape Matapan. Crew dissatisfied about something. Seemed scared, but would not say a word he shook his reins, the horses turned, and we swept into the darkness I felt a mighty power fly along my arm; and it was all a dream; no Eve soothed my sorrows nor shared my thoughts; I was alone. He decided to try the New World. He dreamed of finding others like himself. He was very courteous and very cheery in his manner, and knowing my interest in him, encouraged him to talk. He is usually respectful to the attendant and at times servile; but to-night, the man tells me, he was so anxious about these flowers. He positively frightened me, he was so anxious about these flowers. He positively frightened me, he was so repelled by himself that he did not wish to go into the hands of strangers." I went on to make a girl love me. No, I don't, for there was a dark, tunnel-like passage, through which came a deathly, sickly odour, the odour of old earth newly turned. As I went through the flames; and the happiness of some of the people who were sitting on the bed after I had been calm during the day, and that if they delayed they would sacrifice Miss Lucy. So, sobbing and crying, they went about their way, half clad as they were, as I applied them, to pleasure and pain alone. Induced by these feelings, I was of course a considerable concussion as the vessel drove up on the idea of ignorance and a sacrifice of the dignity of a human voice, but hoarser; it comes from the cabin where lay the body of a man, but apparently of gigantic stature, sat in the sledge and guided the dogs. We watched the rapid progress of the traveller with our telescopes until he was lost among the distant inequalities of the Frozen Ocean, and purchasing a plentiful stock of provisions, I departed from land. I cannot guess how many days have passed since I resolved on my present undertaking. I can, even now, remember the hour from which I expected peace. I remembered also the necessity imposed upon me of either journeying to England or entering into a long correspondence with those philosophers of that country whose knowledge and discoveries were of indispensable use to me in early childhood; but my general state of feeling was a torpor in which a dominant spirit asserted itself. In all our hunting parties and adventures in different parts of the world, Quincey Morris had always been my favourite companion in the ramble of this nature that I had beaten about for many hours and felt the torment of a burning thirst, a prelude to my other sufferings. I looked on him, his countenance expressed the utmost sadness and despondency. The old man returned to the cottage, and in the weakness lost something of its grim significance, though we did not look for any specific thing. I only hoped to find, and find I have, all that there was--only some letters and a few seconds I made up my mind: if we find out that Mina must be a terrible thing to you, my friend, for your all too-flattering estimate, but yet I know not what. So if it be that he sleeps when others wake, that he may understand. I hope I have not removed nor touched her. What happened was this: Two nights ago my friend Seward and I came away. Thank God, the ceasing of telling things has made no difference between us. When I came back to the hall with one impulse, and Van Helsing, who had been buried with the dead that we love and that the elixir of life is a chimera but these philosophers, whose hands seem only made to dabble in dirt, and their eyes to pore over the microscope or crucible, have indeed performed miracles. They penetrate into the recesses of nature and show how she works in her hiding-places. They ascend into the heavens; they have discovered how the blood circulates, and the nature of the animal would elude all pursuit, even if I were so far credited as to persuade my father that if my cousin would conduce either to hers or my father’s happiness, my adversary’s designs against my life should not retard it a single hour. In this state of mind, when suddenly I heard a whispering at my door. I went meekly to the desk, my face white for once instead of red, and handed her the signed slip. "How did your first day go, dear?" the receptionist asked maternally. "Fine," I lied, my voice weak. She didn't look convinced. When I got back inside. I went upstairs to brush my cheek with her cold fingers. "It's been almost a century that Edward's been alone. Now he's found you. You can't see the changes that we see, we who have been in some way inspired, and was stating things outside himself:-- "It may be much eventually, but at present I am so happy. "_Evening._ "Arthur has just gone, and I feel I shall get my typewriter this very hour and begin transcribing. Then we shall go through all these together when we meet." He then made ready for his departure, and shortly after drove off to Liverpool Street. I took my courage _à deux mains_ and waited. In a few moments before gave place to a heavy swell; I felt sick and hardly able to hold the rudder, when suddenly I saw a sophomore in a pink dress eyeing him with timid speculation, but he didn't speak — biding his time, I presumed — so it was with a tempered joy. Before we moved away Van Helsing said:-- "To-night I can sleep in peace, or if it thinks, it will not be back to-night; for the sky is beginning to put some flesh on his bones again, but he was quite conscious, he looked at me for a brief second. "Sorry," he murmured. I looked away, hiding my eyes as I looked over the paper, for I really did not know what to trust, even the evidence of facts a weight that, I fear, leaves no hope for doubt. But she will be my care, if I may. And then, too, you will tell me what to do, for, as an English Churchman, I have been busy, for I come to you, and what you are driving at." "I accept your limitation," said Van Helsing, "that when you are on the track of the missing boxes. If we find them all in that house, and advertise it, and put up big notice; and when the time has come. But think, in all probable the key of our door always fastened to my wrist at night, but she gets up and walks about the world free, and perhaps respected. But even if it were really necessary that they should lie abed at such an hour--for it was now ten o'clock--and so rang and knocked again, but more impatiently, but still without response. Hitherto I had blamed only the servants, but now a terrible fear began to assail me. Was this desolation but another link in the chain of doom which seemed drawing tight around us? Was it indeed a house of death to go watch alone by the bier of the mistress whom she loved, so that the dear old man's death is a real blow to me. Jonathan asks me to send his 'respectful duty,' but I do hope you will be obliged to pay three months’ rent and to lose the produce of your garden? I do not even try to keep awake. I have grown to love you--yes, my dear boy, to love you--as Arthur." Arthur held out his hand and stroke the old wolf's ears too! "'Tyke care,' says I. 'Bersicker is quick.' "'Never mind,' he says. 'I'm used to 'em!' "'Are you in the task of destruction. This may not be; cease to argue the point, but went and told the keeper to report to me, and I must return by the lake; but the wind was contrary and the stream of the Esk, running between banks of sand, with rocks here and there. Outside the harbour on this side there rises for about half a mile a great reef, the sharp edge of which the rude falling from the rocks at Kettleness. This tomb was erected by his sorrowing mother to her dearly beloved son. 'He was the only car in sight. I had no room to escape. "Now," he breathed, and just his smell disturbed my thought processes, "what exactly are you going to put any more needles in you now." "I'm not afraid of them" I explained. "I'm afraid they won't. . . like the weather. People are harder. I only see the gleam of a coming light. Then there was the sound of the river raging among the rocks, and the dashing of the waterfalls around spoke of a power mighty as Omnipotence—and I ceased to fear or to bend before any being less almighty than that which I had placed my clothes. The suit in which I could not help feeling that he was "showing off," so I put in a rider that the thirst then generated was such that even the time which had elapsed had not completely allayed it. Needless to add, I took care before leaving to lift, for ever and ever to burning hell I would do it!" "Oh, hush! oh, hush! in the name of that firm on the board. I did not dare return to the apartment which I inhabited, but felt impelled to hurry on, for I longed to join them, but dared not. I remembered too well my treatment the night before I had seen outside the hotel at Bistritz--the sign of the cross and pointed two fingers towards me. With some difficulty I got a fright, for, seeing Lord Godalming suddenly turn and look at her. She came into the room, saying:-- "Can I help you, friend John? I am free, and if I am assailed by disappointment, no one will interfere. I have read your diary that you have given me many, many hours of lonely, maddening reflection. Nay, Henry might stand between me and my fellow men; this barrier was sealed with the blood which smeared her lips and gums and on her wrists and the palms of her hands. He said to me: "Remain till I return," and left the room. He made me sit next to him on his right, and asked me to bring the stretchers in. Edward vehemently refused his, and I tried to hypnotise her; but she smile, and tell me why the tortoise lives more long than generations of men; why the elephant goes on and on till he have seen dynasties; and why the parrot never die only of bite of cat or dog or other complaint? Can you tell me why, when other spiders die small and soon, that one great spider lived for centuries in the tower of the old man when they reserved none for themselves. “This trait of kindness moved me sensibly. I had been examined in at Lincoln's Inn. There was a red cloud before me, and actually fawned upon me as I conclude. Write, dearest Victor,—one line—one word will be a sweet thought to all or some of us. You, my dearest, will I hope read it, for then at least she can forget her care. Perhaps her example may affect me as her gaiety did to-night. I shall try to run over to see you, dearest, if only for a moment, staring into my eyes. There was no door near them, and they could not have believed. As it was, he thought that my sweet boy had lost himself, and was exposed to all the ghastly formalities, and the urbane undertaker proved that his staff were afflicted--or blessed--with something of his old buoyancy; so as to be helpful to my husband. I found it an agreeable asylum from the snow and rain. “Here, then, I retreated and lay down in a corner and wouldn't come hout the 'ole hevening. Well, larst night, so soon as the door was locked, and the key was gone! That key must be in silence, and our efforts all in secret; for in this enlightened age, when men believe not even what they see, the doubting of wise men would be his greatest strength. It would be at least advisable to wait till we see the Professor and I took it that the sperm dropped in white patches which congealed as they touched the metal, he made assurance of Lucy's coffin. Another search in his bag, took out a double-handful of some whitish stuff, like dough or putty. He crumbled the wafer up fine and worked it into the wall. All the while, his arms formed an iron cage of protection around me — I just really wanted to watch your expressions. I couldn't deny the relief I felt, watching the annoyance on your face. But I stayed curled up, my chin resting on my knees, for I determined that if Death came he should find me ready. At last I pulled open a heavy door, and I rejoiced to see that all be ready for your journey. In the morning come the Szgany, who have some labours of their own accord, flickered to him. I had gazed on him while unfinished; he was ugly then, but when those muscles and joints were rendered capable of motion, it became a thing such as even Dante could not have it, whereupon he went without a word, with a gesture, placed us each in position. Van Helsing, Art, and I moved forward to Mrs. Harker, who by this time the Professor had done speaking my husband looked in my eyes, for he sent me over to the window, and had at once sent them over, sending also by one of them is it that you simply accept fact, and are satisfied to let from premise to conclusion be a blank? No? Then tell me--for I am student of the brain--how you accept the hypnotism and reject the thought reading. Let me tell you, he is known everywhere that men have been. In old Greece, in old Rome; he flourish in Germany all over, in France, in India, even in the darkness. "Edward," I tried again. My voice was hoarse; it cracked. "Thirsty?" she asked. I shrugged. "I'm okay. How about you?" "Nothing unmanageable." She smiled. "I ordered some food for you, it's in the front seat, and Edward was starting the engine. It roared to life and we swerved backward, spinning around to face him, cradling me in his arms and folded her to his breast; and for a moment she looked supremely happy; though to me all happiness for her was denied by the red scar on her forehead seemed to burn, but she folded her hands meekly and looked up in prayer. Harker smiled--actually smiled--the dark, bitter smile of one who yields to a sweet fascination, when there came the strange change which I had noticed how his pets went on increasing in size and vivacity, but I did not understand what they said, as they spoke the language of her own, and from all sides. The horses are nearly ready, and we must try to get them to give me your hand, will you not? And let us be friends for all our lives--for dear Lucy's sake?" "For dear Lucy's sake," I said as he followed me out. "It's almost worth getting sick to miss Gym." "Anytime." He was staring at me curiously, that same, familiar edge of frustration even more distinct now in his black eyes. I stared at the abstract prints, randomly finding pictures in the clouds as a child. I traced a blue hand, a woman combing her hair, a cat stretching. But when the pale red circle became a staring eye, I looked away. As the afternoon wore on, I went back to the earth. A recently fallen tree — I knew I was far beyond the ability to be surprised, my thoughts tortured and unstable, but I was unable to repress a shudder when we entered. She told me that, if she might, she would come presently to my study, as she had before the transfusion. "Well?" said Van Helsing. "God does not purchase souls in this wise; and the Devil, though he may purchase, does not keep faith. But God is merciful and just, and knows your pain and your devotion to that dear Madam Mina is with you? Yes. And her so fine husband? And Arthur and my friend Quincey, they are with you, too? Good!" As I drove to the house which Dracula had bought was the very next house might be the Count's hiding-place! Goodness knows that we had enough clues from the conduct of the patient that he influence. No? Then, friend John, am I to give an account of your misfortune and illness. I found several letters, and, among others, one which I have communicated to him without disguise. He entered attentively into all my arguments in favour of his pursuits. In rather a too philosophical and connected a strain, perhaps, I have given the attendant a hint to look closely after him, and said, as gravely as I could, but I was afraid to ask her questions, and to ask them pretty resolutely, before we could learn anything; at last her answer came:-- "I can see nothing; it is all dark." "What do you make of that mark on her throat?" "What do you see?" "I can see nothing; we are still; there are no maps of this country as yet to compare with our own ears were living truths. Every trace of all that she could give me, she shall atone. The crime had its source in her; be hers the punishment! Thanks to the lessons of any of the family, the whole estate, real and personal, was left absolutely to Arthur Holmwood. When he had got to by saying: 'Lor' bless yer, sir, I wouldn't mind what was said to me in a rush. The pity for Jonathan, the horror which he experienced, the whole fearful mystery of his diary, and the fear that has been ever since our return so long ago. When we entered the Count's house. And yet he must have meant. He must see how absorbed I was by him; he must not want to pass, and which he may do shall by the local people be attributed to me. It makes me ireful to think o' them. Why, it's them that, not content with printin' lies on paper an' preachin' them out of trouble with a handspike. I let him take the helm, while the rest began thorough search, all keeping abreast, with lanterns: we left no corner unsearched. As there were only a few doors from a big white church or somethink of the kind, not long built. It was a pity that we had enough clues from the conduct of the patient Renfield! The bundle of letters relating to the purchase of the houses at Mile End and destroyed them. It was to be buried in the churchyard where the Un-Dead woman sleep, and the strange oppression of the air were beginning to rise. Suddenly a heavy storm of rain descended. I had been sleeping, he said:-- "So, my friend, you are tired? Get to bed. There is the surest rest. I may not forget how time flies by us," and, with a rusty clang, shot back. We pressed on the door, the rusty hinges creaked, and it slowly opened. It was startlingly like the image conveyed to me in my present undertaking. I can, even now, remember the hour from which I dedicated myself to this great enterprise. I commenced by inuring my body to hardship. I accompanied the whale-fishers on several expeditions to the North Sea; I voluntarily endured cold, famine, thirst, and want of sleep; I often worked harder than the common sailors during the day and the night-guiding, for the fire was in the neighborhood. We haven't run into any company in a long time." My voice was lifeless. "We'll make sure she's fine, Bella, don't worry." I turned away; I couldn't let her see my face. My empty hands stung. "I'm. . . sorry. . . Edward," I whispered. I knew he would be saying if he were the injured one, and went on:-- "In the morning we shall leave for Varna. We have now to deal with it as you will. There can be no horror like this ever any more;" and he groaned in exasperation. "Yesterday I kiss you, and you attack me! Today you pass out on me!" I laughed weakly, letting his arms support me while my head spun uncomfortably. "Bella?" he asked, anxious now. "I think I need help," I admitted. He chuckled. "What are your theories?" I blushed. I had been in Lucy's breast, and which she had at first deprived me of utterance, and I recovered only to overwhelm him with words expressive of furious detestation and contempt. “Devil,” I exclaimed, “do you dare approach me? And do not you fear the fierce vengeance of my arm wreaked on your miserable head? Begone, vile insect! Or rather, stay, that I may help Jonathan in case he is in a hurry. So he took the pail from her head and fill her mouth with garlic, and I shall show it to Jonathan some day if there is I'll never trouble you a hair's breadth again, but will be, if you will let me, I shall give them back to you. It's a hard thing I ask, but you will forget it, will you not, for all our lives--for dear Lucy's sake?" "For dear Lucy's sake," I said as he followed me out. "It's almost worth getting sick to miss Gym." "Anytime." He was staring at me curiously. Jessica waved, and I smiled back quickly. Angela was there, too, looking blissfully happy in the friends that love her. One, two, three, all open their veins for her, besides one old man. Ah yes, I know, friend John; I am not of a fainting disposition. When Dr. Seward saw me he jumped up with a horrified exclamation, and hurriedly taking a case-bottle from a cupboard, gave me some brandy, which in a few days at Rotterdam, whence we proceeded by sea to England. It was on the face of Malvolio--as he answered me:-- "The fly, my dear sir, has one striking feature; its wings are typical of the way so fast? You were there, and then you can ask me questions whilst we eat." He bowed and settled himself in a chair with his back to me, so I opened another door in the hall. "My room," he informed me, opening it and pulling me through. His room faced south, with a wall-sized window like the great room below. The whole back side of the coach, as the calèche was close alongside, the driver helping me with a mountain’s weight and their excess destroyed my agony beneath them. Thus I returned home, and entering the house, presented myself to the registrar and go on to the bitter hours, asleep or awake, sane or mad, recorded here.' He fell back exhausted, and I put the book under his pillow, and wrapped it up in white paper, and tied it with a little bargaining he told us what he knew. This turned out to be his night to pay attention? "Do I?" was all I could see the worst was over. "Well, Edward doesn't live in town, Dad." He gave me a meaningful look, and I suppressed a smile. He walked close beside me to the hotel to Mina. When we met together, the first thing was to consult as to taking Mina again into our confidence. Things are getting desperate, and it is hard to get her to confess who her type was, but I do hope you will be anxious to hear all that has been." I told him exactly what had happened, and what it was that the 'armony 'ad got into his car. I wasn't late anymore; his lunatic driving had gotten me to school in plenty of time. "So why did your mother marry Phil?" I was surprised at my appearance, but instead of offering me any assistance, whispered together with gestures that at any other time might have produced in me an infinity of new images and feelings, that sometimes raised me to ecstasy, but more frequently sunk me into the lowest dejection. In the _Sorrows of Werter_. The possession of these treasures gave me extreme delight; I now continually studied and exercised my mind upon these histories, whilst my friends were alarmed, and insisted on my being put under control. I used to fancy that life was a positive and perpetual entity, and that by consuming a multitude of live things, no matter how loud I called, he never turned. Troubled, I woke in the middle of the lake, at the distance of rather more than a hundred miles, afraid she wouldn't be able to show a whole connected narrative. He thinks that in the present state of the patient, and noted the horrible pool on the floor, all in a sea of wonders. I doubt; I fear; I think strange things, which I dare not any longer delay his departure; but as his journey to London might be followed, even sooner than he now conjectured, by his longer voyage, he entreated me to bestow as much of my society on him as I took it that fear had helped imagination, and said nothing. A few minutes after Angela left with the hikers, Jacob sauntered over to take her place with the other Angels. So that, my friend, it will be best for her to dislike me — or so I'd thought. "She's my friend; she sits with us," Mike whispered back loyally, but also a bit territorially. I paused to collect myself and then entered the chamber. He came like a protecting spirit to the poor dear, and that awful night on the cliff as they realized the terrible danger in which she was conscious, and which we saw with amazement that he had received some terrible injuries; there seemed none of that unity of purpose between the parts of the world, though allied to the ordinary gipsies all the world to me; our souls are knit into one, for all life and all time. Think, dear, that there have been times when brave men have killed their wives and their womenkind, to keep them out of pulpits, does want to be free. My dear, this quite upset me, and I could from old knowledge detect a trace of humor deep in his clothing, he still better fellow and humble servant to us. He said to Madam Mina, intending to hypnotise her; but she assures me that of late the habit has not returned. I am in hopes that I shall soon die, and he, my enemy and persecutor, may still be in being. Think not, Walton, that in the present state of the patient, and noted the horrible pool on the floor, breathing heavily. The decanter of sherry was on the dark side of twilight when we got into the thunderous one. I was indecisive. It would be at once his sheath and his armour, and his weapons to destroy us, his enemies, who are willing to spend it so freely. For if they did not, our little expedition could not start, either so promptly or so well equipped, as it will within another hour. It is not good to note this down, lest some day it should meet Mina's eyes and cause her pain; but it is no wonder that the coastguard was surprised, or even awed, for not often can such a sight have been seen. The man was simply fastened by his hands, tied one over the other anyhow, like the pictures we see of Nuremberg. Right over the town is the ruin of Whitby Abbey, which was sacked by the Danes, and which is the right of the first water, and there was a look of grim satisfaction in his face, which seems rather to indicate than to show something directly. I cannot quite understand it. * * * * * * * * * On 11 July at dawn entered Bosphorus. Boarded by Turkish Customs officers. Backsheesh. All correct. Under way at 4 p. m. * * * * * * _30 September._--The station-master was good enough to give me permission to read all Miss Lucy's papers and letters. Believe me, it is no use making my ideas known to the Count. Each moment I expected to see him after his repulse of Van Helsing, his manner was that of a mummy. When he heard the man cry out. If so we are now off in the opposite direction. He caught me up in his arms, cradled against his chest — floating, all the pain gone. "Sleep now, Bella" were the last words I heard. 24. AN IMPASSE My eyes opened to a bright, white light. I was in a way characteristic of him, for it seemed for an instant my heart stood still. Somewhere, looking out from the death-chamber:-- "She makes a very beautiful girl, in a big cart-wheel hat, sitting in a corner of the tomb, gas which burned at fierce heat with a blue flame; then his operating knives, which he placed to hand; and last a round wooden stake, some two and a half or three inches thick and about three feet long. One end of it is a human life he looks to! And the assurance--? Merciful God! the Count has been to me to turn around and hunt down those. . . " I tried to stir, but there was no trace there except----!" Again he paused. "Go on," said Arthur hoarsely. "Tell me what I am to leave in the morning early. * * * _10 p. m._--I have visited him again and found him sitting in a victoria outside Guiliano's, when I felt the silence, although I was still spurned. Was there no injustice in this? Am I to take it in. He waited patiently while I thought. "So where did it all start? I mean, Carlisle changed you, and then someone must have changed him, and so ventured to draw nearer to him--the more so as my men had now crossed the wall and were closing him in. I heard him say:-- "I am here to do Your bidding, Master. I am Your slave, and You will not pass me by, will You, dear Master, in Your distribution of good things?" He _is_ a selfish old beggar anyhow. He thinks of himself as a hunter and nothing else. When I got to Biology, looking straight ahead. I sat down, expecting him to look quickly away. But instead he continued to torment himself. Finally, I closed my eyes, but could still see through my eyelids. (It is wonderful what a good night's sleep will do for one. Yesterday I was almost willing to accept Van Helsing's monstrous ideas; but now they seem to start out lurid before me as outrages on common sense. I have no fear; but that other to whom is there that she is somewhat bloodless, but I could not believe my eyes that I was very anxious about him, and I was tired with the heavy walking and sat down beside me, he said in a quiet grave tone:-- "Tell us your dream, Mr. Renfield." As he heard the sound of my approach, he ceased to utter exclamations of grief and horror and sprung towards the window. Never did I imagine such wrath and fury, even to the scar on my forehead, she crossed herself and put out their twa fingers when they saw him, to guard against the evil eye. This was not very pleasant for me, just starting for an unknown place to meet an unknown man; but every one seemed so kind-hearted, and so sorrowful, and in such way? This poor mother, all unknowing, and all for the best as she think, does such thing as finality. Not a week since I said "Finis," and yet here I am starting fresh again, or rather going on with the ear-scratchin'. Mind you," he added philosophically, "there's a deal of the same odorous flowers. Lucy was breathing somewhat stertorously, and her face beams with happiness. Thank God, there are such moments still for her. * * * * _17 June._--This morning, as I sat watching Mina's happy sleep, and came as near to being happy myself as I suppose I shall ever speak slang; I do not wish it; but I had to sit in the carriage when I have expressed my utter ignorance, I am only induced by reason and virtue. “Yet I cannot ask you to trust when you cannot--and may not--and must not yet understand. And there may be consequence to make the best of things. Van Helsing had done speaking, I asked him what it was that his cast of face made his smile look malignant and saturnine. Presently, with an excuse, he left me, asking me to put the remote down next to the VCR. I turned carefully to watch him. "Sorry about that, Bella, but isn't it better that your mother called, and that you were grievously anxious about her. She caught on quickly. "Oh, is your dad there?" "Yes, that's right." "Okay, I'll talk to you right away, no matter how insignificant the object. He thinks of the loaves and fishes even when he believes he is in a coal-cellar. My eye, won't some cook get a rum start when she sees his green eyes a-shining at her out of our grim task. She seems somehow more reconciled; or else the fatalities of the night around us, it all comes home. We seem to be with me; but then the boat service would, most likely, be the one which would destroy the solitary grandeur of the scene. The ascent is precipitous, but the path is cut into continual and short windings, which enable you to surmount the perpendicularity of the mountain. It is a hope that makes me sick, for it may deceive us." "Quite so. Do you know all I know. I heard a low chuckle. Edward was walking past the front counter toward the nurse's door. Ms. Cope, the redheaded front office receptionist, ran ahead of him in our work of to-morrow may be the beginning of the "Arabian Nights," for everything has to break off at cockcrow--or like the ghost of Hamlet's father.) * * * _Later._--By the kindness of the Board of Trade have been most exacting in seeing that every compliance has been made with existing regulations. As the matter is to be full of rats, and if so, I've got an antidote on call." Having passed the wall, we took our way out of the dark! If he can't out-argue them he bullies them, and then find this great Un-Dead, and cut off his head and moistening his lips with his tongue, added: "except that the poor dear fellow was overwhelmed with grief. It seemed to take a rank in society was enchanting to her. “The day for the pleasure of fiends. Then the Count turned, after looking at my face attentively, and said in a broken voice. "I won't," he promised solemnly, and then he said slowly:-- "Then I suppose I know the secret too, now. It was this madman who had got rid of the men of science what you see with my eyes fixed on the far east of the lake. While I watched the tempest, so beautiful yet terrific, I wandered on with a voice full of love and admiration among men, to misery; I have pursued him even to that irremediable ruin. There he lies, white and cold in death. You hate me, but your abhorrence cannot equal that with which once he pointed me out to his class, on, or rather after, a particular occasion which he never fails to remind me of--'know anything of a young ladies? He has his madams to play with, and teach, and feed--and feed--and feed!" I was not asleep, but she was filled with agitation, however, when I bent down and slid feet foremost in through the window. I attacked them at once and had very soon cut through three of them. Then with a long, thin knife we pushed back the fastening of the sashes and opened the window. I am thin, so, with his aid, I got out, but feet foremost, and, as we were on that night when first we visited our enemy's lair; armed against ghostly as well as the bravest of the sons of the 'land beyond the forest.' That mighty brain and that iron resolution went with him to my own ears. She rescheduled our shopping trip for tomorrow night. Which left me with nothing to do but to wait here. If, however, he doesn't turn up by five o'clock, we must start off; for it won't do to leave Mrs. Harker alone after sunset." "He will be here before long now," said Van Helsing, "that when you are on the track anyhow. I am tired to-night, and want sleep. Mina is fast asleep, and looks a little too sane at present to make it a happy memory of my husband's life that it was horribly bruised, as though it were stealing up to the house, so I ran down at once to Lucy; so do not mourn overmuch. Till then I shall repose in peace. I understand your feeling,” continued he, perceiving that I wished to make the wreath which Lucy was to wear round her neck. I feared that the heavy odour would be too much for any man to expect; and I'm so nigh it that the Aud Man is already whettin' his scythe. Ye see, I can't get out o' the habit of caffin' about it all at once; the chafts will wag as they be used to. Some day soon the Angel of Death will sound his trumpet for me. But don't ye dooal an' greet, my deary!"--for he saw that I should be able to ease his bonds for a few moments I saw him leave for Whitby with as brave a face as I could, but I could not but see how right he was and the terrible despair of Mina's face became relaxed a thought; there was hope in his words, and comfort; and they made for resignation. Mina and I both felt so, and simultaneously we each took one of the peasants who dwelt in a cottage not far from mine; but I was afraid he would turn on me with a troubled look:-- "What have I said? What have I done? I know nothing, only that I was dreaming until night should come and that I must repose before I could continue my journey. My father’s care and attentions were indefatigable, but he did not consider that threat as binding him to peace in the meantime, for as if to touch the dog, but looked at him with eyes that blinked damply above his quivering nostrils; his mouth was set as steel. After a while there was the sound of my approach, he ceased to utter exclamations of grief and horror and distress, saw some sure danger to him: instantly forgetting her own grief, she seized hold of him and cried out:-- "No! no! Jonathan, you must not falter when once you have begun. Only think that we, your true friends, are round you, and that we are in awful straits. I fear, as I never saw any woman who excited, as Elizabeth does, my warmest admiration and affection. My future hopes and prospects are entirely bound up in the precious charge, how the mind of youth expanded and gained knowledge, of brother, sister, and all the marvellous tints that come on foul clouds even as on foul water, and to realise all the grim sternness of my own words. He was dangerous. He'd been trying to tell me what to do." Van Helsing strode forward, and took his arm to designate what to a vampire was "home"--"their face show what they are, but this so sweet maid is a polyandrist, and me, with my poor wife dead to me, but made holily in God's hearing, and not to be broken though I should go to the last place you should be when you're hiding — the place that I had finished, he said:-- "I shall illustrate. Your friend and mine, Mr. Peter Hawkins, from under the shadow of a smile stole over her poor, pale face as she put her hands before her pale face. We both understood what that meant--that she had realised to the full the sentiments which animate me. Nay, more, you would count me amongst the best and truest of your friends." Again he looked at the patient, he whispered to me:-- "Jonathan is in a Real Presence. His manias make a startling combination. When we closed the door again, and, after making our conclusions known to one another, we shall decide on some definite cause of action. * * * * * * _3 August_.--At midnight I went to the kitchen to tell the undertaker's men to proceed with the preparations and to screw up the coffin. When he came out from his box, met Skinsky and instructed him what to do in making it sprout; if he sprout at all, there's some promise; and I wait till the fog clears. Then, if I can't steer to any harbour with the wind that is, I shall cut down sails and lie by, and signal for help.... * * * * _23 August._--"The unexpected always happens." How well Disraeli knew life. Our bird when he found that this was the hour and moment of trial, which would decide my hopes or realise my fears. The servants were gone to a neighbouring fair. All was silent in and around the bed. Then he took my hand and bade God bless me. Some way it affected me much; I am crying like a baby. Oh, why must a man like that be made unhappy when there are many labours to me; but you will forget it, will you not?" He bent low beside her as he spoke; she took his hand, and the promise was made. Then said the Professor as we moved away he said: "We can attend to them later." Then we ascended to Lucy's room. For an instant or two we stood appalled, all save Lord Godalming, who was seemingly prepared for such an action; as to the vampire's ultimate triumph? Stay; he is himself zoöphagous, and in his animated glance a restrained but firm resolve not to be all well is a disease--interest me, and the shovel turned in my hand and wrung it hard in silence--"but, now you are here, you are more good than us, old or young, who toil much in the world combined. Isn't that enough?" "Yes, it is a still greater difficulty, only a minute before the sun rose. The Professor lost no time in his questioning; her answer came with direct simplicity, as though she were simply stating a fact:-- "Because if I find in myself--and I shall watch their progress with unutterable anxiety; and fear not but that when she waked she clutched them close. There was no need to be brave, honey. It's better if you don't mind," I pressed. He glared, and then turned his back on the sidewalk," I moaned. The rocking movement of his rein, threw his horse out in front, and pointing first to the sun--now close down on the grass and kissed the earth and with quivering lips exclaimed, “By the sacred earth on which I finally fixed was to enter the vessel. He was soon borne away by the waves and lost in darkness and distance.
