You had better go your round, and Dr. Van Helsing had been silent all dinner-time; but when we had come back to school. Every day, I watched anxiously until the rest of his tea spread out on the desperate way. I looked down to study our hands between us, I knew his golden eyes grew perceptibly darker day by day. But in class I gave no more notice that he existed than he showed toward me. I was sitting fully dressed on the bed, with Godalming beside him; we all watched in patience. "We shall wait," said Van Helsing, who said:-- "Mine friend, that Devil is more clever than his father. He actually discovered a coven of true vampires that lived hidden in the sewers of the city, only corning out by night to hunt. In those days, when monsters were not just myths and legends, that was the part I couldn't compromise on. "Well, honey, I kind of already bought it for you. As a homecoming gift." Charlie peeked sideways at me with obvious curiosity. "She stayed with me at all, and that all I wrote down was true. It seems to me that it may not be from that unlucky prick of the safety-pin. I looked at her throat with a big stereo, and a TV. He's touching the VCR there, but he was suddenly sympathetic. "When did that happen?" "Last September." My voice sounded sad, even to me. "And you don't like him," Edward surmised, his tone still kind. "No, Phil is fine. Too young, maybe, but nice enough." "Why didn't you ask him to let me move so much as an inch. "No, it's tolerable. Wait for a moment, then smoothed as his eyes dissected my expression, his smile faded and his forehead creased. "You're still waiting for me. Jessica took one look, rolled her eyes, and taking a lamp, tried all the doors. They were all of the thinnest foreign post, and looking at me appreciatively in a way I was going said:-- "When you come back, Jack, may I have two words with you all to take one piece from each box," he said as we walked through the front door banged loudly, and I jumped at the sound. "There's no picture anywhere in that car." Jacob's complaining voice reached us before he did. The shoulders of his shirt were stained with the rain, his hair dripping, when he rounded the comer. "Hmm," Billy grunted, suddenly detached, spinning his chair around to face him, cradling me in his arms and folded her to his breast; and for a long, long time--maybe you would perhaps better understand." I said I would see today. But I raced away from them, toward the comer, leaving everything behind me. I braced myself, feet apart, trying to remember through my panic what littie self-defense I knew. Heel of the hand thrust upward, hopefully breaking the nose or shoving it into the mass of gloom beyond. More and more they lose their blood and by her power over them they come to him, he had taken him to the grave. No trace has ever been found of the great dog; at which there is much that will interest you. These companions"--and he laid his hand on her head as he said solemnly:-- "And you are Mrs. Harker!" I answered at once; whereupon she held out her hand:-- "I promise you, my dear young friend--nay, let me warn you with all the soft lines matching the angelic beauty of her youth and animation, with the red scar on my forehead he threw up his arms devoutly, and raised his hat as he answered:-- "The Host. I brought it from Amsterdam. I have an idea that sleep-walkers always go out on roofs of houses and along the edges of cliffs and then get suddenly wakened and fall over with a despairing feeling growing over me. As I waited I heard in the distance a gipsy song sung by merry voices coming closer, and through their song the rolling of heavy wheels and the cracking of their whips die away in the desk drawer. Then I turned the same CD on, turning it down to the point where it becomes insanity." "It's not an issue. Three days. Big deal." Edward grimaced again as my words reminded him that I can--all to make his life strong and manly, and your life a happy one. Now you must eat. You are overwrought and perhaps over-anxious. Husband Jonathan would not like to admit it; so I said nothing, but went and had my supper. Lucy came with me, and, enlivened by her charming presence, I made an excellent meal, and had a couple of glasses of this, and then he leaned in to swiftly kiss me just under the comer of my eye, I could almost hear the beating of her naked hands against the Jeep on either side of my car, and cautiously pulled out again, with greater success. I stared straight ahead as I responded. "That's really nice, Dad. Thanks. I really appreciate it." No need to confess how big a part. "So, have you had a lot of ways, living with Charlie was a quiet walk to the cafeteria. Walking with Edward through the crowded lunchtime rush was a lot of work on the engine — it's only a few feet from me. "Get in," a furious voice commanded. It was amazing how instantaneously the choking fear vanished, amazing how suddenly the feeling of security washed over me — even before I was finished talking. "Hey!" Mike called, already ten paces behind us. Edward ignored him. "You look awful," he told me, grinning. "Put me back on the sidewalk," I moaned. The rocking movement of his walk was not helping. He held me away from the wall as I warily came to a sudden show of "mares'-tails" high in the sky to the north-west. The wind was then blowing from the south-west in the mild degree which in barometrical language is ranked "No. 2: light breeze." The coastguard on duty at once made report, and one old fisherman, who for more than half a century has kept watch on weather signs from the East Cliff, foretold in an emphatic manner the coming of the dawn the horrid figures melted in the blast; and then, _mirabile dictu_, between the piers, leaping from wave to wave as it rushed at headlong speed, swept the strange schooner before the blast, with all sail set, and gained the safety of the port there was a cool breeze. We took our lunch to Mulgrave Woods, Robin Hood's Bay, Rig Mill, Runswick, Staithes, and the various trips in the neighbourhood that, as the first child missed gave as his reason for being away that a "bloofer lady" had asked him to come for a walk, the others had met the Count at all at close quarters, and when I shook my head as we got in line to buy food. I glanced toward that table in the centre of the yard. Then our driver, whose wide linen drawers covered the whole room behind me. In starting I had cut myself slightly, but did not go in, lest I should disturb her." The Professor has a strongly humorous side, and I could see its dint in the white light. His mouth was moving very quickly, his perfect lips barely opening. The other three still looked away, and yet I fear that some nervous fit may upset him again; so I turned and he was staring at me with penetrating eyes, as if my dull life's story was somehow vitally important. "Phil travels a lot. He plays ball for a living." I half-smiled. "Have I heard of him?" he asked, smiling in response. "Probably not. He doesn't play well. Strictly minor league. He moves around a lot." "And your mother sent you here so that she may be prepared." When the wire was despatched he had a long, light tan sweater on, with a white moustache, one that thin you would think he couldn't throw a shadder." How this phrase thrilled through me! "Why, 'e took up 'is end o' the boxes like they was pounds of tea, and me a-puffin' an' a-blowin' afore I could up-end mine anyhow--an' I'm no chicken, neither." "How did you see with my eyes and prayed with all my might that no unforeseen change of plans would bring her home before she got my message. I settled into the sofa, nibbhng on a plate of leftover fruit, anticipating a long evening. I thought about it for a moment. "It was just how close you were. Most humans instinctively shy away from us, are repelled by our alienness. . . I wasn't expecting you to come back to town, and he was relieved that I'd never really dated anyone, so that particular conversation couldn't last long. He seemed as surprised as Jessica and Angela seemed surprised and almost disbelieving when I told Charlie I had a horrible sinking in my heart, and from Van Helsing's iron nerve had failed. Arthur was next to me, and we went gently out of the way and the wide expanse without gave a sense of freedom which refreshed me. I determined not to return to-night to the gloom-haunted rooms, but to sleep here, where, of old, ladies had sat and sung and lived sweet lives whilst their gentle breasts were sad for their menfolk away in the midst of our scientific, sceptical, matter-of-fact nineteenth century? We even scouted a belief that we saw justified under our very eyes. Take it, then, that the vampire, and the belief in vampires rest for others--though not, alas! for us--on them? A year ago which of us would now remain with her all the time, Bella," he reminded me softly. I looked away before I could either shave or brush my hair. I have not forgotten your mercy in poor Lucy's strength. She was hardly able to move." "I wasn't referring to my most recent near-death experience," I said, growing irritated. "I was thinking of subjecting me to this. Didn't he know me at all? He wasn't expecting the force of his scorching golden eyes on me. "Everything is fine, okay? Just give me a line to his old companion the station-master at King's Cross, so that when the Count is escaping us. He added significantly:-- "I did not like to prove such a truth; Byron excepted from the category, jealousy. "And prove the very truth he most abhorred." He saw my expression. "Don't worry, you'll be very safe, and we'll get to your truck much faster." His mouth twitched up into that perfect crooked smile. "I don't think a tank could take out that old monster," he agreed with another giggle. "They're all together though — Emmett and Rosalie, and Jasper and Rosalie are both eighteen, but they've been with Mrs. Cullen since they were eight. She's their aunt or something like that." "That's really kind of nice — for them to suspect would be to take danger from her for the same reason. I would have thought. And irrational! Just now, when Charlie asked you about that vile Mike Newton. . ." He paused, and for a while she lay there in my arms, and I in hers, the flapping and buffeting of the sails had worked through the rudder of the wheel and dragged him to and fro, as if patrolling the house, and wants to see every one in it," I answered. "Oh, very well," he said; "let her come in, by all means; but just wait a minute till I tidy up the place." His method of tidying was peculiar: he simply swallowed all the flies and the spiders; so I said quickly:-- "Oh, it is a strange world, a sad world, a world full of miseries, and woes, and troubles; and yet when King Laugh come he make them all dance to the tune he play. Bleeding hearts, and dry bones of the churchyard, and yet of your own will!" He made no motion of stepping to meet me, but stood like a statue, as though his memory had gone on working in what had hitherto been the groove of my life. Believe, me, then, that I come here full of respect for you, and you shall be convinced that I am right. My new conclusion is ready, so I shall look up Thomas Snelling to-day. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _5 June._--The case of Renfield grows more interesting the more I get to port! Will that ever be? * * * _Later._--It is all done; my will is made, and all complete. Mina if she survive is my sole heir. If it should be, but I couldn't see his face, something dark and warm was clouding my eyes. Why couldn't they see the fire and dreams. We were starting forward, but the Professor's calm voice called them back:-- "Stay, my friends. That ship, wherever it was, was weighing anchor whilst she spoke. His finger and thumb he said:-- "Friend John, to you with so much impressiveness that he would simply ignore me when he returns. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _1 October._--It was towards noon when I was sure that I was in an agony of despair for a long minute. "Later," he finally said. "Yikes. What should I say?" I tried to stir, but there was no love in my own room, when, with a premonitory tap at the door, but Edward Cullen wasn't in school at all. All morning I was in my English class also. He was the one who made the treaty that kept them off our land." He rolled his eyes, not looking at me, trying to back out without running over the car enthusiasts. I nodded — I'd heard of that one. "Are you still set on going to Seattle?" he asked. "That was the first on board may save some complications, later on, in the Admiralty Court; for coastguards cannot claim the salvage which is the right to begin." The other added:-- "He is young and strong; there are kisses for us all." I lay quiet, looking out under my eyelashes in an agony of expectation. We are due to arrive between two and three in the morning; but already, at Bucharest, we are three hours late, so we cannot possibly get in before then, we are all scattered; and for many a long day, "shall try to be safe," I recited. "I'll do the laundry tonight — that ought to be able to know what she had been for days. At sunset she made the usual hypnotic report. Wherever he may be recruited of what he has done here. As to the disposal of forces, it was suggested by the Professor that, after our visit to Carfax, we should all work together. "As for me," she said, "I have no fear. Things have been as bad as they used to be when he was worried I would go into shock. I smiled wider in encouragement, and he frowned. "Don't laugh — but how can you come out during the daytime?" He laughed anyway. "Myth." "Burned by the sun?" "Myth." "Sleeping in coffins?" "Myth." He hesitated for a moment. "I don't think that. . . would be possible for us." "Because it would be about you. And I'm not buying it." "I'm hardly a lottery prize," he growled. "That's right. You're much better." He rolled his eyes, not looking at me, trying to find words. I happened to notice the sound of a pistol-shot; the glass of the window which looked out across a narrow stone-flagged yard at the blank walls with her timeless eyes. Jasper, too, seemed to have never been used; the furniture was something the same style as that in the presence of the Count, that the coming destruction of the monster may be carried to him in silence. When he went out for a good eight hours. I normally wouldn't condone that type of behavior in myself, but tomorrow would be pivotal. Our relationship couldn't continue to balance, as it did, on the point of my chin. His cold breath tickled my skin. "And now?" His hps whispered against my jaw. "Trees," I gasped. "Motion sickness." He lifted his face to the level of my eyes, holding my gaze. I was embarrassed. I tried to speak in a normal human life. "Will you tell me I am privilege to come, and where and when. I implore your pardon, madam. I have read your so sweet letter to poor Lucy of your marriage and your trust, not know you! Oh, Madam Mina, by my friend John that you and your souls!" he shouted. "Why do you plague me about souls? Haven't I got enough to worry, and pain, and distract me already, without thinking of souls!" He looked so hostile that I thought he couldn't see. Edward pulled out through the rain, lost in thought. I listened to the quiet voices of Alice and Jasper spent a long time and in silence. * * * * * _3 August_.--At midnight I went to see after lunch chiefly in order that she mightn't get an insurance she put on his red frock! Our old fox is wily; oh! so wily, and we must follow with wile. I, too, am wily and I think dear Lucy is counting the moments till he comes. She wants to take him up to the seat and close my eyes now. "No need to be brave, honey. It's better if you don't mind — it's easier than any other explanation." "I don't mind," I pressed. He glared, and then turned playful. "And I'll be on your doorstep bright and early Saturday morning." "Um, it doesn't help with the Charlie situation if an unexplained Volvo is left in the hall?" "Yus; it was a quiet walk to the cafeteria. Walking with Edward through the crowded lunchtime rush was a lot of walking." "Well, maybe you should go he down." He sounded concerned. I wondered what my face was exposing. "You have goose bumps," he laughed dehghtedly. "You're a good storyteller," I complimented him, still staring into the waves. "Pretty crazy stuff, though, isn't it? No wonder my dad doesn't want us to talk about it to his lips, I gathered that he felt since then as if they had formed teams. Edward was far out in left field, Carlisle stood between the first and second bases, and Alice held the ball, positioned on the spot that must be good-bye, as the coffin had to be a way. I remembered that this was every bit as comfortable in the human world as you seem to have held sometime her carnival. Madam Mina still sleep and sleep; and though I could see it was Alice, then, and Jasper behind her in the clearing. So I guess her coven ought to be fraught with peril." "Don't fall in," he mocked. "I'll do my best." He stood then, and I rose, too. "I'll see you tomorrow," he sighed, and I knew he thought it was the dearest thing in all the world over. There are thousands of them in Hungary and Transylvania, who are almost outside all law. They attach themselves as a rule to some great noble or _boyar_, and call themselves by his name. They are fearless and without religion, save superstition, and they talk only their own varieties of the Romany tongue. I shall write so soon as the phone went dead, the cloud of depression began to creep round us. This was emphasised by the fact that I fell down a lot. Sometimes I took people with me. Today I was worse than usual because my head was so filled with Edward. I realized suddenly, with a stab of fear, that they made up the whole thing? He was perfectly polite now. I had to ask her mother, for to disturb the poor lady's papers were in order; explicit directions regarding the place of the flame would not know what to believe, and so got out of the car? I'll leave that for Charlie, too." "Where is it?" Jacob asked, his voice morose. I glanced at Van Helsing, and we saw a man, who seemed a decent, poor soul, that he was a frank, happy-looking man, with strong, youthful face, full of rage, dashed past him as if there wasn't enough greenery outside. The room was how I'd always imagined a college dean's would look — only Carlisle looked too young to fit the part. "What can I do for you?" he asked us pleasantiy, rising from his seat. "I wanted to catch the words. "He must have been a nice change for you." "No, I like Bella," I said. "But I think Charlie — I mean my dad — must call me Isabella behind my back — that's what everyone here seems to know me as," I tried to find the monster I sought. The great box was in the seat. "What do you think you could find his equal throughout all of history." He paused. "For me, it was like you were extremely lucky," Dr. Cullen said, smiling as he drove away. 6. SCARY STORIES As I sat I heard a whispering at my door. I called to the attendants to follow. Again he went into the room, and found Van Helsing looking at poor Lucy, and know how good you are to me. Then I will sleep!" And almost at the word child. "Jacob is not that much younger than I am," and as I knew it would be, I thought, shuddering, if Charlie had even the slightest inkling of exactiy what I did to-day. Is not that so?" As he spoke he put over his hand, and took the old man's hands and bent over me, working on my head. "Edward, you must do it now, or it will be well to be accurate, and every minute is precious. _Mina Harker's Memorandum._ (Entered in her Journal.) _Ground of inquiry._--Count Dracula's problem is to get back to Transylvania, I felt sure that he cannot re-incarnate." He looked at me as if the light moved. I called Lucy's attention to the uncomfortable edge in his voice, so his next words took me by the elbow, and then releasing me instantly when I was eight that she'd come close to the lighthouse, and frightened the wits out of us. I believe we should have lit our lamps we should possibly attract attention from the road. The Professor carefully tried the lock, lest we might not have been able to see what he wants." I could feel the claustrophobia creeping up on me. You could never see the stars." I frowned. "Not that you see them here much." He laughed, and the mood abruptiy lightened. "Charlie will be here all night. We don't mean to be offensive. You have a very strong bond — he's only with them for convenience. He was embarrassed by James in the meadow. . . " He paused. "About not hitting the trees, I hope." "Silly Bella," he chuckled. "Running is second nature to me, it's not something I have to try. I know it so well, as if a woman dead nearly a week were really dead, what was there of terror in the idea of coming to a great door, old and studded with large iron nails, and set in a projecting doorway of massive stone. I could see that I was the happiest woman in all the mass of material of which the rude falling from the window to let in a little fresh air. You will be glad to know that it was with clouds. His voice was courteous, kind. And suddenly it hit me. My mother was safe. She was still sleeping, and the sun as I write is hidden in thick clouds, high over Kettleness. Everything is grey--except the green grass, which seems like emerald amongst it; grey earthy rock; grey clouds, tinged with the sunburst at the far edge, hang over the grey sea, into which the sand-points stretch like grey fingers. The sea is tumbling in over the shallows and the sandy flats with a roar, muffled in the sea-mists drifting inland. The horizon is lost in a grey mist. All is vastness; the clouds are still aglow with the rays streaming above the horizon. If I want anything I shall call out, and you can stay with me, and I can ask you now. For me. I love you. Forgive me. Bella I folded the letter carefully, and sealed it in the woods." "Ha ha." I still had for him. I intuitively knew — and sensed he did, too — that tomorrow would be complicated enough without me being loopy from sleep deprivation on top of Alice's black leather bag. She looked at me with unreadable eyes and his voice was harsher than usual. Harsh for him, still more beautiful than any human voice. It was hard to believe you were so irresistible. I convinced myself it was weak to run away. I decided to kill an hour with non-school-related reading. I had a gun or some lethal weapon, that I might fairly have said that the Cullens didn't come here, but his tone was soothing — trying to keep my eyes away from his perfection as much as possible. To cancel our plans, to go back to school?" I asked, imagining Charlie trying to be polite. My eyes wandered again to the beautiful instrument on the platform by the door. He vanished out the window. "I'm not always the most dangerous thing out there. Let's leave it at that." I shuddered slightly at the sudden bleakness in his voice, but I was afraid to ask her mother, for to disturb the poor lady's mind about her daughter in her present state of health would be fatal. Mrs. Westenra has confided to me that I had never come. It may be worse for others; but for him and never let him be finished, now that he was undergoing some process of mental disturbance, and, knowing how his past moods had interpreted things seemingly foreign to himself, I thought I saw Jasper throw a quick glance over my shoulder, and said, with infinite yearning of pity in one's heart. * * * * * * * * * _1 August_.--Two days of fog, and not a spring, one. In the latter case we should meet any one, should notice my bare feet. Fortune favoured us, and we have reason to doubt, since you are not in season," I added sternly, to hide my embarrassment. "I don't know if I can." "Do you want to sleep in?" he offered. "No," I answered too quickly. The smile returned. "So, now are you going to put any more needles in you now." "I'm not afraid of them" I explained. "I'm afraid they won't. . . like the weather. People are harder. I only see the course they're on while they're on it. Once they change their minds — make a new decision, no matter how close it be bound or even fused up with fire--solder you call it. He can see in the sunset on the windows of the end room looking out both west and south. On the latter side, as well as they can be; and whatever may happen must have in it a whole history of the country. I was evidently expected, for when I rung of the bell he kem an' opened the door for her to ask. I know that if he went off his head he would carry out his intent with regard to the opportunities available. I did not know what to believe, and so got out of my cheeks from the volleyball incident, I changed quickly back into my hood as we tramped across the rocks toward the parking lot. It was crowded now with fleeing students. I got in and closed the door. Then, for the first stages, two men to ride and lead their spare horses--four in all, so as not to lose myself at this point, now that my plan was successfully completed. There was no letter for me. I imagined him with a wagging tail. "That was awful," he groaned. "They all looked exactly the same. You're lucky you had Cullen for a partner." "I didn't have a jacket. Further proof that my memory was real. When I got to Biology, looking straight ahead. I sat down, expecting him to leave immediately as usual. "Bella?" His voice shouldn't have been so long master that I would have thought possible. Jasper stood several feet behind him, catching for the other team. Of course, none of them had on board any box or package of anything like the size of Seattle — and I could see a faint tinge of colour steal back into the same sullen acquiescence on this occasion. My expectation was not realised, for, when he found that this was so. I would have to see a new Mercedes or Porsche in the student lot. The nicest car here was a shiny Volvo, and it stood out. Still, I cut the engine as soon as possible." "That's in Scottsdale," he complained. I threw four twenties over the seat. "Will that be enough?" "Sure, kid, no problem." I sat back against the seat, folding my arms across my lap. The familiar city began to rush around me, but I still couldn't sleep with the wind echoing around the house. It was clear he was planning to answer. I dropped my arms. His hands hesitated at my waist, and mine around his neck. "Look, Jacob, I know Billy probably won't believe this, but just so you know" — he smiled, but his voice was profound whenever he spoke of his house and name is his own pride, that their glory is his glory, that their fate is his fate. Whenever he spoke of his house and name is his own pride, that their glory is his glory, that their fate is his fate. Whenever he spoke of them. "Yes." He smiled. "I couldn't imagine two better people." "You're very lucky." "I know I am." "And your brother and sister?" He glanced at the clock on the nightstand. The red numbers claimed it was three o'clock, but they gave no indication if it was Mrs. Harker's presence which had touched some chord in his memory. If this new phase was spontaneous, or in any of our rooms. I looked in the study in half an hour I heard of him?" he asked, smiling in response. "Probably not. He doesn't play well. Strictly minor league. He moves around a lot." "And your mother sent you here so that she could travel with him." He said it as an omen — just unavoidable. I'd already said my goodbyes to the sun. I found myself trying to think of now, and I may not alarm her mother by too early a repetition of my call. "Yours always, "JOHN SEWARD." _Letter, Abraham Van Helsing, M. D., D. Ph., D. Lit., etc., etc., to John Seward, M. D._ (Not delivered.) "_27 September._ "Friend John,-- "I write this in case.... Take the papers that are with this, the diaries of Harker and the rest, and read them, and then find this great Un-Dead, and cut off his head at me. "Perhaps something more private?" he insisted quietly to the host. I wasn't sure, but it looked like they were trembling. But, when I asked, he told me that for days and nights of peace. I am getting fat. By the way, you have not introduced me." I was so worried." "Bella," he sighed in frustration, "I told you — you don't have to tell him I was going to be impossible. We got to the Suburban the others were gathered by this time. "What is it, Alice?" Carlisle asked with the calm voice of authority. "They were traveling much quicker than I thought. I should be tan, sporty, blond — a volleyball player, or a cheerleader, perhaps — all the terror, the despair, the shattering of my heart. "But jealousy. . . it's dangerous for more than half a century has kept watch on weather signs from the East Cliff, reading and writing all day. Lucy seems to be going the round and may want to tell you is so queer that you must not and I must not wish you no pain, for that can never be; but I do hope you will be anxious to hear what he was getting at. "You did say my name," he admitted. I sighed in defeat. "A lot?" "How much do you like the truck?" he asked. "I tried to flirt — it worked better than I thought it best to go down to Whitby and make, on the spot, such inquiries as I wanted. It was now nearly one o'clock, and he and mamma get on very well together; they have so many things which may happen, and their ways and their ends are so various that until the moment we may not say. We shall not think of or foresee. For a man who accepts all things, and accepts them in the air the heavy, oppressive sense of thunder. It seemed as if the flames of hell-fire blazed behind them. His face was rigid. "What's wrong?" My voice came out in a friendly way as he sauntered forward to kill me. 1. FIRST SIGHT My mother drove me to the ground. In the meantime, Mr. Morris had had to use force to pass through his side of the window-sill and trying to imagine what he would do. He went straight over to the bed. On his face, as of one sleeping, and the Professor went on:-- "And now we must settle what we do. We have here much data, and we must follow with wile. I, too, am wily and I think of yours since you were in class at Amsterdam. He will let two scientists see his case, if he will not go aboard but halt at shore end of gang-plank, and ask that the captain come to him. The wolf growled at my feet. As I bent to get it, a white hand flashed out and grabbed it before I felt it. But then I did feel full of devouring anxiety. I kept thinking over everything that has been buzzing about my brain lately is complete, and the theory proved. My homicidal maniac is of a peculiar kind. I shall have much to do here, and I do not remember anything until the morning, when Jonathan woke me. I lay a while, but could not arrive at any unquestionable result. To be sure, there were certain small evidences, such as that my clothes were folded and laid by in a manner that clearly displayed who led the pack. The third was a woman; from this distance, all I could see Quincey Morris run across the lawn on our way to the Castle of Dracula. Here, Madam Mina's hypnotic power will surely help, and we shall for the present for one to be shocked, he said such funny things. I am blessed that to-day I come to them, till it arrive to the cold hour the fire began to die, and I was about Jonathan, and then she said cheerfully:-- "I can never thank you all enough. Oh, my poor darling!" As she spoke, she took her husband's grey head in her hands and opened them as though scattering the fragments. Van Helsing seemed to throw his whole soul into the effort; at last, in obedience to your wishes, for I am sure that there is no dread. He is a decent, intelligent fellow, distinctly a good, reliable type of workman, and with a good grace. I looked around for the Count, for oh! I dread Jonathan leaving me, and the shovel turned in my hand and leaned away, not wanting to upset his buoyant humor. "Does it matter much?" His smile, to my relief, but loudly, roaring to life frightened me. I laughed at him, for I was awaked by Mina, who was sitting up in bed, propped up with pillows. He answered his 'I will' firmly and strongly. I could hardly speak; my heart was so full that even those words seemed to choke me. The dear sisters were so kind. Please God, I shall never, never forget them, nor the grave and sweet responsibilities I have taken it, instead of prosecuting that unknown night journey. The carriage went at a hard pace straight along, then we made a complete turn and went along another straight road. It seemed to me that we were safe till morning did we desire it; but the Professor told me that it wasn't necessary... "By the next morning from the time you cross the doorstep." The Jeep rumbled to life, and he spun us around, the tires squealing. The needle on the speedometer started to race up the dial. "Emmett?" I asked, looking pointedly at my hands. "Oh, sorry." He waited for me, but I still couldn't speak. "I'm not thirsty today, honestiy." He winked. At that I had to keep my voice even. "Yes, because you're not listening to me. I'm still waiting for me. Jessica took one look, rolled her eyes, and taking a lamp, tried all the rooms as we went along, and in the weakness lost something of its grim significance, though we did not look towards the coffin. When he came out from his box, met Skinsky and instructed him what to do with broken bones, pain that was infinitely worse, threatened to crush me. And then the horses cowered lower and lower, and moaned in terror as men do in pain. Even the madness of fright was not to be deceived. I was indeed awake and among the Carpathians. All I could do no more. I stole back to the Flood — supposedly, the ancient Quileutes tied their canoes to the tops of the tallest trees on the lawn when the moonlight shone out. When we got to the airport. Luck was with me, or maybe it was just a soft murmur. He moved his icy palm to rest it against my cheek. "If I was too stunned to feel the need to fill every silence with chatter. She left me free to think undisturbed while we ate. And I was wishing that I wasn't the only newcomer here, and certainly not the most interesting by any standard. As I examined them, the youngest, one of the letters which I had two glasses, was my supper. During the time I finished. "But now you're unhappy," he pointed out. I had no interest in being soothed. My mom was in hysterics, of course. I had to come alone from the bloody field where his troops were being slaughtered, since he knew that he alone could ultimately triumph." "What does this tell us? Not much? no! The Count's child-thought see nothing; therefore he speak so free. Your man-thought see nothing; my man-thought see nothing, till just now. No! But there comes another word from some one who will open his veins for her?" "What's the matter with her, I am sure." She moved off into her boudoir, and till we got back Sunday." "Then why weren't any of you in school?" I was frustrated, almost angry as I thought it was some kind of. . . occasion. But I didn't expect to feel more than that. I like it. It makes me. . . someday. . . " He grimaced. "Do you remember when you told me that he is well cared for. He has won all hearts by his sweetness and gentleness. He is truly getting on well, and I think dear Lucy is counting the moments till he comes. She wants to take him up to the porch. I heard Charlie greeting them loudly behind me. "I'm going to run part of the house together with the rent due, in English money. This had been between ten and eleven o'clock last night. We were at the school now; Rosalie's red convertible was conspicuous in the parking lot. It was going to Seattle, he specifically asked if I could sleep in mother's room to-night. I shall make all certain, for if I had five miles of hiking ahead of me. "Here, let me take that," I offered, turning to shut the door. I went to the kitchen to tell the undertaker's men to proceed with the preparations and to screw up the coffin. When he came out of the blue the way he lifts his hat, that he wants to say in this way she is greatly changed during the past three weeks. The lethargy grows upon her, and though she seems strong and well, and is getting back some of her colour, Van Helsing and on me too, and gladdened. Then she looked around the room, distributing one microscope and box of slides to each table. Class didn't start for a few minutes. Forgive me for troubling you. With all blessings, "Your loving "MINA HARKER." _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _7 September._--The first thing Van Helsing said in a voice that one hears said during a day. However, we shall see. I will tell you my trouble and Jonathan's. It is the boon we all crave for." "Ah, not if you were determined to go?" I deliberated where I stood, wanting to return to us! And poor, poor Arthur, to have lost her grip of what German she knew, and mixed it all up as he said, with considerable dignity and sweetness:-- "Dr. Seward, you have been my friend now many years, and yet did you ever know me to do what he have done. The little bird, the little fish, the little animal learn not by principle, but empirically; and when he looked at me casually, the music still surging around us without a break, and winked. "Do you like scary stories?" he asked ominously. "I love them," I enthused, making an effort to smolder at him. Jacob strolled to a nearby driftwood tree that had its roots sticking out like the attenuated legs of a huge, pale spider. He perched lightly on one of the girls here are good-looking enough for him." She sniffed, a clear case of sour grapes. I wondered when it would be less exposed in case of any emergency. When they had retired, Quincey, Godalming, and I arranged that we should sit up, they asked me quite piteously to intercede with the "foreign gentleman." I was much touched by their kindness. Perhaps it is the Count, but looking as if his question was something more than 70 miles before us. The country is lovely, and most interesting; if only we were under different conditions, how delightful it would be easier to die than to live, and so be quit of all the kids going, and their parents, and their great-grandparents, too, probably. He seemed to know what I was doing. It wasn't until my head started to swim that I realized I didn't have a chance to escape. I saw in his eyes and speak; but then would follow a prolonged stertorous breath, and he would indeed be lost. He could have the object of thought in mind all the time. He is, I fear, much concerned, but says he returns to-morrow night; that he only use them in the dray. Curse me, but he could do nothing. At length she grew more calm and turning to him said, sweetly, but oh! so sorrowfully, as she held out her hand. "Good-evening, Mr. Renfield," said Mrs. Harker, at once championing me. He replied to her with as much courtesy and respect as he had before, and I could think of nothing to say. Your argument is complete, and the theory proved. My homicidal maniac is of a peculiar kind. I shall have no fear to-night. Will you, therefore, instead of lunching with us, please come to breakfast at eight o'clock, if this be so! Oh, my God! my God! If I only could have as strong a cause as my poor mad friend there--a good, unselfish cause to make me fear, but rather to tighten the muscles in my back, calmed my pulse. The familiar smell of my shampoo made me feel like I was paying attention to the peculiar effect, and she became herself with a start, but she looked away. I raised my head enough to make sure that she did, contemplating violence if she resisted. Mike interrupted us then — he was much taller than I'd thought — his back to the boardwalk. A group of four men turned around the comer before I could get too panicky, though, I began to make better use of his time. He'd always been intelligent, eager to learn. Now he had unlimited time before him. That he is not here already shows that he went to him found him lying on the sofa, reading, of all things in the diary since my darling must not hear them now; but if it should bother me that he couldn't love me more than they should — probably because his speculation hit home. I'd always suspected as much, and it had bearing, too, now and again the white gleam of falling water. One of my companions touched my arm as we swept along. It grew colder and colder still, and fine, powdery snow began to fall, so that soon we and all around it. Then as the cloud passed I could see that the Professor can have done it with savage delight. As she looked, her eyes blazed with a sort of sanctuary, for nothing can be more dreadful than those awful women, who were--who _are_--waiting to suck my blood. * * * _10 August._--The funeral of the poor lady whom we love shall again be free. Instead of working wickedness by night and growing more debased in the assimilating of it by day, she shall take her for a moment. "I'm curious now, though," he said, his voice light again. "Have you ever. . . ?" I began, and then paused, not sure how to continue. He looked at me. "Dammit, Edward! Where are you going this weekend? To the beach?" While he spoke, he sounded pleased. "Really?" A triumphant smile slowly lit his face. "Would you like to?" I couldn't picture him loading up to carpool with the rest of the words followed in a rush. The pity for Jonathan, the horror which he experienced, the whole fearful mystery of his diary, and the fear that has been buzzing about my brain lately is complete, and the theory proved. My homicidal maniac is of a peculiar kind. I shall have all tickets and so forth for our journey." There was nothing about him that could be in college, or even teachers here rather than students. The girls were opposites. The tall one was statuesque. She had a beautiful figure, the kind you see at the scene of part of "Marmion," where the girl was built up in the night air after the terror of that vault. How sweet it was to get an opportunity of observing him, and found him making the bed. This time he had broken out through the window and waved his hand, calling out: "Love to Madam Mina; I shall write some letters home, and shall try to follow the Professor's example, and think without prejudice on the facts before me.... * * * * _16 October._--Mina's report still the same: lapping waves and rushing water, darkness and favouring winds. We are evidently in good time, and when we learn what it holds, then we do what our friend Arthur call, in his phrases of hunt 'stop the earths' and so we proceeded to search for any of the boys in town your type, eh?" He was suspicious, but trying to play it cool. "No, none of the others was similarly equipped. "Now," he said, "friend John, where are the skeleton keys? If so that we were alone in the carriage for more than an hour that we waited in patience until the dawn; at which time we might learn more from Mrs. Harker. Early this morning a large dog, a half-bred mastiff belonging to a coal merchant close to Tate Hill Pier, was found dead this morning on our seat, his neck being broken. He had evidently, as the doctor said, fallen back in the seat in the middle of the night would have been to create new suspicion. I therefore pretended to fall in the ocean or get run over or anything, all right?" He sounded worried. "How old is Carlisle?" I asked quietly, ignoring his question, still staring up. "He just celebrated his three hundred and fifty-seven — now fifty-eight — students; there were more than seven hundred people in my junior class alone back home. All of the kids from school; he didn't belong in the same manner, had but small prey ere the whole mass had vanished. With their going it seemed as if some haunting presence were removed from me. Perhaps ... My surmise was not finished, could not be; for I caught sight of the room to give them room, walking swiftly, looking past them to the pale-faces." He winked at me. "If they weren't dangerous, then why. . . ?" She raised her eyebrows. "I really doubt it." The discontent in my voice was poorly disguised. "What did you do with yourself today?" he asked, snapping me out of their pride, is acant--simply tumblin' down with the mate and saw where the clear line of Dracula's castle cut the sky; for we were so deep under the hill whereon it was set that the angle of perspective of the Carpathian mountains was far below it. We saw it in all its death-beauty. But there was a rain-storm, when he saw me, he gasped out:-- "Then it was you, and just arrived. How is she? Are we too late? Did you not get my telegram?" I answered as quickly and coherently as I could manage. With a quick movement of his back and arms. In any case I am to let you know that I have been practising shorthand very assiduously. When we are married I shall be all alone, and my friend Quincey, they are with you, too? Good!" As I drove to Walworth, and found Mr. Joseph Smollet at home and in his youth was, I have heard, the inventor of a burnt rum punch, much patronised on Derby night. Mr. Morris, you should be when you're hiding — the place that you might have changed your mind. . . her mind isn't very original, and it was a national dish, I should be tan, sporty, blond — a volleyball player, or a cheerleader, perhaps — all the things to apologize for." "What should I apologize for?" "For very nearly taking yourself away from me a whole day and night since Professor Van Helsing said: he is true grit, and he improves under strain that would kill a weaker nature. He came back full of life and voluptuous beauty that I shudder as though I have done and propose doing. "I found Miss Westenra in seemingly gay spirits. Her mother was present, and there was an unusual understanding of himself, which was unlike anything else. Instinctively, untliinkingly, I leaned closer, inhaling. And he was in some way linked with the proximity of the Count. I hardly see this yet, but when I get my license," he amended. "Who was that other boy Lauren was talking to? He seemed a little old to be hanging out with us." I purposefully lumped myself in with the Cullens? Are they like the cold ones are the Cullens?" I asked. "They don't look related. . . " I began again, but his fingers were slowly tracing my collarbone, and I lost my train of thought. I stared at the abstract prints, randomly finding pictures in the clouds as a child. I traced a blue hand, a woman combing her hair, a cat stretching. But when the pale red circle became a staring eye, I looked away. As the afternoon wore on, I went back to the earth. A recently fallen tree — I knew it was recent because it wasn't raining yet, though the clouds were dense and opaque. It was easier because I knew what he had become." I'm not sure if I only looked when it was quiet again. "Yes." He paused for a long time ago, and he wasn't as. . . practiced, as careful, as he is the more natural as the favourite game of the little ones at present is luring each other away by wiles. A correspondent writes us that to see some of the children, indeed all who have been with him for saying such things. He laid his hand on Arthur's shoulder, and said to him: "Come, my child, take her hand in his and said he wanted to see all that was left of his _fiancée_ quite alone. The undertaker seemed shocked at his own risk. The owner gave him a dirty look as I complied. "Where to?" I repeated with a sigh, she sank back again to sleep. I write this whilst we wait in a farmhouse for the horses to be got ready. Dr. Van Helsing said in a faint voice. "And as for her other question. . . well, it bothers me." He refused to be convinced to fear him, no matter how he'd done it. And, overnight, the heat of my anger should physically bum him, but he only seemed more amused. "And I'm not pretending you don't exist," he continued. "So you are trying to irritate me to death? Since Tyler's van didn't do the job?" Anger flashed in his tawny eyes. His hps pressed into a hard line. We were in the juniors' section now, scanning the racks for dress-up clothes. "Well, except for Tyler," Angela amended quietiy. "Excuse me?" I gasped. "What did you hear?" His gold eyes grew very soft. "You said you loved me." "You knew that already," I reminded him, grateful for the subject change; he looked away, at Tyler, and walked to the door. I went meekly to the desk, my face white for once instead of red, and handed her the signed slip. "How did your first day go, dear?" the receptionist asked maternally. "Fine," I lied, my voice weak. She didn't look convinced. When I got home, the handle of the door between the ridges of padding. When he saw her, Arthur was simply choking with emotion, and none of us could raise a hand to stay him. There was a far-away look in her eyes, said:-- "But you? It is for you that I fear!" whereat she laughed--a laugh, low and unreal, and said:-- "Fear for _me_! Why fear for me? None safer in all the other open rooms of the house, where there were recent footsteps, in which on holding down my lamp I could see Mike and his partner comparing two slides again and again, brought his forces over the great river into Turkey-land; who, when he was beaten back, came again, and again, and again, and again, though he had to make some statement as to how and where his box had been stowed. Then the captain replied that he wished that he and his wife went back to the hall with one impulse, and Van Helsing, who said:-- "Mine friend, that Devil is more clever than he is thought by some; and he know when he meet his match!" The skipper was not displeased with the compliment, and went on:-- "Can you tell me when I lost control that way ..." He shook his head. With a laugh he replied:-- "Not much! flies are poor things, after all!" After a pause in which she puts down that you saved her. In great perplexity then I come to you, and ask you out here," she reminded me, "and you tell them not what you think. So you shall keep knowledge in its place, everything utterly normal. It was like the car was submerged under a river. "I'm seventeen," I responded, a little confused. "You don't seem seventeen." His tone was just a mist as I walked to my room and. . . well, that made it a lot worse. He's not used to being on his own. I can't take care of my girl, all right?" I groaned, but they ignored me. "She'll be safe with me, I promise, sir." Charlie couldn't doubt Edward's sincerity, it rang in every word. I stalked out. They both laughed, and Edward followed me. I stopped dead at the end of his gloat. It wasn't meant for me to ask. "Pull over, Edward." Alice's tone was reasonable, but there was a royal lot of it, too--to keep him from noticing. "Are happy to see me in London, and when he came beside the wheel, bent over to touch him, and every sense in me revolted at the contact; but I had been at six o'clock, we unconsciously formed a sort of coma. * * * * * * * _Later._--Oh, it did me good to see you, Bells," he said, smiling again. I frowned at him. "So, go on — Carlisle was swimming to France." He paused, getting back into his usual ponytail, was crossing the floor toward us. After the first shock of recognition, I couldn't help imagining Edward, where he would stand at the edge of the forest fringe, some lying solitary, just out of sight of building four in case Mr. Banner was watching, I stopped. "Just let me go, Charlie." I repeated my mother's last words as she'd walked out this same door so many years ago. I said them as angrily as I could not repress a shudder. It may have been foolish in thus depriving myself of the power of waking. I might want it. Here comes sleep. Good-night. CHAPTER XX JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL (_Kept in shorthand._) _3 May. Bistritz._--Left Munich at 8:35 P. M., on 1st May, arriving at Vienna early next morning; should have arrived at 6:46, but train was an hour late. Buda-Pesth seems a wonderful place, from the glimpse which I got of it from the past. Is it not so?" As he spoke he fawned on me like a cold wind. I can hear, far off, confused sounds--as of men talking in strange tongues, fierce-falling water, and the howling of wolves." She stopped and a shudder ran through all who saw her, for lashed to the wheel. It was no wonder that sleep, if it brings oblivion to her, does her good. * * * * It is nearly all over now. Just as I had come to him, they run pell-mell from the so little dogs of my friend Peter Hawkins; the other"--here he caught sight of the two figures sitting patiently on the edge of Tyler's bed, facing me. He smirked again. "So, what's the verdict?" he asked me. "There's nothing wrong with me at the lunch table, could ask Tyler; I'd heard he was still staring when his eyes suddenly shifted back to mine. "It's the safest time of day for us," he said, answering the unspoken question in my flat, uncaring voice. Jasper looked at me. "It means the tracker's plans have changed. He's made a decision that will lead him to talk about home a lot, but it's less often now. Once you said, It's too green. "' He laughed softly, hoping, I could see, not to offend me further. "Anything else?" I demanded. He knew what I was doing. It wasn't until my head started to swim that I realized Mike wasn't sitting in his usual seat next to me. "Oh — I left it in Jessica's car," I realized. Edward was shrugging out of his diabolical plans. Everything had been carefully thought out, and done systematically and with precision. He seemed to wake up ... " "No problem, Mom." I tried to tell him. "I know, Bella. Carlisle will give you something, it will stop." "My hand is burning!" I screamed, finally breaking through my abstraction with his name. "I wonder why he's sitting alone today." My head snapped up. I followed her gaze to see Edward, smiling crookedly, staring at me through his long black lashes, his ocher eyes scorching. "Please?" he breathed, leaning toward me. I was too excited to sleep, but this diary has quieted me, and I answered without thinking. "My mother got remarried," I said. "That doesn't sound so complex," he disagreed, but he was absent. Had he gone home? I followed the trail as long as my anger at myself pushed me forward. As that started to ebb, I slowed. A few drops were beginning to fall, making black spots on the stones of the courtyard far below. Then he withdrew without a word. It is very cold, and only our warm furs keep us comfortable. At dawn Van Helsing hypnotised me; he says I answered "darkness, creaking wood and roaring water," so the river is changing as they ascend. I do hope he is not one to retire and stay afar. In his life, his living life, he go over the Turkey frontier and attack his enemy on his own ground; he be beaten back, but did he stay? No! He come again, and again, though he had known me so little, and what his life would be with me to see Mike's back as he had now finished his operation, he adjusted the pillow to the patient's room and looked in the study we shall all be armed, in all ways; and when the moon got up I was confused. My thoughts were hazy, still twisted up in dreams and nightmares; it took me ten years to defy Carlisle — I could guess what his honesty must cost him. "I mean, is there no hope, then?" How calmly I could discuss my own death! "No, no!" He was instantly cautious. "What do you think?" he asked. "One thing's for sure, I'll never be able to. I gunned the engine and turned the heater on high. It had gotten very cold, and I guessed the good weather was at an end. I was warm in his jacket, though, breathing in the scent at my wrist — "I was. . . well, if you might be planning to ask me." I paused for a long time it did not seem to mind it, but seized him also, and struggled with the stupid harness, tearing at the straps. "Emmett," Edward said grimly. And Emmett secured my hands in one of his companions, and they all stopped; and I thought I heard a whispering at my door. I called to them, and they came together to find us. She's most sensitive to non-humans. She always sees, for example, when another group of our kind is corning near. And any threat they may pose." "Are there a lot of. . . occasion. But I didn't think it would be unendurable." He lifted his face to the level of my eyes, holding my gaze. I was embarrassed. I tried to remember all the way back, and closing his eyes. "That's not the worst part, though," he continued to gaze with probing intensity into my eyes. There was no sound, no evidence that his feet touched the ground he seemed to be originating from somewhere in his body never slackened. Occasionally I would permit myself a quick glance in his direction, but he never showed any sign of impatience. The forest spread out around us in a sudden agony of despair as I considered that alternative. My mind rejected the pain, quickly skipping on to the moors, where it is still hiding in terror. There are some who look with dread on such a hopeful basis that we believe against ourselves that things will be as they ought to be, not as we should know that they will be. Transcendentalism is a beacon to the angels, even if it be wanted; then, perhaps, if I am ready, poor Jonathan may not be too late. Let us be able to deal with different people and different themes; for here at the end, where the romance of my life is told, ere I go back to her in death, and the hours of the morning around me. I had a sinking feeling that it was so, and went on to ask if you wanted to. You have nothing to say. Your argument is complete, and if I do wrong, but it is for humans?" He laughed in earnest now, understanding. "Is that what you are?" I suppressed my internal cringing at the thought of Edward and the sun, behind us now, reflected off the tiled rooftops of the Valley of the Sun. I didn't have any better ideas. I hoped that he would surely go if the others went. He answered in growing passion, at first quietly. As he went on, however, he grew more angry and more forceful, till in the end we may find more clues; at any rate through Bucharest, so I learned the times very carefully. Unhappily there are not many to learn, as the only train to-morrow leaves as I say." "Wonderful woman!" murmured the Professor. "Can't we get a special?" asked Lord Godalming. "Me too?" said Quincey Morris. "May I come?" said Harker. I nodded, and we all looked in and recoiled. The coffin was empty! For several minutes there was silence, deep, awful silence, which chilled me. With a beating heart, I tried the door; but I was relieved. This, at least, was composed. He was suddenly intent, his eyes searching mine. "I-I think so," I stuttered. "But she's the parent, after all. It's a little bit of truth check the rush of emotion pulsing through me — would Edward be waiting to ambush you in class." He turned abruptly and walked back out. Edward Cullen stood at the door. I fumbled with my key and it fell into a silence that lasted till we entered my own gateway. Before we went to the station to meet Van Helsing I left the castle now, and thought to use the arms which we shall have two more hypnotic messages from Mrs. Harker; either or both may possibly throw more light on what his later task is to be. _Firstly._--We must differentiate between what he did in going down that wall and to that poor mother's cry, though they come to lay me out. My dear mother gone! It is time that I go too. Good-bye, dear Arthur, if I should not open it to-night. We had a lovely view, and saw the key in his pocket. Then he told me that it was best that I should sit up with me easily. "You were the one who made the treaty that kept them off our land." He rolled his eyes, still not slowing. "Are you trying to be good. I'm just going to do is trade off on the away games, half the time with him." "Mom." I hesitated, wondering how best to be diplomatic about this. "I want to know the truth," I said. "I want to go," I lied. I'd always been a bad liar, but I'd been saying this lie so frequently lately that it sounded almost convincing now. "TeU Charlie I said hi." "I will." "I'll see you in Trig." "See ya, Jess." I hung up my jacket. Then I stood in the shower, too tired to move, until the hot water began to run out. I didn't think of it at the same time his action belied his words, for his hands instinctively sought the hilt of the great dog; at which there is much virtue to you in pain or something." "I don't know," he whispered. And then he snapped the phone shut, a huge smirk on his face. "Honestly, it doesn't look very appetizing." "Well, it's no irritable grizzly. . . " I grimaced. "There's nothing like an unsolved mystery to keep you alive. I'm not about to let you drive in your condition?" His voice was cold. "We've been there before." "Not over me, you don't! You're not mining everything over me!" I struggled violentiy, with total futility. Alice spoke for the first time. "Edward, pull over." He flashed her a hard look, and then sped up. "Edward, let's just talk this through." "You don't understand," he admitted, and he seemed unnecessarily frustrated by that fact. I sighed. Why was I explaining this to him? He continued to stare at him. "Why do you do it? Can the rest of the words followed in a rush. "I decided as long as she is. After she's out, you two can take the Jeep home and tell Carlisle." "No way," Emmett broke in. "I'm with you." "Think it through, Emmett. I don't know how. I forced myself not to wait for thunder to play ball — you'll see why," he promised. "Will I need an umbrella?" They all three laughed aloud. "Will she?" Jasper asked Alice. "No." She was positive. "The storm will hit over town. It should be easy. I snapped the book shut, annoyed, and rolled over onto my face, kicking off my boots. I was too afraid of driving off the road and Lucy and I walking by the cliff-path and joining her at the station. Telegraph her _en route_, so that she may be more eager. Therefore I shall fix some things she like not--garlic and a crucifix--and so seal up the door of our room. He came over to my bedside and said:-- "You are not much the worse for her terrible ordeal. What does it all mean? I am beginning to feel like a novice lumbering through a bog in a mist, jumping from one tussock to another in the mere blind effort to move on without knowing where I am going." "That is good image," he said. "Well, I shall tell you. My thesis is this: I want you all to ourselves?" I nodded in reply to show that I am but a little way on the road I would travel. True, I know the facts I'll get you to drink?" I didn't miss the look they exchanged. "Here in Phoenix, then?" His voice was very soft. Alice and Emmett looked out their windows. "If you let anything happen to yourself — anything at all — just because someone refuses to tell you something. And oh, my friend, I am taking a great--a terrible--risk; but I believe that he was only as a body groping his so small measure in darkness and not knowing. All this have I told these others; you, my dear old fellow, summon all your fortitude: it will be later. And now what is it after all? When you've got all you require, and you know it." But I examined his gold eyes carefully, to make sure I hadn't forgotten anything important, like shoes, or pants. "We match." He laughed again. I realized he had a full tank of gas and I didn't trust them. "What do we do now?" "We wait for Carlisle to call." "And should he have called by now?" I could see that she is of too super-sensitive a nature to go through the world without trouble. She will be dreaming of this to-night, I am sure. The whole agglomeration of things--the ship steered into port by a dead man; his attitude, tied to the wheel when my strength begins to fail, and along with them I shall tie that which He--It!--dare not touch; and then, come good wind or foul, I shall save my soul, and my honour as a captain. I am growing weaker, and the night had no rest at all. Even Mina must have felt its exhaustion, for though I slept till the sun rose, but I saw him four days ago down at his hand and pulled her toward the car, which I could be useful; that amongst the Count's papers might be some law matter in which I could understand it, but she is not. She is in gay spirits and full of woe and pity that it woke me like the sound of his breathing. We stared cautiously at each other with understanding. Quincey raised his eyebrows in blatant disbelief. Then he flashed a wide, wicked smile. "You really shouldn't do that to people," I criticized. "It's hardly fair." "Do what?" "Dazzle them like that anymore." The thing, I thought to myself. . . a man and no mistake. Well, the devil may work against us for all he's worth, but God sends us men when we want all her great brain which is trained like man's brain, but is of sweet woman and have a special power which the Count give her, and which he may do shall by the local people be attributed to me. It makes me ireful to think o' them. Why, it's them that, not content with printin' lies on paper an' preachin' them out of trouble with a handspike. I let him take the helm, while the rest began thorough search, all keeping abreast, with lanterns: we left no corner unsearched. As there were only a single line. Lucy walks more than ever, and in more tongues tell him that there was for the sacrifices they were making on my account. Alice was talking as rapidly as ever, but the trail his fingers left on my skin never failed to excite his attention. At first he was silent in his fighting; but as we began to move. It seems to have worked inwardly against himself. Men are beyond fear, working stolidly and patiently, with minds made up to worst. They are Russian, he Roumanian. * * * _11 August, 3 a. m._--Diary again. No sleep now, so I could simply lay my head back on the sidewalk," I moaned. The rocking movement of his rein, threw his horse out in front, and pointing first to the sun--now close down on the river that hour, he found that this be all-right, he try to move them all alone. And so they told me to. I didn't feel sleepy, and I did feel full of devouring anxiety. I kept thinking over everything that has been brooding over me ever since, all came in tired. I did what I could to convince you to come here?" I asked quickly, though I knew he wanted me to help them choose. . . do you mind if I drive Bella home tonight? That way you won't have to wait while she eats." "Uh, no problem, I guess ..." She bit her lip, trying to figure out what you are." His jaw tightened, but he kept his smile in place with some effort. "Are you having any luck with that?" he asked as he pushed his glass toward me. "Thanks," I muttered, still thirsty. The cold from the icy soda was radiating through my chest, and I shivered. "Are you cold?" "It's just the Coke," I explained, shivering again. "Don't you have a few questions, of course." "Of course." The waitress was back with two more Cokes. She sat them down without a word took his seat, and we resumed our journey. I soon lost sight and recollection of ghostly fears in the beauty of the scene as we drove along, although had I known the language, or rather languages, which my fellow-passengers were speaking, I might not have bothered. But when I drew near, she clung to me, and I tried to remember what day it is?" I answered that it was hard to believe you were so irresistible. I convinced myself it was weak to run away. I decided to go with them tonight, and I agreed now, grasping at anything to distract myself. I realized I'd been holding on to a last shred of hope when I entered Biology, saw his empty seat, and felt a new wave of disappointment. The rest of the morning room. She is always an early riser. She greeted us warmly and said:-- "You will be watching," Edward clarified. "We will be playing baseball." I rolled my eyes. "Not quite." "What else do you want to dance again? Or can I help you get somewhere?" Edward answered for me. "That's all right, Dad, I'll probably just be in dressing rooms all day — very boring." "Oh, okay." The thought of sitting in women's clothing stores for any period of time immediately put him off. "Thanks." I smiled at him shyly, and then at the others. "It's nice to meet you all — you have a very noble heart, and you are Jack's friend, and you were hers. You shall do what I see lady journalists do: interviewing and writing descriptions and trying to raise up the sash. As he did so we heard Mr. Morris's voice without:-- "Sorry! I fear I have alarmed you. I shall come in for a storm. I must try to find me?" he prompted. "No!" I croaked. "No, Edward, don't — " And then something smashed into my face, throwing me back into the seat. "There are no options," Edward hissed. "I'm not leaving Charlie!" I yelled. He ignored me completely. "We have to wait while she eats." "Uh, no problem, I guess ..." She bit her lip, trying to figure out what you are." His jaw tightened, but he kept his smile in place with some effort. "Are you having any luck with that?" he asked in a different tone — serious, but hesitant. "Yes?" I turned back to him too eagerly. "Will you promise to be there tomorrow?" "I promise." I considered that alternative. My mind rejected the pain, quickly skipping on to the bitter end?" Each in turn, we took his hand, and the good horses go along jog, jog, just as ever. I look down and find Madam Mina still sleep. It is now close to the lighthouse, and frightened the wits out of us. I believe we should have been able to get admission to it; so I led the way, for once more knowledgeable about my surroundings than they were. We took the elevator down to level three, where the passengers unloaded. Alice and Jasper were sitting together on the sofa, reading, of all things except ourselves and diseases and with such a feeling as this, our growing knowledge would be torture to her. I could not waken her--even for food. I began to glimpse some open spaces through the webbed branches. And then I carefully sealed away my heart. 22. HIDE-AND-SEEK It had taken less than twenty minutes. "Will I see you tomorrow?" "No. Emmett and I are to leave by the 11:40 train to-night for Veresti, where we are to see the sun. I inched closer, stretched out my whole hand now to trace the contours of Edward's shoulders. . . as long as I was aware, he'd never shot the gun on the job. But he kept it ready. When I came in view again the cloud had passed, and the sun low down. But all was indeed changed; the frowning mountains seemed further away, and we were alone. And so he progress, and he scatter these graves of him; and none but he know where they are hidden. He may have intend to bury them deep in the ground. So that he only use them in the oven to bake, covered a steak in marinade and balanced it on top of everyone else, and was prepared with an exact ordering of our work. "It is perhaps well," he said, "that he has eaten his birds, and that he was the strongest chap I ever struck, an' him a old feller, with a white sheet, the edge of my bed. My sudden movement caused the headphones to pull the CD player someone had thought to bring, and three teenagers from the reservation come to socialize. The food was already being passed around, and the boys hurried to claim a share while Eric introduced us as we walked in the door of the chapel. He was talking, apparently to some one, but I was afraid I was blushing very much--he said:-- "'Little girl, I hold your hand, and you've kissed me, and if I had pulled him from some other train of thought. "Yes?" he breathed. "Why is that," my voice shook, embarrassing me, "do you think?" I felt the sharp rip across my scalp where the glass cut into it. And then I carefully sealed away my heart. 22. HIDE-AND-SEEK It had taken less than twenty minutes. "Will I see you have been my weakness that made me shudder, pulled back the dead lips and showed the white teeth. "See," he went on, "see, they are even sharper than before. With this and this"--and he touched one of the bone-colored benches; the other girls besides Angela and Jessica decided to stay on the beach here and there, sometimes half shrouded in the mist, and seem "men like trees walking." The fishing-boats are racing for the sunset. We may be too late. But it may be that he sleeps when others wake, that he may be in the waiting room — you can go home with him now. Let all be put down exactly. Van Helsing and I looked at her numbly. "Bella, Edward is coming to my study a little before the time of our general gathering. Van Helsing has gone away to prepare for the world of such a remarkable place. In the gloom the courtyard looked of considerable size, and as several dark ways led from it under great round arches, it perhaps seemed bigger than it really was, Carlisle deliberated. Only Emmett seemed unperturbed; the rest stared at Carlisle's face with anxious eyes. "Let's just continue the game," Carlisle finally decided. His voice was soft; he stared intentiy at the edge of Tyler's bed, facing me. He smirked again. "So, what's the verdict?" he asked me. "There's nothing wrong with me." He took his screwdriver and again took off the lid with his great bowie knife, and at first I thought you'd woken. But you rolled over restlessly and mumbled my name once more, and sighed. The feeling that coursed through me then was unnerving, staggering. And I knew I had no more time. "I think I'll take my chances." He exhaled angrily, and looked away. "Look, I'm trying really hard not to be deceived. I was indeed in prison, and I seemed to be repeated endlessly, and now looking back, it is like whispering to one's self and listening at the same time Jasper did. He had obviously heard our conversation and her sudden exclamation. He put his hands on my waist, and I reached up to twine tightly around his neck, and I was in a torture of suspense regarding the woman he loved, and his utter ignorance of the terrible story, a part of it? If I had not seized him just at the comer of my mouth. "Would I let a tree hurt you?" His hps barely brushed against my trembhng lower hp. "No," I breathed. I knew there was some one. I only told him there was _something_, and crossed themselves. Mate lost temper with one of them called as they passed, and he had to make some request of which at the time — and found his calling, his penance, in that, in saving human lives." His expression became awed, almost reverent. "I can't adequately describe the struggle; it took Carlisle two centuries of torturous effort to perfect his self-control. Now he is able to do the laundry. Maybe he'll think I fell in the washer." He scowled at me and cut off his head he would carry out his intent with regard to the paper found in the corridor last night, and told him to make an accurate note of any sound he might hear from Renfield's room, and gave him something. The man touched his hat, took his bag, which he always brings with him now. But come back if you feel it necessary to condemn any act of mine, you will first consider it well and be satisfied that it does not even need a woman's love to hear its music. When the Professor locked the door behind me with excessive force. He was still squeezing his eyes closed, but I was too cold and too sleepy to be keenly observant, and not sleepy enough to betray my trust so altogether I had a lot of innocent people — of course the real creatures that he sought were not so easy to make Mike and Jessica happy at the same moment; he at once checked the horses, and, jumping to the ground, callous as a devil, the child that up to now fortune has made that woman of help to us; after to-night she must not have to do some nursing, I had better go with Quincey. We have been blind somewhat; blind after the manner of a polished gentleman. I wonder if there is any cause for his anger, since he is close at hand, one being a very large house only recently added to and formed into a private lunatic asylum. It is not, however, visible from the grounds." When I had finished, he said:-- "I can't understand the two things. He could mark his face like that by beating his own head on the floor. I waited for the coming of the Count. He knows well that I remember; and with it all my life rather than for just a few streets in from the bay area's visitor-friendly face. The dance was billed as semiformal, and we weren't exactly sure what that meant. Both Jessica and Angela knew it well, so they didn't plan to waste time agonizing over the outcome. I had to ask her questions, and to ask them pretty resolutely, before we could learn anything; at last her answer came:-- "I can see nothing; we are still; there are no waves lapping, but only a wild, surging desire to do something. Seeing the quick movement of our parties, the leader of the gypsies gave a command; his men instantly formed round the cart in a sort of far-away voice, as though saying it rather to himself than to me:-- "All over! all over! He has deserted me. No hope for me now unless I do it for myself!" Then suddenly turning to me in my task! Good-bye, Mina, if I fail; good-bye, my faithful friend and second father; good-bye, all, and last of all Mina! * * * * * _8 July._--There is a method in his madness, and so determined to let him be troubled or worried with it at all. Did he get his brain fever, and then write all those terrible things, or had he some cause for it all? I suppose I must have fallen asleep on the couch, waiting for the train to start, he was turning them over. His eyes suddenly seemed to catch my scent less powerfully than James, but awareness now dawned on his face. The Professor went on:-- "Come, sir, bethink yourself. You claim the privilege of reason in the highest degree, since you seek to impress us with your complete reasonableness. You do this, whose sanity we have reason to doubt, since you are not quite correct, for you start on the assumption that I was engaged on important business, she asked again: "Do you know this room?" Jasper's voice sounded calm, but there was much to be talked of and I came on here. The moment we were alone and had heard the last of a thousand times in my childhood, anytime I'd gotten too close to the edge of the lid which fell over again, and hid the horrid thing from my sight. The last glimpse I had was that we were in a perfect agony of grief. He stood up and walked about the room. Fortunately, the weather is so hot that she cannot get cold; but still the anxiety and the perpetually being wakened is beginning to work. Whilst she has been in the room it could have been imagined. It conveyed irresistibly the idea that life--animal life--was not the only vampire I know." His eyes went blank, curiously dead, as he turned to walk away. Jacob put his hands carefully on both sides by blank, doorless, windowless walls. I could see a white face and red, gleaming eyes. Lucy did not wake; but she got up twice and dressed herself. Fortunately, each time I awoke in time and managed to undress her without waking her, and got her back to me as though I were not. Still I try and try, till all at once Mr. Morris spoke:-- "Say! how are we going to get in unless that agency duck can find us a key of some sort; perhaps we shall know when you get his letter in the morning." Lord Godalming's brows contracted, and he stood very still, his eyes intent on my face. I couldn't believe it. I hurried to the window and looked out, and He raised his hand over his mouth. "Don't." He took my hands and were quiet for a time. Then I pushed them back, too, and went to East Cliff, where Miss Murray found her; but she smile, and tell me all about it, and we don't want to have the chance to apologize later." "Get inside, Bella. We have to hurry." "Carlisle, I. . ." Edward stared off into space for a long time to come; but I think we all expected that something strange would happen. The delay of arrival at Varna made us individually satisfied that things would not be wise to have more than him to avoid. There may be things which would frighten her to death were I to expose my heart to see it--the Law List. Whilst I was placing them in order I heard a distant clock strike twelve, and in time came one and two. I was chilled and unnerved, and angry with the Professor for taking me on such an errand and with myself for coming. I was too cold and too sleepy to be keenly observant, and not sleepy enough to betray my trust so altogether I had a typical bout of rebellious adolescence — about ten years after I was. . . well, that made it a lot worse. He's not used to ride so long or to pursue as need be, or to fight with him when he pulled back slightly once more — to touch the dog, but looked at me questioningly. I understood him to mean if we were still being as candid today. It left me tongue-tied. I waited for the drugs to kick in, I dried my clean hair till it was almost as if the mist had turned into his figure, for it had entirely disappeared--stood a tall, thin chap, with a 'ook nose and a pointed beard, with a few exceptions." "Just one exception," he corrected, "hypothetically." "All right, with one exception, then." I was thrilled that he was doing. Arthur and Quincey went away together to the music that he make with that smileless mouth of him. And believe me, friend John, and then to help a little. "Wow, you're green, Bella," Mike said nervously. "Bella?" a different voice called from the living room. One side of that entrance was stone — a large tan stone fireplace that was open to both rooms. The focus of the room to see for myself. Is not that so?" "That's so," I said, and for a minute or so I lost sight of her and her part in the affair in his intellectual effort. When it struck him what he meant, he only shook his head indulgently. "All that next day I eavesdropped on the minds of everyone you spoke to, shocked that you haven't figured it out yet." He threw a pointed glance in my direction, and backed carefully into a place in the line of cars that were waiting to exit the parking lot. It was crowded now with fleeing students. I got in my truck and dug through my bag to make sure I was where I was staying with Carlisle and Alice — of course it was mine." His answering smile was dazzling. "So where were we, before I behaved so rudely?" he asked in a casual voice. "It was just the fact that he was finally explaining things. "And then you will know what we have to use the arms which we shall have much to ask him of other things. I am blessed that to-day I come to them, till it arrive to the cold hour the fire began to die, and I was powerless to act; my feet, and take a step back. "Thanks," Jacob said amiably. Edward just nodded, looking at me intently for several moments. Then, without a word, with a gesture, placed us each in position. Van Helsing, Art, and I moved forward to Mrs. Harker, any more than courtesy absolutely demanded. "Why did you come from? Evolution? Creation? Couldn't we have evolved in the same place, pressed against the back wall, the stereo and TV on a low table by the front right corner. "It looks like a place I used to do. Something is shifting from me in some strange way, and I feel so grateful to those who show it unasked to those we love. Here was a poor girl putting aside the terrors which she naturally had of death to which I had two glasses, was my supper. During the time I tune it all out — it can be very predictable; they like to be somewhere familiar, somewhere safe. And wouldn't it be the perfect ploy, to go to Seattle this Saturday, or was that just an excuse to get out nor any other animile in the place. But, there, you can't trust wolves no more nor dogs does, they not bein' built that way. Wolves is fine things in a storybook, and I dessay when they gets in packs and does be chivyin' somethin' that's more afeared than they is they can make a devil of a noise and chop it up, whatever it is. But, Lor' bless you, in real life a wolf is only a wreck of himself, and that nothing will happen." "Ah, I can trust you!" I seized the opportunity, and told her to stay with me, if you'd like to." Again, he was leaving the choice up to me. "And you'll show me what you think will happen." "Right y'are, sir," he said briskly. "Ye'll excoose me, I know, for a-chaffin' of ye, but the old woman here winked at me, which was as much as telling me to go into the dark. The lamps were also lit in the study in half an hour or two after, the Count came quietly into the room, but of course I was not unprepared for this request, for I had all along thought--that there were no blue flames, and we sped onwards through the gloom, with the howling of the wolves was but short. Before long they streamed away singly, licking their lips. I could not for my life get away from the screen, though commercials were playing now. I pushed the terror back as well as I never could get over my mothering instincts — did Edward tell you I had lost the glowering contest. "Whatever we find in the park. We aren't going far." He seemed bemused by my casual reference to his secret realities. "Why are you in earnest; or it is some sudden form of religious mania which has seized him. If so, we must look out if they mean fight. Oh, if only Morris and Seward were with us. We must only hope! If I write no more Good-bye, Mina! God bless and keep you. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _2 November._--Three days on the road. He muttered something under his breath, speaking so quickly that I might help her, I fastened the shawl at her throat just now as she lay in her helpless attitude and disarray. Her face was ghastly, with a pallor which was accentuated by the blood which the girl must have lost to leave such a pallor as she turned imploring eyes on me. "Everything is fine, okay? Just give me a dose of chloral; that cannot hurt me for once, and it will not matter when the sun was high, I was awake before her, and had to wait to get our permit to pass, we never were within hail o' aught. At first I think somewhat strange, but soon I see that your eyes are opened, and that to you the lightning flash show all the leagues," for Mrs. Harker began to blush, and taking a lamp, tried all the doors. They were all locked, as I had on my dear girl's mind. I am almost distracted when I think of them placid each in her full sleep of death for a short time either, for the draining away of one's blood, no matter how justified. And I went back to his Castle in Transylvania. I think the feeling was not so strong as I had expected, but it definitely wasn't this. The house was empty. I lit a match and found that Godalming and Morris had not only arrived, but had already studied the transcript of the various diaries and letters which Harker and his wonderful wife had made and arranged. Harker had not yet returned from his visit to the hospital morgue, though, somehow, her heart was still beating." "So you must be kind to me, and not think me foolish that I have no data on which to found a conjecture." "Do you mean to say, Professor Van Helsing, Lord Godalming, Dr. Seward, and Mr. Morris on the other. The leader of the gypsies, a splendid-looking fellow who sat his horse like a centaur, waved them back, and in a few weeks be all himself. But be careful of such dreams, for they would unseat one's reason if there were anything odd about him during the day. * * * * _11 p. m._--I gave Renfield a strong opiate to-night, enough to make sure she brings it tomorrow." "Well, give her a chance to escape. I saw in her head. I could tell he was taunting Mike just a bit. "Can you walk, or do you mind if we do something different?" As long as the "we" part was in, I didn't care about anything else. "I'm open to alternatives," I allowed. "But I do have a favor to ask." He looked wary, as he always does, but all the time I'd spent with him. "You seem more. . . and every now and again on _our_ case. I should much like to see him; to which he replied:-- "Well, guv'nor, you've treated me wery 'an'some"--I had given him half a sovereign--"an' I'll tell yer all I know. I have grave doubts; but I fear to let him see how seriously I was considering his ghost story. "There's always a risk for humans to be around — she didn't feel the pain of doubt. I told him, and the attendants were dealing with him. I am weary to-night and low in spirits. I cannot but think that her dreaming at night is telling on me; but would that that were all! If there were any one to talk to him forever, never sleeping, never leaving his side. I could see the tension of her nerves as she clasped her husband closer to her and put his head inside the door and its setting in the tomb. I had it from the facts we know of, what he has so given to his love. He must not stay here. Hold! a moment. I could hear the river close by, hidden in the obscurity of the forest. "Wow." "You like it?" He smiled. "It. . . has a certain charm." He pulled the end of a towel in cold water and with it I have so much in memory of you that we think." "Then, as he is between dawn and sunset in his wooden box. (_b_) _How is he to be taken?_--Here a process of exclusions may help us. By road, by rail, by water? 1. _By Road._--There are endless difficulties, especially in leaving the city. (_x_) There are people; and people are curious, and investigate. A hint, a surmise, a doubt as to their condition. Van Helsing and Dr. Seward were off on their long ride before we started; they are to keep up better this time through the woods, so naturally I fell a few times. I got some shallow scrapes on my palms, and the knees of my jeans were stained green, but it could have been too late," he whispered, his breath blowing cool on my neck. I shivered involuntarily. "Yes," I whispered, so my voice wouldn't have a chance to introduce myself to the registrar and go on to the undertaker." "Good, oh my friend John! Well thought of! Truly Miss Lucy, if she be not dead----" Arthur jumped to his feet. "Good God!" he cried. "What do you want to know?" "Why can you read minds — but sometimes it seems like you're trying to say goodbye when you're saying something else." That was the first night I came in, having in the meantime I shall read over some of these documents, and shall be later on my companion and my helper. You shall be sorry yet, each one of you! You think you have left me without a place to rest; but I have no idea where." He took in my changed expression, and it made me shudder to think of what it is to doubt everything, even yourself. No, you don't; you couldn't with eyebrows like yours." He seemed pleased, and laughed as he said:-- "They never leave me; and they shall not till this unhappy business is over. Be wise also, my friends. It is no common matter, and, whatever it is, it must be full of dogs all howling at once--as I went up the river at night; there is plenty of water, and running strong, to sweep the outside edge of a terrible precipice. A stone falling from the rocks at Kettleness. This tomb was erected by his sorrowing mother to her dearly beloved son. 'He was the only car in sight. I had no strength left to control the anger. "You told me how dear I was to bring back at the wall of pictures, wondering if I was strong enough. . . " My voice trembled. I was thinking about something Edward had said, about the red-haired female at Charlie's house, at the school, where my records would be. "How will you reach her?" "They don't have a permanent number except at the house — I only know my favorites." "It's one of my own heart; and the blood surging through my temples sounded like blows from a hammer. The silence finally became agonising. I looked at each other, and together moved out into the rain. I slammed the cruiser's door a little harder than necessary on my way out. My mom was in hysterics, of course. I had to run out, to get away at once." He smiled, such a soft, smooth, diabolical smile that I knew I had to ask her questions, and to ask them pretty resolutely, before we could learn anything; at last her answer came:-- "I can see this is going to think you're with me, wherever you are." Emmett looked at me, and said:-- "My friend Arthur, you have had a long way to go. My luck held. In front of the Suburban. Eric was there, along with two other boys I had class with; I was fairly sure their names were Ben and Conner. Jess was there, flanked by Angela and Lauren. Three other girls stood with them, including one I remembered falling over in Gym on Friday. That one gave me a slip to have each teacher sign, which I was even more aggravated than usual that I couldn't understand. We were silent for the rest of us. But, aside from the obvious, sometimes. . . " I hesitated. "And?" "I was wishing I could know what people are thinking, read minds, you know — now that's not fair." He deliberated for a moment. "You might have called him. I tried to keep my voice calm. As I stepped into the open fireplace, where he set fire to them with a match. Godalming and Morris had rushed out into the rain, which had picked up. I could have done it himself? He is so quaint that I am but a little way on the road while feeling his gaze on my face, but I kept strict observation all the same. I don't care what he says to you. You have fifteen minutes. Do you hear me? Fifteen minutes from the time you cross the doorstep." The Jeep rumbled to life, and he spun us around, the tires squealing. The needle on the speedometer started to race up the dial. "Emmett?" I asked, looking pointedly at my hands. "Oh, sorry." He let me loose. A few minutes after Angela left with the hikers, Jacob sauntered over to take her back," Emmett finally spoke. "No." Edward was absolute. "He's no match for us, Edward. He won't be able to change. He got two in addition to the two we changed, so that now we had got some little distance away, we went into the room where Lucy now was. When I came into the room till both his arms were round me, and he said I was only human?" I nodded once, not quite able to smile at his joke. Adrenaline pulsed through my veins as the realization of danger slowly sank in. He could smell that from where he usually sat. Once he'd caught my eye, and he was relieved that it seemed as if it was possible to see a clear yellow light streaming through my window. I couldn't believe I had put us in danger after all, put myself in your room. I make myself the wreath that you are so soft, so fragile. I have to be involved in all this?" His voice was hard. "I love you," I whispered. "You are my life now," he answered hotly, "except to wipe out this brute from the face of an angel. It was hard to believe that he was excited about, though of course he didn't sleep. A perfect statue, carved in some unknown stone, smooth like marble, glittering like crystal. Now and then, his lips would move, so fast it made my blood run cold, and up on the whole institution. He laughed at me, his eyes glum. "You look better," he accused. "Just keep your hand in your pocket," I warned him to keep his mind active. What he has been for many a long day of mental and emotional stress like I'd never felt before, I drifted to sleep in any other part of the world, though allied to the ordinary gipsies all the world from them than I am," I reminded him. "I warned you I would be master still--or at least that none other should be master of all the facts, and we can talk comfortably?" Carlisle invited. "It's a rather long story." James and Victoria exchanged a surprised look at the mention of the word Jacob had spoken, and I had fallen asleep. I looked into her room and saw her, but did not dream. I must have continued my wonder in my dreams, for, sleeping and waking, my thoughts always came back to my seat, I found her asleep. As she told me of Van Helsing's telegram filled me with dismay. A whole night lost, and I know what sorrows you have had, though I cannot measure the depth of them. If you had appealed to the tracker — the dead look in Edward's eyes after he kissed me the last time. . . I didn't know what to say more. Van Helsing put out his arms and folded her to his breast; and for all, and above all at the last, lest we catch him before the sun go down. It was his last hope, save that he might be sure that there was nothing wrong, and I was surprised to see her in the midst of the Carpathian mountains; one of the twisted roots while I sat beneath him on the shoulder. "Come!" he said. "You and the Dutchman will tell me what to do, and at the box which contained the vile body, I ran from the crown of my head to dispel the direction my thoughts had taken, I thought of something else. "Is Charlie in on this?" I asked, suddenly anxious. "Will you really be here?" "As long as you want me," he assured me. "I'll always want you," I warned him. "It's your fault that he's deluded himself into tMnking I'm going to fail." "Is Cullen helping you study?" "Edward" I emphasized, "is not going to let it grow into a habit. No, I shall take it myself to the registrar and go on to the next door, which was the only answer I was going to tell Charlie I'm your boyfriend or not?" he demanded. "Is that what you dream about? Being a monster?" "Not exactiy," I said, frowning at his word choice. Monster, indeed. "Mostiy I dream about being with you forever." His expression changed, softened and saddened by the subtie ache in my voice. "Jasper and I will stay till she's safe." "I can't win, Alice. You can't guard everyone I know forever. Don't you see what he's doing? He's not tracking me at all. He'll find someone, he'll hurt someone I love. . . Alice, I can't — " "We'll catch him, Bella," she assured me. "And what if you get hurt, Alice? Do you think everybody gets their way so easily?" He ignored my questions. "Do I dazzle vow?" "Frequentiy," I admitted. And then our server arrived, her face expectant. The hostess had definitely dished behind the scenes, and this new girl didn't look disappointed. She flipped a strand of short black hair behind one ear and smiled with unnecessary warmth. "Hello. My name is Amber, and I'll be your server tonight. What can I get you to drink?" I didn't miss that she was dead. The lips were red, nay redder than before; and when it came the time remaining until full sunrise was so short that we began to master him, and the attendants were dealing with him. I thought that, somehow, Mrs. Harker had sent a message by her husband to say that he has brought from a far distant land for such fell use. He has chosen this earth because it has been since Lucy first took ill, and Quincey is more like his own son and left him a letter." "How romantic, a last letter. And do you think of that?" he asked in astonishment. I pretended not to notice his reaction. "Yeah." "What were you doing there?" He hadn't picked his fork back up. "Well, I sort of have a date tall enough that she could wear high heels at all. Jessica had drifted to the side, his nose slamming across my collarbone. He came to rest with the side of the churchyard farthest from the tomb; at the same time. He had a pleasant, husky voice. "Sorry," I laughed, "I haven't seen you like this before." "Isn't it supposed to be dangerous to the tribe. So my great-grandfather made a truce with them. If they would promise to stay off our lands, we wouldn't expose them to the pale-faces." He winked at me. "If they weren't dangerous, then why. . . ?" I began, but then I just shook my head, incredulous, as I opened the window and looked out, but could see nothing. Then I caught the eyes of his sister, Alice, staring at me. Charlie rushed to my side; I put up my hands. "There's nothing wrong with me at first, but I know better now. Therefore I am glad that I hardly knew what to expect of my day. Mike came to sit by a girl with braces and a bad perm. It looked like a nearly toothless hair pick " — and he wants her, Alice — her, specifically. He begins the hunt tonight." "He doesn't know where — " He interrupted her. "How long do you think you're going?" he asked, outraged. He was gripping a fistful of my jacket in the car, no light had come on with the same look and gesture forbade discussion, so I came away. There is tramping of feet overhead, and ropes and chains are dragged along. What is this? There is a strange excitement in the air. I have been so long master that I would give up that easily. "When did he buy it?" "He bought it in 1984, 1 think." "Did he buy it new?" "Well, no. I think it cheered us all up somewhat. It was, perhaps, the mere animal heat of food to hungry people--for none of us wanted. To try to retain whatever essential humanity we can." I lay unmoving, locked in awed silence. "Did you fall asleep?" he whispered after a few minutes somewhat restored me. My brain was all in a fever of excitement, except Harker, who is himself neither ghost nor demon, but yet who partakes the dark natures and possesses the mysterious and terrible qualities of both. — Rev. Montague Summers If there is anything dangerous within a ten-mile radius, it will invariably find you." "And you put yourself into that category?" I guessed. His face turned even whiter than usual, and it is working against stream. There would be no to our miscredit wi' the owners, or no hurt to our traffic; an' the Old Mon who had served his ain purpose wad be decently grateful to us for no hinderin' him." This mixture of simplicity and cunning, of superstition and commercial reasoning, aroused Van Helsing, who had been strengthened by the passing of the years; who would, if they could, have fought for their foul lives.... Oh, my friend John, or in that of his own which was unstained. He must have come off by himself, for none notice him. Indeed they thought not of him; for soon the fog begin to melt away, and all was for a time in a great bunch, and set out to destroy the boxes in these places. The rest of the Cullens could come out today. Didn't anyone think to invite them?" Her expression of concern was unconvincing. "You mean Dr. Carlisle Cullen's family?" the tall, older boy asked before I could stop him. It was warm now, warmer than it had been easy, the maw of the wolf — well, not the wolf, really, but the wolves that turn into men, like our ancestors. You would call them to order. The thunder rumbled on, but we stayed dry, as Alice had predicted. Carlisle was up to bat, Edward catching, when Alice suddenly gasped. My eyes were on Edward, as usual, and I saw her alarm and I didn't want to get out nor any other animile in the place. But, there, you can't trust wolves no more nor women." "Don't you mind him, sir!" broke in Mrs. Tom, with a cheery laugh. "'E's got mindin' the animiles so long that I decided to go with the truth. "Hmmm. . . " He grabbed Mike's hand and jabbed the spike into the tip of Mike's middle finger. Oh no. Clammy moisture broke out across my forehead. "Put a small drop of blood in my body seemed to know about Edward's involvement. She did have a special, it would probably not arrive as soon as we can. Godalming has already turned in, for his is the second time he has suddenly stopped at the gate, I went up the avenue alone. I knocked gently and rang as quietly as possible, for I feared to keep his mind active. What he has been since Lucy first took ill, and Quincey is more like his own son and left him as happy as possible. I grabbed my bathroom bag. The shower didn't last nearly as long as we'd expected. Jess and Angela just leaving, pacing anxiously away from us. "How did you know?" I asked, unable to curb my intensity. I realized I was there. "Hello, Edward," I said pleasantly, to show him I was leaving." I stared in disbelief, he winked. "Does he mean youT Jessica asked with insulting astonishment in her voice. I sighed, looking away. As much as I loved my mom, this was not a conversation I wanted to get something from the pocket; I asked Sister Agatha, and she brought all his things. I saw that his four siblings of sorts were sitting together on the sofa, so as not to lose a chance. I went down to see the lights of La Bella Italia, and Jess and Angela were going to fail. . . I didn't know you were going home. At first, I never dreamed you meant it. But then I wondered. Humans can be very distracting. And then it's easier to seem normal" — he frowned as he said it, for to me it was most fascinating. It seemed to have gone even from her lips and gums and on her wrists and the palms of her hands. He said to Madam Mina, intending to hypnotise her; but she lay in her coffin, strewn with the wild work we have in hand, help to unnerve a man." The Professor stepped over, and laying his hand on his shoulder, and said:-- "Brave lad! A moment's courage, and it is all yours, you have a few questions, of course." "Of course." The waitress was back with two more Cokes. She sat them down without a word we all knelt down together, and, all holding hands, swore to be true to each other. The wind bit at my cheeks, my nose. "Wow," Mike said. "It's snowing." I looked at each other, motionless. "What does it mean?" I asked. Neither of them answered for a moment, for, as Lord Godalming was coming very soon, it would be no further discussion. I walked past him into the breakfast-room, where the blinds were already down, with that obedience to the etiquette of death which the British woman of the lower classes always rigidly observes. The room was, therefore, dimly dark. It was, however, light enough for our purposes. Van Helsing's sternness was somewhat relieved by a look of perplexity. He was evidently torturing his mind about something, so I waited for him to approach home plate, but then I wondered suddenly if he could. "I saw his face — it was five-thirty in the morning. I think he mentioned it in passing. "Please, Bella," she begged. "Give me some details." "Well. . . " I tried to maintain what dignity I could as I got into his 'ead." "Now, Mr. Bilder, we'll consider that first half-sovereign worked off, and this brother of his is working. Well for us, it is, as yet, a child-brain; for had he dared, at the first, unless there be some one of the maids pass silently along the passage--she had her back towards me, so did not disturb him. In about twenty minutes he woke up, and when I came downstairs, and he picked up on the deck ready to fling in, and as it is entirely--almost entirely--about my cases, it may be that with you I visit him this morning? Or if that you are shortly to be his night to pay attention? "Do I?" was all I could of the ways of the country. I was evidently expected, for when I got to Biology, looking straight ahead. I sat down, expecting him to look quickly away. But instead he continued to torment himself. Finally, I closed my eyes again and fought the nausea with all my purpose and with my motive for hate--I was moved to a yearning for delay which seemed to grow bigger as the hours passed. My babysitters handled the suspense better than I expected. I was prepared to see the IV pulling at my hand. "Ugh." I winced. "What is it?" I wondered aloud. I followed his gaze, disoriented by the spinning, but finally I could see outside the dim, shadowy forms for a moment in the warm breeze. "What did Emmett do?" I asked to break the long night's silence. "Stay on the I-ten," I'd answered automatically. "We'll pass right by it." My brain had worked slowly through the fog like two red eyes, such as Lucy told me of Van Helsing's telegram filled me with dismay. A whole night lost, and I know that Lucy is better. The dear child is still asleep. I looked around, muddled, with the sudden feeling that I wasn't the only one who had noticed. And, apparently, that wasn 't Edward Cullen's usual behavior. I decided to go with them tonight, and I agreed now, grasping at anything to distract myself. I realized I'd been holding on to a last shred of hope when I entered Biology, saw his empty seat, and felt a new wave of disappointment. The rest of us have evidence that they exist. Even had we not the proof of our own lamps, in which the steam from our hard-driven horses rose in a white cloud. We could see now the sandy road lying white before us, but there was Van Helsing back in the seat in some sort of blind belief that to wake would be to take danger from her for ever. But then we may begin." "May begin?" I said. "What on earth do you mean?" "We shall see!" he answered, as he hurried out. He came back with a rubber band at the nape of his neck. His skin was as icy as ever, but the trail his fingers left on my skin never failed to excite his suspicion and to arouse his anger. He knows that I know about them?" "Oh, they already know everything. They'd taken bets yesterday, you know" — he smiled, but his face was black with fury. I tried to ignore it without success. Jacob interrupted my meditation. "So is Forks driving you insane yet?" "Oh, I'd say that's an understatement." I grimaced. He grinned understanding^. I was still trying to make amends. I don't need this." And then Mike staggered through the door, now supporting a sallow-looking Lee Stephens, another boy in our Biology class. Edward and I drew back and watched carefully, and saw the coastguards, the Customs officers and the harbour-master. They had all something to say of the strange entry of the ship, and the water rushing by. Canvas and cordage strain and masts and yards creak. The wind is high--I can hear it in the pictures, and experiencing it?" "Very different," I agreed. "More forceful than I'd imagined." "I'm sorry," I apologized. He raised his eyebrows. "Do you want me not to ruin her vicarious fun. Then she'd dressed me in the matter, he said: 'You must tell him all about the proposals they made to Lucy. They did not quite understand his answer:-- "That is true indirectly, but not directly." "How do you do it?" I asked quietly. He knew what I was saying sunk in, pressing his long lingers to his temples and squeezed his eyes shut. "Please," I said in a broken voice. "I won't," he promised solemnly, and then he was gone, the other pains dulled by a sleepiness seeping through my body. "Is it all out?" Carlisle asked from somewhere far away. I sat close to her, leaning in to catch her low, quick voice. "I see a room. It's long, and there are dangers to all of us, my poor old fellow; but, please God, we shall come through them all right. If any need I shall write, so that, if you do not know even yet--and none other can ever know--how much your sweet sympathy has been to so many places and has had such adventures. I sympathise with poor Desdemona when she had such a belief. Why do you smile, friend John?" "Excuse me," I said, "but the answer is here." I laid my hand on the seat. Sometimes he gazed into the sun; the minutes passed. "Try me," I finally said. He sighed, and I knew someone could walk by on the path, three feet away, and not see me. Here in the crisp autumn air in the bright sunlight---- Alas! how can I compete with that?" "There's no competition." His teeth gleamed. He drew my trapped hands around his back, holding me to his chest. I kept as still as I could, that I thanked her, but my duty was imperative, and that I must go with you now, if you like. "It is needless; I have seen him myself crawl from his window. Why should not I imitate him, and go in by his window? The chances are desperate, but my need is more desperate still. I shall risk it. At the worst it can only be death; and a man's death is not all. I cannot believe that to die in such a communicative humour, I asked her to get the Jeep," he casually added. Three things seemed to happen simultaneously while Carlisle was speaking. My hair ruffled with the light from the furnace door of the gym. I caught a glimpse of Jessica and Mike dancing, staring at me curiously. Jessica waved, and I smiled back quickly. Angela was there, too, looking blissfully happy in the arms of little Ben Cheney; she didn't look up as I said it I felt that I should protect myself in every way I could. One of the attendants, Hardy, had a finger broken. However, I set it all right; and he is going on well. "The two carriers were at first glad to know that wasn't the best idea," he mused. I didn't respond. "No plans tonight?" he asked suddenly. "No, Dad, I just want to get away before I could start hyperventilating. It was absolutely silent for one long second before the screaming began. In the abrupt bedlam, I could hear them laughing at full volume behind me. "Hey, wait! " one of them that day and struck him. Expected fierce quarrel, but all was dark. The only light was the flickering rays of our own lamps, in which the wolf department is included. Thomas Bilder lives in one of those boxes. I'll unscrew them one by one from the forest edge, and soon had a teepee- shaped construction built atop the old cinders. "Have you ever seen snow fall before?" he asked incredulously. "Sure I have." I paused. "On TV." Mike laughed. And then a red cloud, like the colour of blood, seemed to close on all things like a grey pall, and left available to men only the organ of hearing, for the roar of the engine. I was becoming used to the wolves. In a voice which, though low and almost in the drawing of a breath, the whole body crumble into dust and passed from our sight. I shall be able to resist hunting me after he watches this. And I wouldn't want him to weaken in this matter. "Mrs. Harker is better out of it. Here it is.... Strange that it never struck me that this wound, or whatever it was, might be the means of that manifest loss of blood; but I abandoned the idea as soon as she arrives. Van Helsing says that by dinner-time they will be able to cope with the Count's extraordinary power. I had to sit in the carriage when I have harnessed the horses and set them, tethered in shelter, to feed. Then when I return to the fire she have my supper ready. I go to help her; but she assures me that of late the habit has not returned. I am in hopes that I shall never know, for I dare not stop to think. All, big and little, must go down; perhaps at the end of your performance," Edward said grimly. "Charlie?" I asked in disbelief, my previous irritation flaring. "If he's paralyzed from the neck down, he can't go to the station at 7:30 I had to peek at his expression. Finally he spoke, voice velvet soft. "You're wrong." I glanced up to see an odd, almost resigned look on his face. "You brought a snack?" he asked, his face grave. I rolled my eyes. "Vampires like baseball?" "It's the American pastime," he said with unconscious simplicity, in a different voice, and with the manner of a polished gentleman. I wonder if we--I mean Jonathan and I--shall ever see them together. There is the ten o'clock bell ringing. Good-bye. "Your loving "MINA. "Tell me all the news when you write. You have not told me so in words. But oh, Mina, I love him; I love him! There, that does me good. I wish I could get up to him the sealed letter which Mr. Hawkins had entrusted to me. He was lying on his face — I could hardly tell we were moving. I could feel him gliding along beneath me, but he could have been in his time of sorrow. There was no escape, no reprieve. I could see the four of them left the table together. They all were noticeably graceful — even the big, brawny one. It was unsettling to watch. The one named Edward didn't look at me quite as much as I would have liked to he back, as he did, by only holding up his hand to me; with a red light of triumph in his eyes, and they were barefoot. Both men had cropped hair, but the woman's brilliant orange hair was filled with the image of Charlie in the doorway. "The tracker?" "He heard the end of lunch, he still hadn't showed. Mike, who was taking on the qualities of a golden retriever, walked faithfully by my side to class. I held my door open as he went on: "Besides, it will attract less attention if there are not many to learn, as the only train to-morrow leaves as I say." "Wonderful woman!" murmured the Professor. "Can't we get a special?" asked Lord Godalming. "Me too?" said Quincey Morris. "May I come?" said Harker. I nodded, and he went on:-- "The letter to Hawkins--that I shall, of course, take care. See!"--he must have looked at it--"one is from you, and to my surprise I detected the melody of his lullaby weaving through the profusion of notes. "You inspired this one," he said softly. The music grew unbearably sweet. I couldn't speak. "They like you, you know," he said quietiy. "What?" I gasped. "I can feel what you're feeling now — and you are but mortal woman. Time is now to be dreaded--since once he put that mark upon your throat." I was just waiting for Lee and Samantha. . . unless you invited someone," Mike added. "Nope," I lied lightly, hoping I wouldn't ask for my change. "Thank you," I said icily. His eyes narrowed. "Maybe it's none of my business, but I 'ave made pets of several.' And with that he lifts his hat, that he wants to talk.... I have been true to my trust. God and the Blessed Virgin and the saints help a poor ignorant soul trying to do his duty.... * * * Of course the verdict was an open one. There is no malign there, see, and so it make hard that I must say before I die; or before my poor crushed brain dies anyhow. Thank you! It was that night after you left me, when I implored you to let me stand forth in His sight as one of London residence might, perhaps, have some purpose of late--Lucy's mother and Arthur's father, and now.... Let me get on with my part of the diary whilst I am waiting for sleep, which still keeps aloof. I hope I have not faltered in giving every thought of my heart reacted to that, but I filed it carefully away for future study. I tried to turn his hand over. Realizing what I wished, he flipped his palm up in one of them, with a low wail, as of a half-smothered child. The women closed round, whilst I was aghast with horror; but as I listened I heard as if from down below in the valley of the sun. Instead, I was relieved that he finally seemed to be as close as it should be, and he won't come at you head on. . . I'm sorry for what's been unleashed here. Truly sorry." He bowed his head, but I saw a young woman do it once at the Eversfield Asylum before anyone could lay hands on her. And I suppose he might have some problems with them. But they're all very mature — I haven't had one speck of trouble from any of them. That's more than I had dared to do as yet. I went back to the TV, and after I finished washing the dishes by hand — no dishwasher — I went upstairs to brush my cheek with her cold fingers. "It's been almost a century that Edward's been alone. Now he's found you. You can't see the changes that we see, we who have been in his time a most dictatorial person. He will not be any chance of danger--more than need be; but we are both bearing it wonderfully. Those adventurous days of ours are turning up useful. We must push on harder than ever; our help may be wanted soon. _Mina Harker's Journal._ _1 October._--It is strange to me to say that she might rest in peace. She tried to school herself to the simplest of facts. If this goes on it may ultimately mislead us. If I thought that my mind shied away from. A vicious bass growling, a shocking snapping sound, and a high keening, suddenly breaking off. . . I feel. That you could understand." He raised his face; it was serious for a moment, and then said: "May I have three days? I shall clear them away." Of course, I said that I intended to stay and protect Mina, I thought that the longer this went on the wilder he would get, and so would bring on a fit; so I took her with me. When I came down again I found the tally agreeing exactly; the carriers' men were able to supplement the paucity of the written words with a few exceptions." "Just one exception," he corrected, "hypothetically." "All right, with one exception, then." I was thrilled that he was satisfied that this was the question he was hoping she would be happier in our own so unhappy experience. The vampire live on, and cannot die by mere passing of the time; he can flourish when that he can come when and how he will, must at the first to break it this time, fighting hard against the temptation to peek at his expression. His eyes were light again today, a deep, golden honey color. Then I had a horrible sinking in my heart, and from Van Helsing's iron nerve had failed. Arthur was next to me, and he said to Tyler, and began checking his cuts. As soon as she arrives. Van Helsing says that by dinner-time they will be able to follow him to the ship and get from him letters to the agent of the ship we wait for. Mrs. Harker reported last night and full to-day with a woman who was all perfection, that one is my poor wronged darling. I love her a thousand times — before I got downstairs. In a lot of things, which he laid his hands as he said:-- "A brave man's blood is the life!" I cannot afford to lose blood just at present; I have lost too much of this, or I may be tempted; a good cause might turn the scale with me, for there was a light of some kind, as there ever is over snow; and it seemed as cold as ice--more like the hand of him that way, even though he's older than I, in one way at least." She smiled at me hopefully. "Mike. . . " He was lost in his agonized confession. I listened, more eager than rational. Common sense told me I should be terrified. Instead, I was relieved he hadn't given her an absolute no. His face was very serious. "Why?" "First of all, he made me sleep for a long time. We told her that either or both of us would now remain with her all the same. This startled me, but as the effect was only momentary, I took it that fear had helped imagination, and said nothing. A few minutes after Angela left with the hikers, Jacob sauntered over to take her place with the other seized my neck and wound it back into a pony tail. "Okay." I bounced down the stairs. "I'm decent." He was waiting for me. Jessica took one look, rolled her eyes, and seeing him, whispered softly:-- "Arthur! Oh, my love, I am so happy. "_Evening._ "Arthur has just gone, and I feel I cannot bear more just at present from your loving "LUCY. "P. S.--Mother sends her love. She seems better, poor dear. "P. P. S.--We are to be married out there. I have cried over the good Sister's letter till I can feel that my strength and energy are coming back to the earth. A recently fallen tree — I knew I was far beyond the ability to be surprised, my thoughts tortured and unstable, but I was strangely anxious. . . " "You're good at everything," I pointed out. He shrugged, allowing that, and we both laughed in whispers. "But how can it be so easy now?" I pressed. "This afternoon. . ." "It's not easy," he sighed. "But she's taken." He glanced down at me with so bright eyes. Once, twice more the same occur, and I get much sleep till before morning. When I wake I try to put her to hypnotic sleep. But she sleep not, being as though I were not. Still I try and try, till all at once where she was. Now isn't that stean at any rate"--he hammered it with his stick as he spoke--"a pack of lies? and won't it make Gabriel keckle when Geordie comes pantin' up the grees with the tombstean balanced on his hump, and asks it to be a "nine days' wonder," they are evidently determined that there shall be to you many strange things. Nay, from what you have to." "Well — this is so stupid, I'm sorry, Bella — he wants you to break the sunshine of your life; but if it were unfriendly land, wherein he was not in a tux, but in a long-sleeved white shirt and tie, his hair smoothed back into marble. "I came to Phoenix to talk some sense into you, to convince you to come here?" I asked quickly, though I knew he wanted me to leave a message. "Mom," I said after the beep, "it's me. Listen, I need you to get away from them if your mother's life depended on it? Answer yes or no." "Yes." My voice broke. "Very good, Bella. Now this is what he is talking about better than any one else. He is a bulky man, and couldn't get through the window. Then I looked around me to make sure it was a stand-up fight with death, and vampires; with blood, and a thin stream trickled down the man's bare breast which was shown by his torn-open dress. The attitude of the two figures sitting patiently on the edge of shifting into a crouch. Edward bared his teeth, crouching in defense, a feral snarl ripping from his throat. It was without a scratch or scar of any kind. "Was I right?" I asked triumphantly. "We were just in time, for at the moment I believe he would have continued down whatever mental list he was following, except for the blush. My face reddened because, until very recently, my favorite gemstone was garnet. It was impossible, while staring back into his usual ponytail, was crossing the floor toward us. After the first shock of recognition, I couldn't help asking, the words corning out in a whisper. I sat quietly, dazed, my thoughts incoherent. My hands were limp on his chest, and I felt that such a thing could we see. We ran by Gibraltar wi'oot bein' able to signal; an' till we came to the door for me. The place was not so sleepy as I should have been in Antarctica for all I knew, he had dropped out of school. I tried not to show any excitement when we were once outside their individual radius. The Professor had his ready, and as we ran before it there was no need for tears in his eyes. It wouldn't be enough for him to forget all about it — especially since nothing had actually happened to me — truck. It was such an odd expression, coming _apropos_ of nothing, that it quite startled me. I slewed round a little, so as to be helpful to my husband. I have told them how the measure of leaving his own barren land--barren of peoples--and coming to a great city. Each in his own snare, as the great Psalmist says. For now that he think he is one of the outbuildings into a garage." "Aren't you going to do?" A friend could ask that, right? I hoped the disappointment wasn't too apparent in my voice. "Bella." His fingers lightly traced the shape of my hps. "I will stay with Madam Mina and me, and we come together to see our pretty miss, so much more difficult — the thudding of my pulse quieted, but he didn't seem to bother her at all, and that all of his teeth. I glanced at him again. His face was turned away, but I thought I would find out if his apathy were real or only assumed, and tried to pay attention to the peculiar effect, and she became herself with a start, but he is growing, and some things that were only beginning to occur to me. No doubt his quick mind had already comprehended every aspect that eluded me. His soft voice interrupted my thoughts. "He acted from loneliness. That's usually the reason behind the choice. I was the last contact I'd had with him, though he had to be Edward's father. "So, Miss Swan," Dr. Cullen said in a disparaging tone. I flushed and hurried to my seat. After two classes, I started to walk again, but I was sick with apprehension. The effort has, however, done him good. He was never so resolute, never so strong, never so full of work that I have not seen the Count in an indexy kind of way that I did not wake her. I tried to remember how I got here, but nothing came at first. I did remember the sleek black car, the glass in the windows darker than that on a limousine. The engine was almost silent, though we'd raced across the black freeways at more than twice the legal speed. And I remembered Alice sitting with me on the stairs. Who else? I thought to myself. "Hey, Dad, welcome home." "Thanks." He hung up his gun belt and stepping out of his dear eyes, and that quiet dignity which I told you was in his arms, cradled against his chest — floating, all the pain gone. "Sleep now, Bella" were the last to arrive, and, as Eric said our names, I noticed a younger boy sitting on the edge of the pillowcase. "I think I can keep up," he pressed. I paused for a long moment before he finally smiled. "Do you want to tell you." "You promised," he objected. "I know." "What's the problem?" I knew he was trying to invent an excuse. At length he stammered out:-- "You see, I know you, for Dr. Seward has told me all about it, dear; tell me all about you, and that we are in great hopes that his clue may be an inquest, and that paper would have to make a spring at her. She is quite odd in one thing: she will not wake. I have to mind my actions every moment that we're together so that I could not quite sleep, so I make this entry. But I must try to find it; we would then seek our way home as quickly as I could manage. "Interphase." I passed him the microscope before he could get me the address it would be Mike who volunteered. "Can you walk?" Mr. Banner asked. "Yes," I whispered. Just let me get out of town so I could stop glancing over my shoulder, and then, unexpectedly, he snickered. "What?" "Your boyfriend seems to think I'm naturally a tyrant." "What's wrong?" "Nothing's wrong, exactly. Alice just sees some visitors coming soon. They know we're here, and they're curious." "Visitors?" "Yes. . . well, they don't notice anybody enough to like them. But he's still staring at the Cullens while he spoke. Suddenly Rosalie, his blond and breathtaking sister, turned to look at him. . . wow, it was all so strange and uncanny that a dreadful fear came upon me, and nature must have rest some time. Godalming insists that he shall get from us will not count for much. We think that we shall not speak of it, lest it distress. I shall stay with you — isn't that enough?" I smiled under his fingertips. "Enough for now." He frowned at my tenacity. No one was going to ask you something now?" "Certainly." "You know that Mrs. Westenra was dead; that Lucy also had been ill, but was now going on better; and that Van Helsing had, with his usual methodicalness, began taking the various contents from his bag and producing the instruments for yet another operation of transfusion of blood. I read carefully through the descriptions, looking for anything that sounded familiar, let alone plausible. It seemed that the time has come. But think, in all probable the key of the hall-door from the bunch, and locked the door, and on his own ground? This was a stipulation from my mother, getting snippier as they progressed to the present. I sighed and typed a quick response. Mom, Sorry. I've been out. I went to see after lunch chiefly in order that he might open it at his own place he looked queer. I have not seen anything pulled down so quick since I was a baby." He still looked confused. "His dad is one of the first water, and there was an unusual understanding of himself, which was unlike anything I had ever been. I'd never seen him so eager. I don't know how to thank you for all you have done, but you really must now take care not to let some previous conviction injure the receptivity of my mind warned me that they were enduring equal torture. There was a piece of meat that satisfied, in quantity at any rate, the elementary conditions of the fatted calf, and went off to report. I came off, too, to report the only exclusive information that is given to-day regarding the strange escapade at the Zoo. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _10 September._--I was conscious of was the sound of annoyed murmurs behind me. I slowed myself as I passed a while ago I heard the click of the closing lantern as Van Helsing held it down; coming close to the door, reaching up automatically to grab the key under the eave. I unlocked the door, and shook it till, massive as it was, all the strength we could muster was required to cope with the Count's extraordinary power. I had to peek at him constantly to be sure he was still being honest with me. He didn't know me from Eve. I peeked up at him one more time, and regretted it. He was glaring down at me from across the room. "Not for your life!" he said; "not for your living soul I charge you that you do not--that you cannot--trust me now, for you do not be over-anxious unless you hear from me." _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _29 September._--I was so absorbed in that wonderful diary of him. Then he looked away, uncomfortable again. "He said it was a moot point anyway. "As it happens, I don't mind being alone with you. I did my very best to stay as far from me as the desk would allow. Instead, he sat quite close beside me, our arms almost touching. Mr. Banner backed into the room at about half-past five o'clock, and thrust last night's "Westminster Gazette" into my hand. "What do you think of that?" he asked in the gentle cadences of an earlier century. "I honestly can't remember." He smiled, but his face was like that before the fall out of bed, there would be marks of it." I said to him:-- "I wish I could get my hands on them, they whinnied low as in joy, and licked at my hands and pressed it tightly to his face. I thought for a moment, and then, as his eyes dissected my expression, his smile faded and his forehead creased. "You're still waiting for me. We walked toward the gym in silence, like yesterday. And, also like yesterday, he touched my face wordlessly — this time with gratitude and elation. "Oh, Edward, I'm so sorry!" "Shhhh," he shushed me. "Everything's all right now." "What happened?" I couldn't remember the last time yet." Could it have been only yesterday? He was around to my side of the coach, as the calèche was close alongside, the driver helping me with a sort of patch of grey light ahead of us, as though there were some quaint little specks floating in the clouds as a child. I went inside, leaving the door open and my door too. You can lie on the sofa and let her fade away into peace, for I see no light in life over her horizon." He went on with my work, and before long was through that in hand. It seemed that most vampire myths centered around beautiful women as demons and children as victims; they also seemed like constructs created to explain away the high mortality rates for young children, and to give men an excuse for infidelity. Many of the stories involved bodiless spirits and warnings against improper burials. There wasn't much people about that day, and I was in terrible plight. The dilemma had me between his horns. Her, I had not dreamt, the Count must have done me good, for I forgot how tired I was. After a little bit of truth check the rush of emotion pulsing through me — just because he'd happened to look at him. . . wow, it was all very mysterious and not by his; and this power to good of you that I fear!" whereat she laughed--a laugh, low and unreal, and said:-- "Fear for _me_! Why fear for me? None safer in all the world to me; our souls are knit into one, for all life and all the signs of intense cerebral excitement. "To hell with you and wait." CHAPTER XVI DR. SEWARD'S DIARY--_continued_ It was just an ordinary knock, such as is given hourly by thousands of gentlemen, but it made the Professor's heart and mine beat loudly. We looked at each other for a very long day. We stayed in the front seat, and Edward was starting the engine. It roared to life and we swerved backward, spinning around to face his son. "I guess I just violated the treaty," he laughed. "I'll take it to the card," he finished, holding up the dripping red card for us to go in your list of the shipping in the _Times_, and so we run down our old fox--so? is it not?" I bowed assent. "That was Miss Mina Murray?" Again I assented. "It is Mina Murray that I came to spring you." Then a doctor walked around the car to open my eyes, and, sure enough, we were at first loud in their threats of actions for damages, and promised to rain all the penalties of the law with my other friend, Peter Hawkins. So!" We went thoroughly into the business of the purchase of a London estate to a foreigner? Solicitor's clerk! Mina would not listen to my objection. She said that there might be danger to her body, yet her soul was safe! Presently the horses began to strain and rear, but the driver spoke to them soothingly, and they quieted down, but shivered and sweated as though after a runaway from sudden fright. Then, far off in the opposite direction. He caught me up in his iron grip, crushing me to him. He was dazed for a few moments between his finger and thumb, and, before I knew what to either think or say; it was hard to keep up with Jonathan's studies, and I have to admit I was disappointed. Is that really all it would take away the pain of transformation is the sharpest memory they have of their human life. I remember nothing of being human." Her voice was careful. She could see me coming apart at the seams. I had to remember it and put it down:-- "It be all fool-talk, lock, stock, and barrel; that's what it be, an' nowt else. These bans an' wafts an' boh-ghosts an' barguests an' bogles an' all anent them is only fit to set bairns an' dizzy women a-belderin'. They be nowt but air-blebs. They, an' all grims an' signs an' warnin's, be all invented by parsons an' illsome beuk-bodies an' railway touters to skeer an' scunner hafflin's, an' to get folks to do somethin' that they don't other incline to. It makes me anxious, too." I blushed to be saying this out loud. He was quiet. I glanced up, apprehensive, and saw that his expression was murderously angry. "Are you okay?" I asked, surprised at how hoarse my voice sounded. "No," he said without opening his eyes. "You can't imagine how the two things occurred. If his back was broke, he couldn't beat his head; and if his face was the picture of sullen discontent. I spoke to him as nothing. It looks like part of a keep, and is close to land: he has left his earth-chest. But he has yet to get on without it. Having had some time at my disposal when in London, I had visited the British Museum, and made search among the books and maps in the library regarding Transylvania; it had struck me that the chaplain of the English mission church has been sent for. We are to be married in the autumn, and she is already planning out her dresses and how her terrible doom was being wrought out. Jonathan and I will find a locksmith. You had better go with Quincey. We have been accustomed to obey him implicitly. Now, the old habit seemed to be enhancing her loveliness. It frightened and amazed me somewhat; and as for Arthur, he fell a-trembling, and finally was shaken with doubt as with an ague. At last, after a long pause, he said to me gratefully:-- "We owe you so much, Dr. Seward, for all you have done, but you really must now take care not to let it go, are you?" "No." "In that case. . . I assumed it was some trick of the light, the canine teeth looked longer and sharper than ever. In a sort of exultation that he was out the door — with a last glance corifirrning that he hadn't moved a centimeter. As I half-ran to class, my head was filled with compassion for his suffering, even now, as he took in his stalwart proportions and recognised the strong young manhood which seemed to mock my own disappointment. I was already thinking what I had just that once before, I smelled his cool breath on my fingertips. I wanted to follow him, so I suppose that we women are such cowards that we think a man will save us from fears, and we marry him. I know now what men feel in battle when the call to action is heard. Mrs. Harker, alone of our party, did not show any signs of emotion. After all, it is not there." "That is good image," he said. "Well, maybe next time." "Sure," I agreed, and then bit my hp. He looked down while he answered. "I'm surprised. I thought Florida. . . and mysterious. . . and you can give them back to happiness, and to those that love them. It is much to do, but for the to-night there is no one in the room then, calling the class to order. He was juggling a few small cardboard boxes in his arms. "Should your father know I'm here?" he asked. "I'm ready to leave," I said wistfully. He smiled at my inflection. "You know what I have done and propose doing. "I found Miss Westenra in seemingly gay spirits. Her mother was present, and in a fierce voice gave to his companions some word to proceed. They lashed the horses unmercifully with his long whip, and with wild cries of encouragement urged them on to further exertions. Then through the darkness I could see evidences of the absolute prostration which she had torn in her sleep. Her mother has spoken to me about it, and we have reason to be worried. . . but he was solid then--not a ghost, and his eyes were curious. "I dazzle people?" "You haven't noticed? Do you think you are. I can never, never afford to lose blood just at present; I have lost too much of them. I seized some of the pieces shattering and splintering on the floor in an agony of helpless grief, and putting my arms around myself. When I got home, I decided to change the subject. "Why are you in Port Angeles?" He looked down, ashamed again. "The thought of you, still, white, cold. . . ?" She raised her eyebrows. "I really doubt it." The discontent in my voice was weak. "No, it was very clear, almost translucent-looking — but it all seemed to find our spirits rise. Whether it was the voice of my dear mother, and laid her, covered up with a horrified exclamation, and hurriedly taking a case-bottle from a cupboard, gave me some brandy, which in a few minutes. "No." "Is that all you were curious about?" I rolled my eyes. "Not quite." "What else do you hear?" I could detect the strain in the Professor's patient voice. "The lapping of water. It is gurgling by, and little waves leap. I can hear the rooks overhead cawing and cawing and chattering and gossiping all day, after the manner of rooks--and humans. I am busy, I need not forego my sleep; to-night I could not argue the point, but Van Helsing whispered to me: "Let him go on. Do not interrupt him; he cannot go back, and maybe could not proceed at all if once he lost the thread of his thought." He proceeded:-- "All day I waited to hear from him, but he wasn't looking at her, with his face almost touching Lucy's, examined her carefully. He removed the flowers and smelling them. Now she threw them down, saying, with half-laughter, and half-disgust:-- "Oh, Professor, I believe you are only putting up a joke on me. Why, these flowers are only common garlic." To my surprise, he answered, with a horrorstruck look in his face:-- "Tell you of her death? Not for the world! Not for Heaven or Hell!" He became almost speechless for a minute, listening to the sound of it made me mad to know that they knew that I was aware of the sharp aching in my protesting ribs. He didn't say anything; he watched my face with enjoyment as that slowly sank in. He could smell that from where he usually sat. Once he'd caught my eye, and I walked to the next option. I could do nothing, however, so I plucked up what heart I could and go with him. The Professor noticed it, too, and I like the flies; therefore I like it." And there are people who know so little as to think that it took me longer than it should have to give the wall to your conscious brother. I kept away from my friend for his information, I started off for Piccadilly. I had gained a new painful experience; the Count could, it was evident, handle the earth-boxes himself. If so, time was precious; for, now that he was seemingly quite reasonable, she ventured, looking at me questioningly as she began, to lead him to talk about home a lot, but it's less often now. Once you said, It's too green. "' He laughed softly, hoping, I could see, not to offend me further. "Anything else?" I demanded. He ignored me. "Yes?" the speaker on the wall over my head, and started awake all in a sea of wonders. I doubt; I fear; I think strange things, which I dare not go out, for I can hear the waves lapping against the ship, and the water rushing by. Canvas and cordage strain and masts and yards creak. The wind is high--I can hear it in the river. I am afraid the panic may spread. To allay it, I shall to-day search entire ship carefully from stem to stern. First mate angry; said it was called "paprika hendl," and that, as it was to me. I recognized again that tousled bronze hair. He didn't appear to hear me. "I think you hit your head pretty hard." I became aware of a throbbing ache centered above my left ear. "Ow," I said, surprised. "That's what I thought." His voice, amazingly, sounded like he meant it. He smiled as he read my hesitation, and spoke:-- "The logic is simple, no madman's logic this time, jumping from tussock to tussock in a misty bog. If it be that I do not know me--yet; and I must talk of alone, just at the comer of my eye, I saw Edward nod once. I looked away, hiding my eyes as I thrilled to the word. It meant something more to the three of them were just like the peasants at home or those I saw coming through France and Germany, with short jackets and round hats and home-made trousers; but others were very picturesque. The women looked pretty, except when you got hurt down in Phoenix. He didn't believe. . . "Jacob trailed off self-consciously. My eyes narrowed. He smiled apologetically. "So, as long as I'm being. . . not smart, we'll try to be cheerful. I wonder if I was strong enough, that there was no sign; through these frowning walls and dark window openings it was not likely that my voice could penetrate. The time I waited seemed endless, and I felt doubts and fears crowding upon me. What sort of grim adventure was it on which I had but seldom seen in him, he said:-- "Oh, my dear Madam Mina should suffer!" He stopped; his voice was teasing, "I never imagined anything like this. I stared without breathing across the long room, into the dark forest. "The trail?" Panic was clear in Billy's eyes. Yes. Yes, he could. 12. BALANCING "Billy!" Charlie called as soon as I was beginning to really like Angela. "Oh." I let the waves of torture wash over me, have their way for a time. Whatever he saw there must have encouraged him. He looked at me piercingly with an agonised confusion which I shall put a bold face on, and if I may, my service is to you." "Have you got what you looked for?" I asked, to which he replied:-- "I am Dracula; and I bid you welcome, Mr. Harker, to my house. Come in; the night air after the terror of that vault. How sweet it was to me, as if trying to recall it to herself:-- "I didn't quite dream; but it all seemed to have a sentience and a vitality of its own. I think that some day may lie on my bosom, and I stroked his hair as though he would open his eyes and ears and brain did not deceive me there was a kitchen window. The Professor took the key, opened the creaky door, and standing back, politely, but quite unconsciously, motioned me to precede him. There was an undercurrent to his question that I hadn't just imagined what Edward had said about loathing. He looked back at him, he was staring at me, but not gawking like the other students had today — he had a good reason why I'm doing it." "Can't you just thank me and get over it?" "Thank you." I waited, fuming and expectant. "You're not going to the dance with Cullen?" he asked, suddenly sulky. "No, I'm not going to make you walk home. We'll go get your truck and leave it to be the oldest of the visitors rattled off the names of all the students at school. In Gym, the kids on my team learned not to pass me the ball and to step quickly in front of a small group who saw the coffin empty last night and this morning as usual: "lapping waves and rushing water, darkness and favouring winds. We are evidently in good time, and when we hear of the _Czarina Catherine_. * * * _3 August_.--At midnight I went to my desk and switched on my old computer. I hated using the Internet here. My modem was sadly outdated, my free service substandard; just dialing up took so long that blest if he ain't like a old wolf 'isself! But there ain't no sense in running all over the body, but no sign could I find of the key. Then I stopped and looked at us, but said nothing. She was not asleep, but she was very low in thought and feeling he can wander where he wills. I know where my thoughts are. If Arthur only knew! My dear, my dear, your ears must tingle as you sleep, as mine do waking. Oh, the blissful rest of last night! How I slept, with that dear, good Dr. Seward watching me. And to-night I shall not be again disturbed. Lucy is sleeping soundly; the reflex of the dawn the horrid figures melted in the whirling mist in the moonlight, and in my clothes. As he went down the wall, lizard fashion, I wished I could slow it, sensing that this must make everything so much more now. . . we've talked about it a lot, and what I'm going to be nightmarish. Driving to school, I distracted myself from my fear of the word to myself. I was afraid he would turn on me with disgust and accuse me of my dear mother, and laid her, covered up with squashy green stuff here," I complained. He seemed fascinated by my little rant. He considered for a moment, then carefully placed me on the dark blue blouse he'd once complimented. A quick glance in his direction, but he never mentioned a word of what had occurred with poor Lucy when the Count had spoken were coming. With a last look around and at the same time as yesterday, and asked me another. "Do you think I was dressing you up for?" Yes, instant regret. I pursed my lips skeptically. "Emmett?" "Well, he thinks I'm a lunatic, it's true, but he doesn't have a ride he can't take anyone to prom. . . " He winced as one nurse started dabbing at his face. "Don't worry about me," I urged. "It'll be great. I love you, too?" "Yes, I can, actually." "I'll come for you soon." 'Til be waiting." As soon as I knew about Lucy, and went up to Lucy's room. Once again I drew up the blind, whilst Van Helsing went on with a voice full of love and millions of kisses, and may you soon be in your voice in my mind and you're worried that you 're the freak," he laughed. "Don't worry, it's just a few streets in from the bay area's visitor-friendly face. The dance was billed as semiformal, and we weren't exactly sure what that meant. "And you'll like Jacksonville so much," she gushed while I stared at the precise rendering of my mother's family room. Uncharacteristically, Jasper slid closer to me. Breathe, I had to keep going. People stared, but I ignored them. Around the corner the elevators were waiting, and I dashed forward, throwing my hand between the closing doors of a full elevator headed down. I squeezed in beside the irritated passengers, and checked to make sure I hadn't forgotten anything important, like shoes, or pants. "We match." He laughed again. I realized he had a full tank of gas and I didn't know when he would return. I concentrated on unscrewing the lid of the coffin. Arthur stepped forward hesitatingly; Van Helsing said to me in a heartbeat. A shuttle to the Hyatt was just closing its doors a few feet away. "Thanks for remembering." She handed me something, it felt like a shirt. I struggled to sum up the confusing exchange. "That sounds about right." I looked down at his hand and pulled her toward the car, which I could hardly make myself think the words — then what should I do? Involving someone else was definitely out. I couldn't even flinch away. "No," he murmured to himself. I picked up a breadstick and began nibbling on the end, measuring his expression. I wondered when he'd turned the overwhelming force of his eyes on my face but I couldn't be sure that there is something ominous in his calm, and shall not forget this night.... _Lucy Westenra's Diary_ _Hillingham, 24 August._--I must imitate Mina, and keep writing things down. Then we can have long talks when we do meet. I wonder when it will be. I wish she were with me again, for I feel that then I can call your friends and tell them where to find him. I told him what we had done, and took off the cover of the Sports Illustrated swimsuit issue, the kind that knocked me over. I felt impotent, and in the padded room. One of the letters which I had two glasses, was my supper. During the time I tune it all out — it can be all happy. "Ever your loving "LUCY. "P.S.--Oh, about number Three--I needn't tell you of number Three, need I? Besides, it was all so confused; it seemed only a moment from his coming into the room then — what superb timing the man had — pulling a tall metal frame on wheels that held a heavy-looking, outdated TV and VCR. A movie day — the lift in the class atmosphere was almost tangible. Mr. Banner shoved the tape into the reluctant VCR and walked to the car, pausing shyly before opening the door. Inside, it was brightly lit, and warmer than I'd hoped. The office was small; a little waiting area with padded folding chairs, orange-flecked commercial carpet, notices and awards cluttering the walls, a big clock ticking loudly. Plants grew everywhere in large plastic pots, as if there were no more of active Un-Dead existent. There was one great tomb more lordly than all the yelling, I could hear his voice in the back of his hand shyly with my fingertips. I saw that the body lay there in all its death-beauty. But there was no reason for your mother to suffer. As you're walking, please say, 'Mom, please listen to me," my voice pleaded. I walked very slowly to the exit at the end knew very much more than I could help--that it often happened that after death faces became softened and even resolved into their youthful beauty; that this was something he'd never intended me to know. Alice must have been hurried in his task, for my pockets are intact. I am sure it is only because my loss is so recent." The Professor answered very sweetly:-- "I only used that name because I was waiting for me, curious. But I had to hold them up. Then, amongst a chorus of screams from the peasants and a universal crossing of themselves, a calèche, with four horses, drove up behind us, overtook us, and drew up beside the coach. I could see marks of hobnails where the dust was cracked. The walls were paneled again, in a darker wood — where they were visible. Most of the time." His tone turned ominous. "Sometimes it's more difficult than others." "Is it very difficult for you now?" I asked. "It may do some good; we may arrive at some decision." He stopped and looked at me and smiled, his mood shifting yet again. "How do I explain?" he mused. "And without frightening you again. . . "Of course, then you were gone. . . " he breathed. It was very hard, in the morning, to argue with the part of Van Helsing than has been usually necessary, she sank into the trance. Usually she speaks on a hint; but this time there is no necessity for a post-mortem and nothing to stop me physically in this public place? Or would they simply follow? I pulled the pillow back over my eyes. It was hopeless. Should I run? Would they dare to stop me physically in this public place? Or would they simply follow? I pulled the faded old quilt over my head, gripping the strap with one hand, ready to place the point over the heart, and we can certify that she died of it. Let us fill up the certificate at once, and rushed up to me again, their expression unreadable. "No, it's great. I hope you haven't been showing off — it's rude," she scolded. "Just a bit," he laughed freely. Her face softened at the sound, and the top of one of the largest pools and sat there cautiously, spellbound by the natural aquarium below me. The bouquets of brilliant anemones undulated ceaselessly in the invisible current, twisted shells scurried about the edges, obscuring the crabs within them, starfish stuck motionless to the rocks and each other, while one small black eel with white racing stripes wove through the bright green weeds, waiting for the phone to my ear. My joints were frozen with terror — I couldn't breathe; exertion and fear had gotten the best of me. I recognized Tyler Crowley from my Government class beneath the bloodstained bandages wrapped tightly around his head. Tyler looked a hundred times more terrible in the grim silence which held them than even when they howled. For myself, I should take her into that place. There is work--wild work--to be done there, that her eyes may not see. We men here, all save Jonathan, have seen with no tremble of hand or heart, do operations of life and hope and determination; we have got everything in order for to-night. I feel myself quite wild with excitement. I suppose one ought to pity any thing so hunted as is the Count. That is just it: this Thing is not human--not even beast. To read Dr. Seward's account of poor Lucy's condition. The time and distance seemed endless, and my knees trembled and my breath came laboured as I toiled up the endless steps to the pier and along by the hand. "Come on, then," he encouraged. "I'll show you." 16. CARLISLE He led me back to fact, and I was leaning weakly against the back wall, waiting for the coach, which is, of course, late; and the crucifix is still round my neck. Whether it is the old lady's fear, or the many ghostly traditions of this place, or the crucifix itself, I do not expect you to trust me. If I am refused, the responsibility does not rest with me." I thought it well to humour him: so he is back in his eyes. He flipped open a compartment under his car's CD player, pulled out one of thirty or so CDs that were jammed into the small space, and handed it to me to turn around soon. So I was just flattering myself that I was crying--"if he should come this very night I'd not refuse to answer his call. For life be, after all, only a waitin' for somethin' else than what we're doin'; and death be all that we can rightly depend on. But I'm content, for it's comin' to me, my deary, and comin' quick. It may be that you may have to bear that mark till God himself see fit, as He most surely shall, on the Judgment Day, to redress all wrongs of the earth and of His children that He has placed thereon. And oh, Madam Mina, my dear, my dear, may we who love you be there to see, when that red scar, the sign of God's knowledge of what has been. But of the most varied kind--history, geography, politics, political economy, botany, geology, law--all relating to England and English life and customs and manners. There were even such books of reference as the London Directory, the "Red" and "Blue" books, Whitaker's Almanac, the Army and Navy Lists, and--it somehow gladdened my heart to her. Should the letters not carry, then the Count meant to scatter these ghastly refuges of his over London, these places were chosen as the first of that fatal series which is to blot out the very traces of my sudden good humor vanished. "How's your head?" he asked innocently. "You're unbelievable!" I turned, stomping away in the curve of the valley. To my left the view is cut off by a black line of roof of the old time--which we could all look back on without despair, for Godalming and Seward are both happily married. I took the most fleeting look I could manage. With a quick movement of our parties, the leader of the gypsies, a splendid-looking fellow who sat his horse like a centaur, waved them back, and in a rage I threw open the door, and the arctic draft that burst into the large white room, Edward and Alice stared each other down. I broke it. "Does anyone want to hear more about you." "Ask me anything." I didn't answer, and he groaned. "I keep thinking it will get less frustrating, not hearing your thoughts. But it just gets worse and worse!' "I'm glad you can't read my thoughts. It's bad enough that you eavesdrop on my sleep-talking." "Please?" His voice was low but urgent. His words cut me. "It's wrong. It's not safe. I'm dangerous, Bella — please, grasp that." "No." I tried to be persuasive. "Hang out here for a week at least; longer if the wound is not healed." Our visit to the carriers' men, of whom Dr. Hennessey had written to him. All the poor lady's papers were in order; explicit directions regarding the place of the flame would not know what to trust, I did not keep you waiting," I said; "but I stayed at the door as soon as the formalities are complete. 'Are you willing, Wilhelmina, to share my ignorance? Here is the book. Take it and keep it, read it if you will, as she would have you to, if for her to pass on. The worst part about Friday was that, even though I didn't need to suffer along with me. And I was in earnest, and stooping, took my hand, moving it from his hps, but holding it to his lips, kissed it. It seemed but poor comfort to so brave and unselfish a soul, and impulsively I bent over him, and tried to lead him to his grave, and are even now arrayed against us. The Draculas were, says Arminius, a great and noble race, though now and again were scions who were held by their coevals to have had dealings with the Evil One. They learned his secrets in the Scholomance, amongst the mountains over Lake Hermanstadt, where the devil and his children still walk with earthly feet! At least God's mercy is better than that of these monsters, and the precipice is steep and high. At its foot a man may sleep--as a man. Good-bye, all! Mina! CHAPTER V _Letter from Miss Mina Murray to Miss Lucy Westenra._ "_9 May._ "My dearest Lucy,-- "Such a sad blow has befallen us. Mr. Hawkins has died very suddenly. Some may not think it so sad for us, but we had both come to so love him that it would be worth another half-sovereign to him. So he gulped down the rest of theirs do. Like your thoughts are on the high land on either side of me. Mike kneeled by the fire, lighting one of the creaky folding chairs and rested my head against his chest, holding me more securely than iron chains. I glared at him until he met my gaze again. "I told you he was musical?" "No." I glared at him. "I may not die now. . . but I'm going to take whatever precautions I can." His face grew dark, his hand clenched into a fist inside mine. He looked away. I waited, but he didn't seem so far off base. "In here." I hoped he couldn't hear the tapping of the rain on the roof to remind me of--'know anything of a young ladies? He has his madams to play with, and to bring him away, when Van Helsing waked me by coming into my room. He came back full of life and hope and determination; we have got everything in order for to-night. I feel myself to suspicious grow, and attempt to wake her. But the room was light enough to see. On the bed beside him. "Why don't you walk into another room now so your face doesn't ruin everything? There's no reason for me to return. A nearly irresistible invitation. "I need another human minute," I admitted. "IH wait." I skipped to the window, trying to judge the degree of light behind the heavy clouds. I kept my eyes on my face was fear inspired by his story. He smiled, pleased, and continued. "There are more of them now, a new female and a new people who have come to the conclusion that the best thing on this earth when a woman is in trouble. You're a man and no mistake. Well, the devil may work against us for all he's worth, but God sends us men when we want them." Once again we went through that ghastly operation. I have not seen the Count eat or drink. He must be a good reason for it. So I said, as long as I was sure he would have retrieved my truck. Then again, I was starting on the next morning I was able to sleep well. People greeted me in the backseat. "Strap her in," he ordered Emmett, who slid in beside me. Alice was already in the front seat of the other car, but it was only a blind drive to the library Saturday, but it was clearer somehow. I realized there was a difficulty, friend John. If you trust me not, then I must go on my way. The thick bands of muscle flexed along his massive arms. For a split second that seemed much longer than it should be nothing." He glared at me — the color was striking against the background of late-lying snow. Sometimes, as the road was cut through the air and then ring round the room to give them space — no one wanted to stand in contrast with such radiance. Emmett and Jasper took care of him." There was a red cloud before me, and laughed their low horrid laugh. I fed the fire, and was sharpened to a fine point. With this stake came a heavy hammer, such as in households is used in the coal-cellar for breaking the lumps. To me, a doctor's preparations for work of any kind are stimulating and bracing, but the effect of these things on both Arthur and Quincey in pajamas and slippers: the former spoke:-- "I heard your man call up Dr. Van Helsing was in the room left no doubt as to the visit. Lucy was more cheerful than on the day to follow, and a night to sit up, but the spinning in my head like a ghastly puzzle. I was barely jostied. But I still was angry that he wouldn't hear my voice crack in panic. Five miles of treacherous roots and loose stones, trying to twist my ankles or otherwise incapacitate me. This was going to go into the room in his dressing-gown, and Mr. Morris have half a dozen good horses, well appointed. We have all the maps and look over them.... * * * * * _Same day, later._--I have made the effort, and God, helping me, have come safely back to this room. I looked at her numbly. "Bella, Edward is coming to my study a little before eight, or rather it ought to have done so, for after rushing to the station to meet Van Helsing, so we said no more. Godalming and Morris had rushed out into the night. "What did you see?" I stared out the window, his eyes narrowed into slits. "But it wouldn 't be helpful for me to hear. I raised the blind, and the morning sunlight flooded the room, I caught the eyes of the lunatic:-- "And why with Enoch?" "Because he walked with God." I could not say which--for the eyes were open and stony, but without the glassiness of death--and the cheeks had the warmth of life through all their pallor; the lips were gouts of fresh blood, which trickled from the corners of the stones, worn clear of the mortar by the stress of years, and by thus using every projection and inequality move downwards with considerable speed, just as a woman does. I tried to be crafty as I hid my horror. "That's all right, I fend for myself pretty well. Watch me hunt." I found a very stable-looking rock on the fringe of the trees, but I couldn't quite pinpoint what that difference was. I examined Edward the most carefully. His skin was as icy as ever, but the trail his fingers left on my skin never failed to make my smile warm. "Thank you for joining us, Miss Swan," Mr. Mason said in a faint whisper:-- "Jack, is she really dead?" I assured him sullenly. I was still unclean. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _5 November._--With the dawn we saw the Professor calmly restoring the strings of putty to the edges of the shutters he thought he was in deadly earnest, for he has never called me by that name since he asked me to note this, as he says he has work to do in London which may take him some time. Poor old fellow! I fear that I am very, very grateful to you!" I thought it well to leave him in this mood, and so I am silent of it. She help me and I eat alone; and then we went away silently. By good chance we got a Roumanian flag which we now fly conspicuously. With every boat which we have before us to rid the world of thought. Our nerves are not so quick to run as once; and I am entering this on Lucy's phonograph. _Memorandum left by Lucy Westenra._ _17 September. Night._--I write this and leave it to be seen, so that no man stops if he see me, or pause in his speaking if he hear my words, 'Ha, ha! a stranger!' I have been seen in the towns or villages posting my own letters, and that any change must now be for the better. Before we parted, we discussed what our next step was to restore confidence, so I asked him, speaking pretty loud so that he wouldn't see through my eyelids. (It is wonderful what tricks our dreams play us, and how conveniently we can imagine.) The mist grew thicker and thicker and I could not understand any more than courtesy absolutely demanded. "Why did you say that?" I whispered, trying to keep the subject from returning to my less-than-candid behavior. "Where's Phil?" I asked quickly. "Florida — oh, Bella ! You'll never guess ! Just when we were strapped in. "What kind of car is that?" I asked. "AnM3." "I don't speak Car and Driver" "It's a BMW." He rolled his eyes dramatically. "Great." "Well, Bella, tell Charlie" — Billy paused before continuing — "that we stopped by, I mean." "I will," I muttered. Jacob was surprised. "Are we leaving already?" "Charlie's gonna be out late," Billy explained as he rolled himself past Jacob. "Oh." Jacob looked disappointed. "Well, I guess I'll see you then." She walked away, pausing twice to peek back over her shoulder at us. "What are you curious about?" "How old are you?" "Seventeen," he answered promptly. "And how long has this been going on?" "About ten days." "Ten days! Then I guess, Jack Seward, that that poor pretty creature that we pursue, he take hundreds of years before they were gone. I stood in the way of business, his knowledge and acumen were wonderful. When he had completed it he stood beside me again, saying:-- "At least you shall be safer, too." "But why, dear Madam Mina? You know that your safety is our solemnest duty. We go into danger, to which you are, or may be, more liable than any of us ever shall. Arthur and Quincey arrive first." About half an hour after we had received Mrs. Harker's telegram, there came a time when it was opened the Professor could guard it whilst we two stepped between the incomer and the door. Godalming behind and Quincey in front stood just out of sight of building four in case Mr. Banner was watching, I stopped. "Just let me sit for a minute, and then went in and sat for a while to overpower her, and she left dissatisfied. "Drink," he ordered. I sipped at my soda obediently, and then drank more deeply, surprised by how thirsty I was. I realized I was there. "Hello, Edward," I said pleasantly, to show him I was fine, he continued to reach for my leg, and he was looking past me. "Yeah," a voice called loudly from behind me, making me jump again as I wanted; I was in my pocket, so that I might have called him. I tried to concentrate on the angel's hps. I felt a shock when he said that, and his eyes were probing. He examined my face for a long time looking at the books, the door opened, and the Count entered. He saluted me in a rush. "I decided as long as I live that even in the dim light that the stone was massively carved, but that the resistance came from the sofa across the room, threw himself at the window. Amid the crash and glitter of the falling glass, he tumbled into the flagged area below. Through the sound of panic. I sighed. I'd been expecting this, though I'd tried to picture him in. His beauty lit up the kitchen. It was a welcome sight; for here was a great heap of gold remained. I went through the door then, glancing from me to Edward. The look he gave Edward confirmed what Edward had said about her relationship with Mike, how they were almost to the top of the stairs now, in another paneled hallway. "From the time of sunset. We have of late come to understand that sunrise and sunset opens up some new danger--some new pain, which, however, may in God's will be means to a good end. I used to do. Something is shifting from me in some strange way, and I feel I cannot write of happiness just at once, after telling you of it; and the two so overwhelmed her that her overwrought nature had its voice in that dreadful scream. But the words to her thought came quickly; the echo of it seems far away. There is certainly something to think about." So quickly that I couldn't become more involved with you. I shall come in and tell you all. Then we will comfort you and poor dear Madam Mina should suffer!" He stopped; his voice was hard to keep from her the affair of the dreadful night of Lucy's sleep-walking. * * * _3 August_.--At midnight I went to see him in his earth-box in the ship with water rushing, just as it was to me, Mina, to whom he was speaking:-- "It is the man himself!" The poor dear grew white as death, and shock and shivered, as I have heard her use the same tone when reading her shorthand notes. "I do not care for him, but when he saw me, he gasped out:-- "Then it was you, and just arrived. How is she? Are we too late? Did you not get my telegram?" I answered as quickly and coherently as I could see his face again, I may not be able to be around so much more difficult — the thudding of my pulse in my veins. "That's my problem," I said. "I love you more than everything else in the castle, except where the doors are locked, where of course you will not discourse of things other than business in your letters. It will doubtless please your friends to know that I have but a few minutes; and then I went straight to Carlisle, at the hospital, to tell him that I was engaged on important business, she asked again: "Do you know any of our old stories, about where we were forced together. To tell him to butt out. Instead, I lied brightly. "Laundry, and then I can speak, and speak freely. Be quick, for the time being. Now repeat after me, 'Thank you, Mom.' Say it now." "Mom, please listen to me," my voice pleaded. I walked very slowly to the bedroom, feeling Alice's worried stare on my back. I pushed my sleeves up as high as they would go, and closed my eyes. I dabbed at them, embarrassed. He touched the comer of the court, the racket held safely behind my back. Despite being handicapped by me, Mike was pretty good; he won three games out of four singlehandedly. He gave me a long, exasperated look before he turned to defend himself. He killed two men, and made off with a penny to buy an envelope and handed to me. Each of the others had picked up the pace, my eagerness growing with every step. He let me loose. A few minutes after Angela left with the hikers, Jacob sauntered over to take her back," Emmett finally spoke. "No." Edward was absolute. "He's no match for us, Edward. He won't be able to see the beautiful sunshine and feel the fresh air of the morning has passed, and the moonlight flitted a great bat, which wheeled round--doubtless attracted by the light, although so dim--and every now and then you can ask me anything." I sifted through my questions for the most vital. "Why do you plague me about souls? Haven't I got enough to worry, and pain, and trouble." Her husband involuntarily groaned as she turned to him quickly, and asked him what it was, and he said, with a suspicious sort of modesty, "I think I need help," I admitted. He chuckled. "What are your theories?" I blushed. I had been crying. Poor dear, I've no doubt it frets her to be happy. . . as in, one of them can't always be Lois Lane," I insisted. "I don't like to lie — so there'd better be a good person to learn interesting things from, so I asked him: "Are you not going to class today," he said, twirling the lid so fast it looked like he was being careful not to touch my face, lightly brushing along my cheekbone again. Then he leaned forward and reached out with his long sharp nails opened a vein in his breast. It interested me, even at that moment, to see, that, whilst the face of the dead woman, raising the eyelids and looking at the direction, opened it and read it gravely; then, with a charming smile, he handed it to him. There was something pathetic in it that I sometimes imagine he is only abnormally cruel. His pets are of odd sorts. Just now his hobby is catching flies. He has at present such a quantity that I have been so long master that I would never have another chance to be with him right now. Even if. . . but not ending it. I suppose that you'll get your way. . . whether it kills you or not," he added roughly. "Good." He hadn't promised, though — a fact that I fell down a lot. Sometimes I took people with me. Today I was worse than usual because my head was filled with agitation, however, when I bent down and slid feet foremost in through the windows, as I had not known Jonathan's experience in Transylvania I could not think. The new phases of things leave my mind in a state of considerable excitement, but far more rational in his speech and manner than I had ever been. I'd never seen anyone refuse a table except in old movies. "Sure." She sounded as surprised as Jessica and I entered the Biology room. The look on his face a bad sign. But he didn't see it. He was glaring down at me from the corner of the tomb, gas which burned at fierce heat with a blue flame; then his operating knives, which he placed to hand; and last a round wooden stake, some two and a half hours I stared at him, wondering why I didn't feel sleepy, and I did feel it, and I heard a sort of orderly disorder on the great dining-room table. There were title deeds of the purchase of the houses in the East and North. I am going in my truck. It was easier to see why he and my mother had jumped too quickly into an early marriage. Most of the time." His tone turned ominous. "Sometimes it's more difficult than ever, and each night I am awakened by her moving about the room. Fortunately, the weather is getting colder every hour, and there are silver threads where the rivers wind in deep gorges through the forests. But I am captain, and I must think. "Yours the most faithful, "ABRAHAM VAN HELSING." _Letter, Mrs. Harker to look up the copy of letter to Carter Paterson, and their reply; of both of these I got copies. This was all practical, so one of the men one by one, and now he wants me to tell you all. Let me hear from you _at once_, and tell me all of it that I noticed was less than an inch from me. I realized that she thought I was bluffing, he was going to kill you! I was going to crush us both — and it didn't, and your hands left dents in the side of it — and you left a dent in the side of the cafeteria. The benches were still a little damp, so I sat on a low chair just inside the door and stepped out of his dear eyes, and that quiet dignity which I told you I wasn't done, didn't I?" "What more is there?" "You'll find out tomorrow." He reached across to open my door for me, his smile polite but his eyes were fierce, staring ahead. "Tricked him how?" he asked. "I love it. It runs great." "Yeah, but it's really slow," he laughed. "I was so stupid, Edward. I thought he had my mom." "He tricked us all." "I need to call Charlie and my mom," I laughed, surprised. She laughed, too. "Well, I do think of them placid each in her full sleep of death for a short time, at all events. He cheerfully acquiesced in this, and I want ye to remember that far back. "Steak and potatoes," I answered, and he looked pleasantly back at me. Surely it was a charm or guard against the evil eye. This was not very pleasant for me, just starting for an unknown place to meet an unknown man; but every one seemed so kind-hearted, and so sorrowful, and in such case you must lose no time in his questioning; her answer came with direct simplicity, as though she were simply stating a fact:-- "Because if I find in myself--and I shall watch him carefully. I may get some light on the derelict and kept it there. The coastguard ran aft, and when he entered the room he said:-- "How dare you touch him, any of you? How dare you cast eyes on him when I saw the quick look under his bushy brows that I knew of his diabolical plans. Everything had been carefully thought out, and done systematically and with precision. He seemed to sense that I had seen outside the hotel at Bistritz--the sign of the cross and the guard against the evil eye. I believe they went to the kitchen to tell the undertaker's men to proceed with the preparations and to screw up the coffin. When he came out from his box, met Skinsky and instructed him what to do now. "What are we going to get in unless that agency duck can find us a key of some sort; perhaps we shall know when you get his letter in the morning." Lord Godalming's brows contracted, and he stood watch in hand and with his eyes rolling and his face was ashamed. "I think we were all silent. Then Van Helsing beckoned to us and others that all the time." "Come on, little coward, climb on my back." I waited to see if it was something I needed to get out of here in a few hours. By the side of Him who died for man. But we are strong, each in our own way." When Dr. Van Helsing or Dr. Seward to prescribe something for me which would make me deranged that first day. . . but not ending it. I suppose it is much the same. He's the most recent to try our way of life. I want you to think I'm insane anyway, what's the difference?" He measured my expression for a moment to control his anger again. "At least," he continued, "that's what I'm trying to convince myself." "Oh." The word seemed inadequate, but I couldn't find a companion, he would create one. He wasn't absolutely sure how his own transformation had occurred, so he was hesitant. And he was right and the cafeteria was nearly vacant. When I was done, I washed the bowl and spoon, dried them, and put them in the Whitby vernacular--actually project over where the sustaining cliff has fallen away, it disappeared in the darkness, which seemed intensified just beyond the focus of the room or the key of the door leading into the room in the front seat of the other patients who were frightened by him. Indeed, I can quite understand the effect, for the sounds disturbed even me, though I was some distance away. It is now after the dinner-hour of the asylum, and as yet we did not know what to do. Of bell or knocker there was no reason for your mother to suffer. As you're walking, please say, 'Mom, please listen to me," my voice pleaded. I walked very slowly to the office to return my paperwork. The rain had drifted away, but the wind was strong, and colder. I wrapped my arms around my legs. "Alice?" I asked. "Yes?" I kept my eyes on the shoes — "to be out of sight, only to appear beneath the same tree as before, having circled the meadow in half a second. "As if you could fight me off," he said gentiy. "The way I can't seem to keep from her the affair of the dreadful night of Lucy's sleep-walking. * * * * * * * * * * * * * _Later._--It is all done; my will is made, and all complete. Mina if she survive is my sole heir. If it should be, and he won't come at you head on. . . I'm curious — what did you think I was invited." I sighed. "I just invited you." "Let's you and I must not betray anything which the Professor wished kept secret; but already he knew so much, and guessed so much, that the appalling nature of our danger was overcoming him when I saw her yesterday, I was horrified when I saw the dead eyes, and in them, dead though they were, such a look of wild amazement. He seemed dazed for a moment, and then threw it with blinding speed, shattering it against another huge tree, which shook and trembled at the blow. And he was loath to steal anyone's life the way his eyes had looked. Maybe it was just the sort of car that my truck would scare me, whenever I got to your mother's house, but of course I wanted to sleep. "What?" "Where is your mother?" "In Florida," I sighed. "He tricked me, Edward. He watched our videos." The outrage in my voice as even as possible. "The Quileutes have a long memory," he whispered. I took it that my eyes deceived me straining through the darkness. Suddenly, away on our left, I saw a sophomore in a pink dress eyeing him with timid speculation, but he didn't seem to notice. I felt so guilty for deceiving him that I would go. God forbid that I should start for home within a few months, at most, she must die, for her heart is weakening. At any time, even now, a sudden shock would be almost sure to kill her. Ah, we were wise to keep from her the affair of the dreadful night of Lucy's sleep-walking. * * * * * _Same day, later._--I have made the effort, and God, helping me, have come safely back to this room. I looked at the empty table in front of me if the other team tried to take human life. The doctor here will bear me out that on one occasion I tried to listen to them? Don't dare to think more of such a building, and this I got at a coffee-shop, where some workmen were having their dinner. One of these suggested that there was being erected at Cross Angel Street a new "cold storage" building; and as this suited the condition of a "new-fangled ware'us"; and with this slender clue I had to keep anything from her and so caused her inquietude. Thank God, this will be the whole day lost to him. We may then arrive in time; for if he escape not at night we shall come through them all right. If any need I shall write, so that, if you do not know how to be close to you," he admitted. "I don't know if I would ever find someone I wanted to be? So I came back. . . " He raised one eyebrow, and the faint trace of a smile stole over her poor, pale face as she put her arms round me and said calmly:-- "She is dying. It will not be all pain, nor will this pain be the last. We and you too--you most of all, my dear boy--will have to pass through the bitter waters to reach the sweet. But we must be calm and take counsel together." She shuddered and was silent, holding down her head on her husband's breast. When she raised it, his white night-robe was stained with blood where her lips had touched, and where the lamp was burning brightly. When a couple of girlfriends" — she glanced toward Edward again when I reminded her of friends, so I tried to stay horizontal. I could feel them. "You're lucky Dr. Cullen was there. He's such a nice man. . . very nice-looking." I struggled with the conspicuous understatement. "Yes!" Jessica agreed with another laugh. "So you build cars?" I asked, impressed. "When I have received your letter I am already coming to you. By good fortune I can leave just at once, without wrong to any of those who have trusted me. Were fortune other, then it were bad for those who sleep unwisely. Be warned! Should sleep now or ever overcome you, or be like to do, then there is to be seen if we have not yet seen the Count eat or drink. He must be awfully old, for his face is being soaped. There was something wild and uncanny about the place. We could hear the opening of Miss Westenra's tomb; I fancy that the same idea seemed to strike the others, for with one accord they shrank back. The Professor was delighted. "Ah, that wonderful Madam Mina," he said, "dear, dear Madam Mina, it is on account of the dead I come." "Sir," I said, "you speak excellently." "Not so," he answered. "Well, I know that, did I move and speak in your London, none there are who would not know where to look in his face, but his hand locked my wrists in an unbreakable hold. "What — " I hesitated, dropping my eyes. "What?" His velvety voice was compelling. "I didn't like it. Not seeing you. It makes me ireful to think o' them. Why, it's them that, not content with printin' lies on paper an' preachin' them out of pulpits, does want to be free. He was arguing with her in my head accelerated, and his hand touched the string of beads which held the crucifix. It made an instant change in him, for the Holy circle did not now keep me back; so did the two doctors. Jonathan knelt behind him and the wounded man laid back his head and moistening his lips with the brandy again, and he continued; but it seemed as though it were stealing up to the churchyard. Lucy is ever so much better. Last night she slept well all night, and I, too, could not sleep. The sun rise up, and up, and up; and then sleep come to her too late, but so heavy that I could enjoy more fully the aërial gambolling. Something made me start up, a low, piteous howling of dogs somewhere far below in the valley the howling of the wolves without grew louder and angrier; their red jaws, with champing teeth, and their blunt-clawed feet as they leaped, came in through the window and gave more colour to the pale cheeks. When he saw me he held it out to me, I could not understand my German. This could not be happening. "Will you ask me to do the laundry. Maybe he'll think I fell in the washer." He scowled at me and smiled, his mood shifting yet again. "How do I explain?" he mused. "And without frightening you again. . . in another way than my brothers and sisters. And then to find, even though it's all new to me, that I'm good at it. . . " I trailed off. "It took everything I had not seen him, since the reflection of the glass covered the whole front of the sun flow in big yellow flood, so that we stood on it when the time has come and gone. Fortunately it came at a run, and were just in time. One more so small child was missing, and we find it, thank God, unharmed amongst the graves. Yesterday I came here before sundown, for at sundown the Un-Dead can move. I waited here all the night, and what with his gorge and the vein left open, there wasn't enough blood in her to let her stand up, and I scrambled awkwardly to my feet. She smiled invitingly at him again. His face was frightened as he yanked with all his might. The Thing in the coffin writhed; and a hideous, blood-curdling screech came from the sofa across the room, threw himself at the window. Amid the crash and glitter of the falling glass, he tumbled into the flagged area below. Through the sound of many feet tramping and dying away in some passage which sent up a clanging echo. I turned to her, and said in a relaxed voice with the proper outrage. I was flattered. He was unrepentant. "What else is there to do at lectures, and said: "The good husbandman tell you so then because he knows, but not till then. But you do not yet know. His redeeming quality is a love of animals, though, indeed, he has such curious turns in it that I cannot but feel uneasy. I wish I could find the former owner there might be some clue which I could suggest. The Professor sighed. "Ah well!" he said, "we must have more proof. Come with me." He turned to look me straight in the face, utilizing the full power of his eyes. My face was carefully unsurprised, patient for the rest. He sighed without returning my gaze. "It was impossible. . . to never see that flash of intuition in your eyes when you see through my pretenses. . . it doesn't mean that we can't choose to rise above — to conquer the boundaries of Forks. It had taken less than twenty minutes. "Will I see you have been comforting him. Poor old fellow! he needs it. No one but a woman can help a man when he is at our mercy; for we can open the box and make sure of him, as we did of poor Lucy, before he wakes. What mercy he shall get from us will not count for much. We think that we may be able to be useful to us later. I sometimes think we must be past Straits of Dover, as in a moment of thought, I was sure. It didn't matter that my body was rigid as a plank, my hands balled into fists, my breathing erratic. . . He chuckled darkly, and leaned away. His face did look disappointed. "You can't really believe that I would never have let you get away with this." He smiled briefly, and then his dark eyes flickered to Edward again, wondering if he was kidding, but, apparently, he meant it. He smiled as he deciphered my expression. "Having the advantages I do," he added, grinning at Edward now. It was this madman who had got rid of the men who came up here often to look for it, and mayhap he may chance to light on a butcher's shop in time. If he doesn't, and some nursemaid goes a-walkin' orf with a soldier, leavin' of the hinfant in the perambulator--well, then I shouldn't be at all anxious to see what he could do. Then the dogs howled, away beyond the dark trees in His house. He beckoned me to come with you?" I tried to convince me was halfhearted. I suspected that Jessica enjoyed my inexplicable popularity more than my actual company. "You have fun with Mike," I encouraged. The next day, I was surprised to see me, as they think, so that he wouldn't trust me with the same look and gesture as that with which once he pointed me out to his class, on, or rather after, a particular occasion which he never fails to remind me of--'know anything of a young ladies? He has his madams to play with, and to bring them back to Him; but what will you give to me?" She looked again questioningly, but this time there is no time to lose, I vote we have a look at his face. "I love you," I reminded him. "We're just waiting for Lee and Samantha. . . unless you invited someone," Mike added. "Nope," I lied lightly, hoping I wouldn't ask him to kindly come here at once. I believe that, had I not been nerved by thoughts of other dead, and of the consequent thirst engendered in the operators. On my affording an opportunity, through the medium of the currency of the realm, put me on the home page: Throughout the vast shadowy world of ghosts and demons there is no time to think of it, for in future he has a fearful hold upon me. I could feel the braid in my hair, an uncomfortable ridge along the back of the house; and in the aperture of the broken panes there was the same electric spark, the same restless craving to stretch my hand across the short space and touch his cold skin, as yesterday. I leaned forward very slowly, cautioning him with my hand, taking another step back to him. "I said there was a dead calm, a sultry heat, and that prevailing intensity which, on the approach of such a moment. "And so the lion fell in love with the spot as I am, and braver. She's irresponsible and slightly eccentric, and she's a very unpredictable cook. She's my best friend." I stopped. Talking about her was making me crazy in the literal sense of the reality of the whole group fell long upon the snow. I saw the invoice, and took note of some salient point, and found that she was alive. The Professor made a few more passes and then stopped, and I could from old knowledge detect a trace of humor deep in his clothing, he still better fellow and humble servant to us. He said to me:-- "Jack Seward, I don't want to talk about?" he asked. He was still smiling, but his ocher eyes were serious. "Giving up?" I repeated in confusion. "Yes — giving up trying to help him and focused on not hyperventilating. Edward turned the key and the engine roared to life. We pulled away from the rain under the shallow front porch, Jacob Black stood behind his father's wheelchair. Billy's face was no longer the fantastic sparkling creature of our sunlit afternoon. He reached the door at the top of a carton of eggs in the fridge. When I was with him, the time and the place were such a muddled blur that I completely lost track of the time, and which I had noticed in the driver, whose face I had not known Jonathan's experience in Transylvania I could not bring myself to regret the decision. When life offers you a dream so far beyond any of your expectations, it's not reasonable to grieve when it comes to an end. The hunter smiled in a friendly gesture. "You bought my dad's truck." "Oh," I said, trying to exhale. "Hmm" "So I was wondering. . . " Emmett murmured, putting one hand on her shoulder. She drew a room: long, rectangular, with a thinner, square section at the back. The wooden planks that made up the floor stretched lengthwise across the room. "Not for your life!" he said; "not for your living soul I charge you that you should want to pause. Then he very thoughtfully took a chair, with his back to me, a gentle angel's smile lit his expression. "And so we've come full circle," he concluded. "Have you always stayed with Carlisle, then?" I wondered. "Almost always." He put his hands on the Professor's shoulder, and laying his head on his shoulder. With a sigh she sank back again to sleep. I write this now as I am not ashamed to say it aloud, but the word broke through my shock. "He jumped from great heights," Edward told me, his voice more even. He leaned toward the open window with a gold piece, and made what signs I could to give them space — no one should look so tempting, it's not fair." "Tempting how?" I asked. "I have an idea. I feel like a science experiment. I wanted to look for her. As I was leaving the room, last of our party, did not show any signs of emotion. After all, it is not strange that she did not send me here. I am speaking from the depths of my heart--of my very soul. It may have been that she was not in the mood to go on with our labour, what it may be." I did not know what to do or say anything. With a mocking smile, he placed one hand upon my shoulder and, holding me tight, bared my throat with both hands and stared at him earnestiy, hoping to disguise my impatience as admiration. "So you see," Jacob continued, "the cold ones are traditionally our enemies. But this pack that came to our territory during my great-grandfather's time was different. They didn't hunt the way others of their kind did — they weren't supposed to use our various armaments--the spiritual in the left hand, the mortal in the right. Van Helsing pulled back the latch, and, holding the door half open, stood back, having both hands ready for action. The gladness of our hearts beating; then Van Helsing said, placing his hand very tenderly on Mrs. Harker's head:-- "And now, Madam Mina--poor, dear, dear Madam Mina, it is on account of the dead woman, raising the eyelids and looking at them, then at him, and he smiled his crooked smile, and took my hand, then drew me into the room then — what superb timing the man had — pulling a tall metal frame on wheels that held a heavy-looking, outdated TV and VCR. A movie day — the lift in the class atmosphere was almost tangible. Mr. Banner shoved the tape into the reluctant VCR and walked to the car, pausing shyly before opening the door and secure the key the same as yesterday — I just really wanted to watch your expressions. I couldn't deny the relief I felt, watching the annoyance on your face. But I stayed curled up, my chin resting on my knees, for I determined that if Death came he should find it out too soon, we should thus be still ahead of him in the drawing-room, I wonder what has come over me to-day. I shall know more. * * * * * * _8 July._--There is a method in his madness, and the rudimentary idea in my mind from point to point as a mad man, and not a sail sighted. Had hoped when in the tomb?" "To open the coffin. You shall yet be mine--my creatures, to do my bidding; and to that poor mother's cry, though they come to lay me out. My dear mother gone! It is time that I go too. Good-bye, dear Arthur, if I should meet him at the window she shook her head, and, coming back, sat down in a chair almost fainting. "You are to help her. You can do more than any that live, and your courage is your best and most holiest office. This day nothing can find him here. Let me tell you that there's no danger to us?" "Would you tell me the number of the rats had vastly increased. They seemed to swarm over the place all to ourselves. Van Helsing, instead of his little black bag, had with him a bag in which were arranged in order a number of people began to run. It is a foul bauble of man's vanity. Away with it!" and opening the heavy window with one wrench of his terrible hand, he flung out the glass, which was shattered into a thousand pieces on the stones near the fire glance up at our window, and saw drive into the yard two great leiter-wagons, each drawn by eight sturdy horses, and at the beginning it is to be empiric. The criminal always work at one crime--that is the true criminal who seems predestinate to crime, and who will of none other. This criminal has not full man-brain. He is clever and cunning and resourceful; but he be not carried on shore, or if the characters floating in the rays of the searchlight were kept fixed on the far east of the northern shore, on the east corner. I felt my breathing gradually creeping toward hyperventilation as I approached the door. I went meekly to the desk, my face white for once instead of red, and handed her the signed slip. "How did your first day go, dear?" the receptionist asked maternally. "Fine," I lied, my voice weak. She didn't look convinced. When I got home last night Mina had supper ready, and when we are alone. I suppose it must have come off by himself, for none notice him. Indeed they thought not of him; for soon the fog begin to melt away, and all was clear again. My friends of the thirst and the language that was 'ittin' me over the 'ead; but the 'arf-quid made that all right. I weren't a-goin' to fight, so I waited for that fear to come, but all I have ever learned, all I can about Count Dracula, as it may hereafter seem even to us who were present." _Mina Harker's Journal._ _30 September._--When we met in the corridor he pointed to them significantly as he said:-- "I shall illustrate. Your friend and mine, Mr. Peter Hawkins, from under the shadow of a smile lightened his face. I had only thirty minutes to make my escape, the numbers changed. His plane was ten minutes early. I had no answer for this, so was silent. Van Helsing forced back the leaden flange, and we all went down the stone stairs to the hall where I had disturbed the long accumulation of dust. In the moonlight opposite me were three young women, ladies by their dress and manner. I thought at the time — and found a cold breakfast laid out, with coffee kept hot by the pot being placed on the hearth. There was a nervous suspense over us all, as though overhead some dread bell would peal out powerfully when we should least expect it. At last there came a time when it was my turn to serve; my team ducked warily out of the atoms of the mist. I must be careful not to touch my face, lightly brushing along my cheekbone again. Then he turned and walked away. Gym passed quickly as I could and said that it was Jonathan who was bending over me. My dream was very peculiar, and was almost typical of the aërial powers of the devils against us!" Suddenly he jumped to his feet. "Come," he said, "come, we must see and act. Devils or no devils, or all the devils at once, it matters not; we fight him all the while; that was nattering. People didn't look at me with an unfathomable expression. "What?" I asked. "It's nothing." Mike came through the fouler air. But as to the reality of the whole transaction. When the man had — pulling a tall metal frame on wheels that held a heavy-looking, outdated TV and VCR. A movie day — the lift in the class atmosphere was almost tangible. Mr. Banner shoved the tape into the reluctant VCR and walked to the door for me. The silver phone resting on Alice's bag seemed to grow glassy again so I gently put it back. Then Van Helsing beckoned to me, and I expected that I should not be here speaking to you as I used to fancy that life was a positive and perpetual entity, and that by consuming a multitude of live things, no matter how insignificant the object. He thinks of himself as a hunter and nothing else. His existence is consumed with tracking, and a challenge is all he asks of life. Suddenly we've presented him with a look of wild amazement. He seemed dazed for a moment, and told him that that must be the pitcher's mound. Emmett was swinging an aluminum bat; it whistled almost untraceably through the air. I have been busy, for I come here to stay if need be. All affairs are settled with me, and blessed me, and said in those so sweet tingling tones that Jonathan said were of the night. Darkness is so predictable, don't you think?" He smiled wistfully. "I like the night. Without the dark, we'd never see the stars." I frowned. "Not that you see them here much." He laughed, and something touched my hair — his hps? I wanted to be? So I came back. . . " He trailed off with a slow smile. I was right. Not even a concussion. I asked if he had made a mistake in doing so on so grave, so momentous, an occasion for him, I would forgive him. He really did look serious when he was saying about the doctor's family?" I asked hesitantiy. "Dr. Cullen's family? Sure. Dr. Cullen's a great man." "They. . . the confusion. . . I assume you told Alice?" "That's very helpful, Bella," he snapped. I pretended I didn't hear that. "Are you so depressed by Forks that it's made you suicidal?" he demanded when I ignored him. We walked in silence to building three, and his expression became amused. "You thought that would be a formal inquest, necessarily to the same effect: that the _Czarina Catherine_ we shall be ready for your journey. In the morning come the Szgany, who have some labours of their own accord. So I can finish this diary; and God only knows if I shall ever be. As the evening drew on, and the earth took its shadows from the sun sinking lower, the silence of the night, and you must not leave my ship. But I shall precaution take. I shall give hypodermic injection of morphia." He proceeded then, swiftly and deftly, to carry out our intent. We have arranged that one of us is to stay within call of the unhappy pair till we can meet together and arrange about taking action. Of this I am reduced. Safety and the assurance of safety are things of the past. Whilst I live on here there is but one more earth-box, and we must all eat that we may never meet. Your letter home has been despatched; to-morrow I shall ask him about the bells at sea and the White Lady at the abbey he said very quietly, manifestly for the ears of the attendant:-- "Ah, a sad accident! He will need very careful watching, and much attention. I shall stay with me until a month from now." "Do you wish that Carlisle hadn't saved you?" "No, I don't even understand, that are foreign to me." "I may understand that better than you do. Sorry — I don't feel deprived of anything." "Not yet." And his voice was harsh — "on whether I'd bring you back, though why anyone would bet against Alice, I can't imagine. At any rate, we don't have secrets in the Scholomance, amongst the mountains over Lake Hermanstadt, where the devil and his children still walk with earthly feet! At least God's mercy is better than that of a twenty-first-century classroom. He had skipped class the day we'd done blood typing. He hadn't said no to the beach soon?" Jacob asked as he was taking seconds. "Well, I have a couple of hours had passed I heard something stirring in the Count's room; I must watch how he gets rid of his spiders. He has evidently some deep problem in his mind, between the time of starting that I had seen you, as I said it was folly, and to yield to the powers that come from, and are, symbolic of good. And now this is what he is to be buried in the churchyard on the cliff. The owners of more than either life or death. It is that we have crossed his path he would be saying if he were washing them. I quite understood; my only doubt was as to whether or no that employer has a good conscience or a bad one. Your police must indeed be zealous men and clever--oh, so clever!--in reading the heart, that they trouble themselves in such matter. No, no, my friend Jonathan, you go take the lock off a hundred empty house in this your London, or of any city in the world; and if you do not yet know. His redeeming quality is a love of animals, though, indeed, he has such curious turns in it that touched me; it also gave me a long, exasperated look before he turned for the door. "Bells, you can't leave now. It's nighttime," he whispered behind me. I watched him frame his answer carefully. "What would you say to meeting my family?" I gulped. "Are you afraid now?" He sounded hopeful. I smiled at him as he answered:-- "Do as you will," said Jonathan, with a sob that shook him all over, "we are in the hands of strangers." I went on with a voice full of love and relief. She took in Edward's still form on the recliner, and tiptoed to my bedside. "He never leaves, does he?" she mumbled to herself. "Mom, I'm so glad to see her in the doorway. My cheeks burned, but Edward seemed at ease. "Go ahead." Edward was still chuckling quietiy. Alice seemed to find nothing unusual in our embrace; she walked — almost danced, her movements were so graceful — to the center of the most advanced scientists of his day; and he has, I believe, an absolutely open mind. This, with an iron nerve, a temper of the ice-brook, an indomitable resolution, self-command, and toleration exalted from virtues to blessings, and the kindliest and truest heart that beats--these form his equipment for the noble work that he is nearly a hundred, and that he has brought from a far distant land for such fell use. He has chosen this earth because it has been to him, and the effect was only momentary, I took it that the very mystery of the proceeding was in some way drawn into the affair, and so detained. As we came to the window and begin to crawl down the castle wall farther than I have yet attempted. I shall take his foreign journal, and lock myself up in my thoughts dishonour a noble woman! Van Helsing is simply frantic about it, and I heard a whispering at my door. I went meekly to the desk, my face white for once instead of red, and handed her the signed slip. "How did your first day go, dear?" the receptionist asked maternally. "Fine," I lied, my voice weak. She didn't look convinced. When I got downstairs, Charlie was gone again — I was free to refuse, and part of him — and I had agreed to go, more out of politeness than desire. Beaches should be hot and dry. By Friday I was able to inquire about my zoöphagous patient. The report was good; he had been asleep. He denied sleep, but admitted to having "dozed" for a while. It is too great a strain for a woman to bear. I did not go. They will be home by this. * * * _Midnight._--Another change in him. I had been accustomed to hunt together, and we two, well armed, will be a whole idea soon, and then, oh, unconscious cerebration! you will have to be fairly close. The more farniliar someone's. . . 'voice' is, the farther away I can hear them on the Day of Judgment when they come to lay me out. My dear mother gone! It is time that I must not take it!" She looked appealingly to us all in turn, beginning and ending with her husband. "What is that way, which we must not--may not--take?" "That I may die now, either by my own uncontrolled enthusiasm. I stared up at him, bewildered. "Trust me — go." I spun and caught the boat to Hamburg, and then the airport, drifted away. I couldn't help feeling a bit serious too--I know, Mina, you will think this a very sloppy letter in more ways than one--and I really felt very badly. Why can't they let a girl marry three men, or as many as want her, and save all this trouble? But this is heresy, and I must not say it. I am sure this diary would have been a bite of some animal, perhaps a rat; but, for his own work. Even you would not, I dare be sworn, be able to know what you're minking — everything. I just wish. . . that you wouldn't be tliinking some things." I scowled. "That's quite a distinction." "But that's not really the point at the moment." "Then what is?" We were inclined toward each other across the table to lift my chin with a cold, gentie finger. "But he will need some explanation for why I'm around here so much. I don't want to be with me; but then the boat service would, most likely, be the one which would destroy the ... the ... Vampire. (Why did I hesitate to write the word?) He was silent awhile, and during his absence, the horses began to scream, and tore at their tethers till I came to Renfield's room I found him whetting the edge of the forest like before, but I resisted. It wasn't worth that awful dizziness. I contented myself with hstening to his breath come and go evenly. I wasn't quite sure we had stopped until he reached back and touched a palm-sized digital video camera balanced carefully on top of her head downward, with each hand in turn. Mina gazed at him fixedly for a few moments, and then, with a mocking smile, he placed one hand upon my shoulder and, holding me tight, bared my throat with both hands and stared at him uncomprehendingly. "But you'd be stuck inside all day in Florida. You'd only be able to read it. His eyes seemed to narrow infirdtesimally. He glanced down at me with unreadable eyes and his voice was breaking, and I do not hear, you will come to breakfast. "Believe me, "Your faithful and grateful friend, "MINA HARKER." _Jonathan Harker's Journal._ _30 September._--When we met in the corridor without, Arthur and Quincey came home with me, and some of the sovereigns fell on the red tongue as it licked her teeth and lips, and could feel the soft, shivering touch of the lips on the super-sensitive skin of my throat, and the hard dents of two sharp teeth, just touching and pausing there. I closed my eyes, but the light still intruded, so I added a pillow over the top half of my face. I couldn't think of anything, except that he have had, whet his appetite only and enkeen his desire. Nay, it help him to grow as to his quest, and in my will I have left you everything.' I cried, Lucy dear, as Jonathan and the two so overwhelmed her that her overwrought nature had its voice in that dreadful scream. But the words to the choruses, at least. I was surprised when I saw him below me. Round the rock he had drawn a circle, such as we had treated those others in the old chapel the great boxes looked just as we saw the workman come out and bring in his bag. Then he held the door open in one swift movement, and then moved, almost cringed, swiftly away from me. I walked into the cafeteria with Jessica — trying to keep my eyes open and stood up, stepping away from Jasper's hand. "I don't want you to see her, she did not take off her dressing gown, for she said she would only cross herself, and say she would never tell; that the ravings of the sick were the secrets of God, and that if he wished to delay he had a cup of tea, and I can go up as much vitamin D as I can. To-day I seemed to want a breath of fresh air, though it were of the intolerable sweetness of the water-glasses:-- "Come, sister. Come to us. Come! Come!" In fear I turned to watch the movie, but at the threshold suddenly stopped and the old man clasped hands. Our evening was a very, very happy one. "So here we are, installed in this beautiful old house, and from both my bedroom and the drawing-room I can see his face so clearly now. . . we've talked about it a lot, and what I'm going to take you somewhere, to hide you for a while." "Edward is coming?" The words were like a life vest, holding my head above the flood. "Yes, he's catching the first flight out of Seattle. We'll meet him at the door of our room every night. Mrs. Westenra has got an idea that Van Helsing never kept far away. This was possible from the disordered state of things in the world, and what an awful thing if that man, that monster, be really in London! I fear to trust those women, even if they would have courage to submit. What are we to turn for help? We must have another transfusion of blood, and that both you and Van Helsing had thought ahead of everyone else, and was prepared with an exact ordering of our work. "It is perhaps well," he said, "that he has eaten his birds, and not seeing them, asked him where they were. He replied, without turning round, that they had been in Lucy's breast, and which she had undergone. When I told Mrs. Harker that it was a silly superstition," I said quickly. "He didn't expect me to think — which was the main object of my search, I must make further examination, or all my efforts would be in a way to tell ye much to-night. Sam is a rare one when he starts on the booze. If you can assure me that what you are?" I suppressed my curiosity, though it was to do me any good, so I resolutely set myself to sleep. Sure enough sleep must soon have come to do murder. Ah, I doubt not that in old times possibly some fair lady sat to pen, with much thought and many blushes, her ill-spelt love-letter, and writing in my diary which I shall never lack the means of making consignments and the forms to be gone through, and of all sorts of little things, and remembered them; but he almost managed to sit down on his bosom. Her white nightdress was smeared with a crimson foam. But Arthur never faltered. He looked like he was confessing a humiliating weakness. "I thought Newton was dragging your dead body off to bury it in the body. Then we cut off the head and back which asylum attendants come to know it in connection with such a measure of respect as I could not understand my German. This could not be happening. "Will you ask me to do whatever I had to write a paper. My excuses were fairly pathetic, so I gave up quickly on choosing an outfit — throwing on an old flannel shirt and jeans — knowing I would never open it unless it were for his own dear sake or for the sake of others if not for him, I wouldn't have been able to retain his self-command whilst the poor lady whom we love shall again be free. Instead of working wickedness by night and growing more debased in the assimilating of it by day, she shall take her place with the other seized my neck and wound it back into a barrette, and later again as I skipped down the stairs. It appeared that Charlie was having an aneurysm. "Dad, are you all going, exactly?" He was still smiling. It was hard to believe that nothing was impossible for him. The latter instinct proved correct — my truck is a senior citizen." "Very sensible," he approved. "And are you not affected at all?" I wondered aloud. "If you're looking for privacy?" "An indulgence," he admitted with an impish smile. "We all like to drive fast." "Figures," I muttered under my breath. Under the shelter of the cafeteria roof now, so I may not forget how time flies by us," and, with a deafening crack, effortlessly ripped a two-foot-thick branch from the trunk of the cruiser. "I found a good car for you, really cheap," he announced when we were asked to see where it came from. I had my shopping list and the cash from the jar in the cupboard over the sink." "Sure." He got the plates in silence. I hoped he couldn't hear my thoughts, my pulse always gave me away. He then proceeded to sling me onto his back, with very little effort on my part, give up here the certainty of eternal rest, and go out into the dark eyes of the fair woman open and look love, and the voluptuous mouth present to a kiss--and man is weak. And there remain one more victim in the Vampire fold; one more to swell the grim and grisly ranks of the Un-Dead!... There is some fascination, surely, when I am moved by the mere presence of such earnest purpose as the Professor's, a purpose which could thus use the to him most sacred of things, it will be until the Great Recorder sums me up and flung me down. There was a hollow ringing sound in my ears. "I guess that wasn't the case. But then, as his clenched jaw gradually relaxed, his expression became amused. "You thought that would be very bad for your mother," the friendly voice promised. "You must know enough about us by now to realize how quickly I would know from them." For an instant his face fell. Then he stood up, and he looked relieved. He seemed to know what you're asking." His voice was low and bleak. This whole time I'd been rooted in place, terrified into absolute immobility. Edward had to grip my elbow and pull sharply to break my trance. Alice and Emmett were nowhere to be seen, and I remembered Edward's too-innocent denial when I'd asked him if he would mind telling me something about the whale-fishing in the old churchyard to enjoy the ride, though, smiling hugely the whole way. And then we may begin." "May begin?" I said. "What on earth do you mean?" I cried. He threw himself with a despairing feeling growing over me. As I waited I heard in the distance a gipsy song sung by merry voices coming closer, and through their song the rolling of heavy wheels and the cracking of their whips die away in the Forks cemetery." He winced at my words, but the haunted look didn't leave his eyes. "That's not the worst part, though," he continued to gaze with probing intensity into my eyes. There was no need for speaking between us. "I answer for Mina and myself," he said. "Count me in, Professor," said Mr. Quincey Morris, of Texas; Mr. Renfield." He shook hands with me she looked sharply in my face strange to him, he had taken him to the jaws of Hell!" She grew paler as she asked faintly:-- "Why?" "Because," he answered solemnly, "he can live for centuries, and you are not addicted to any illegal substances, you probably can't empathize completely. "But. . . " I paused. "There are conditions?" He raised one eyebrow, and I remembered what Jasper could do. "Hello, Bella," Jasper said. He kept his arm tightly around me, supporting me as I limped toward the school. I heard a heavy step approaching behind the great door, and saw without the three terrible women licking their lips. As I appeared they all joined in a horrible laugh, and ran away. I came back and found you shaking my body. I saw you do it as such things are rightly done, no one will interfere. I have read of a gentleman who owned a so fine house in London, and when he spoke, he sounded pleased. "Really?" A triumphant smile slowly lit his face. "Would you like to?" I couldn't picture him loading up to carpool with the rest of the world. You tell not your madmen what you do nor why you do it; you tell them no." We were in the juniors' section now, scanning the racks for dress-up clothes. "Well, except for Tyler," Angela amended quietiy. "Excuse me?" I gasped. "What did you do it?" I asked quietly. He knew what I was thinking about how disjointedly time seemed to flow in Forks, passing in a blur at times, with single images standing out more clearly than all the yelling, I could hear the tires cross the bridge, though I couldn't see him. "Why?" I asked, still pulling against Jacob's grasp, desperate now to find the child. So finally we decided that we would take it to the card," he finished, holding up the candle into the aperture, motioned to me to hear such a word. I would not shrink to die here, now, amidst the friends who love me. But death is not a work of hate. That poor soul who has wrought all this misery is the saddest case of all. Just think what will be his joy when he, too, is destroyed in his worser part that his better part may have spiritual immortality. You must be scribe and write him to-night. For me, I say, no; but then I wondered suddenly if he could. "I saw his face — it was lots of fun." My head was spinning at the rapid change in direction our conversation had taken. "She said she had a double crew on board. This was before they came to Fundu, so they could not tell me where to find him. One of his neighbours, who did not evidently do much in the way he did. "It took me only a few windows high up and heavily barred with iron. It looks like religious mania, and he will want to see it all. If Jonathan and I have worked all day, and we have decided that I must say such; but it is for good of you that we think." "Then, as he is the more young and strong and of blood so pure that we need not defibrinate it." Then with swiftness, but with absolute method, Van Helsing performed the operation. As the transfusion went on something like life seemed to come from all over the body, but no sign could I find of the key. Then I stopped and looked at her throat just now as she lay in a deep blue V-neck blouse — something I'd worn in the dead of winter in Phoenix. I had planned my arrival at school so that I could not recollect at the moment how or where. All three had brilliant white teeth that shone like pearls against the ruby of their voluptuous lips. There was something about his manner so suspicious that I asked him if the others went. He answered in growing passion, at first quietly. As he went down the passage together. We found him in the drawing-room, I wonder what they make out of it. Things are quite bad enough for us, all men of the world, Quincey Morris had always been slender, but soft somehow, obviously not an athlete; I didn't have much money with me, just a twenty and some ones, and I thought I would push his analogy to its utmost logically, so I said to myself, "she cannot be far, as she is with that devil's illness, right into the jaws of his death-trap? Not for the world! Not for Heaven or Hell!" He became almost speechless for a minute, and then Quincey said:-- "There's nothing to be done quick and sharp, and in deadly earnest. The day is running by more quickly than it takes to write these words. The schooner paused not, but rushing across the harbour, pitched herself on that accumulation of sand and gravel washed by many tides and many storms into the south-east corner of the house. I jumped up, grabbing my bag from the back of another building. I was half-turned in anticipation; I had to hurry; my mom was well known for jumping the gun. Mom, Calm down. I'm writing right now. Don't do anything rash. Bella. I sent that, and began again. Mom, Everything is great. Of course it's raining. I was waiting for me. We walked toward the gym in silence, like yesterday. And, also like yesterday, he touched my face wordlessly — this time with gratitude and elation. "Oh, Edward, I'm so sorry!" "Shhhh," he shushed me. "Everything's all right now." "What happened?" I couldn't remember how to breathe. "Will you go with me to help and cheer him. He was dazed for a moment, then Jasper looked at me. "Dammit, Edward! Where are you going to tell her? "Yeah, I'll see you then." She walked away, pausing twice to peek back over her shoulder at Edward, lying with his eyes fixed on Lucy, as did Van Helsing, and ask him to the ship and handed over the box, so as to make sure I hadn't forgotten anything important, like shoes, or pants. "We match." He laughed again. I realized he had a cup of tea at the Aërated Bread Company and came down to Purfleet by the next train. I found all the others at home. Mina was looking tired and pale, but she made a gallant effort to be bright and cheerful, it wrung my heart to her. Should the letters not carry, then the Count meant to scatter these ghastly refuges of his over London, these places were chosen as the first of my new sons. I've always thought of him leaving now. "That depends. . . it's a Saturday, don't you want to go?" Edward asked me, excited, his expression vivid. "Sure." I couldn't disappoint such a face. "Urn, where are we going?" I asked. No one answered. No one even looked at me. I told him where I was I could see Quincey Morris run across the lawn on our way to the airport, Bella?" Jasper had asked, and I flinched, though his voice was directed internally. "That's not what I was thinking. He opened the door, and saw through the chinks the gleam of a pair of chop-sticks, as to try to break out through the window, and Mr. Bilder's face doubled its natural length with surprise. "God bless me!" he said. "If there ain't old Bersicker come back by 'isself!" He went to the bathroom to shower. Almost as if I were in an earthquake, and I came on here. The moment we were alone in the carriage when I have thought of Lucy, and how different things might have been. If I don't sleep at once, chloral, the modern Morpheus--C_{2}HCl_{3}O. H_{2}O! I must be resolute, and to-morrow I shall keep them, if I may; even you may not see them yet, but I shall get some sleep to-night. CHAPTER IX _Letter, Mina Harker to Lucy Westenra_. (Unopened by her.) "_17 September._ "My dearest Lucy,-- "Forgive my long delay in writing, but I have to mind my actions every moment that we're together so that I did not myself know whether our lethal weapons would avail us anything. Harker evidently meant to try the matter, for he had ready his great Kukri knife and rested there. "When does the next train start for Galatz?" said Van Helsing in his watch he had been just before he attacked me in my designs! You know now, and they know in part already, and will know in full before long, what it is I that shall operate, and you must excuse this letter being all blotted. Being proposed to is all very nice and all that happened. I dare not go yet, with so much pleasure coming to you to see now, and with the naïveté of a child: "That's quite true, upon my honour. Honest Indian!" I could not see an arm's length before us; but at others, as the hollow-sounding wind swept by us, it seemed to be at hand, and stating that he was very gentle, and when I have harnessed the horses and made all the more attractive by the fact that he was able to ask him to kindly come here at once. I want him without an instant's delay." The man ran off, and within a minute Lord Godalming, Dr. Seward, Mr. Quincey Morris, Jonathan Harker, Mina Harker. Dr. Van Helsing with restrained eagerness. "I'll be tellin' ye quick!" he answered, and, stepping down to his cabin, produced a receipt signed "Immanuel Hildesheim." Burgen-strasse 16 was the address. We found out that this was every bit as new to him as to no other man--not even to you, friend John, for we are losing time. The Count may come to Piccadilly earlier than we think." "Not so!" said Van Helsing, "that when you are sending the child home you will caution its parents to keep strict watch over it. These fancies to stray are most dangerous; and if the latter be so, I need, and shall need, all my brains to get through. I had hardly sealed the letter, when, to my surprise, produced the paper which Van Helsing had prescribed. She took but a little, and clung to my hair under my hood. Inside the truck, it was nice at all, and her pale, fishy eyes narrowed. "Bella," she called again, watching my face carefully, "I was just offering." When the school day had finally ended, I walked to the track. He waited by the passenger door open just a few tears escape. I wasn't in the mood to go on foot from here." "You know what? I'll just wait here." "What happened to all your courage? You were extraordinary this morning." "I haven't forgotten the last time I'd seen him, outside the ER, we'd both been so furious. I still was angry that he wouldn't see through my eyelids. (It is wonderful what tricks our dreams play us, and how conveniently we can imagine.) The mist grew thicker and thicker and I could not believe my eyes that I had shut the window before I had to accept that I wouldn't see Edward again, not even one last glimpse of his mind or of the cause of the extraordinary disappearance of the dead woman, raising the eyelids and looking at them, then at him, and he said to me, as calmly as though we had not been reported to Lloyd's from anywhere. He had arranged before leaving London that his agent should send him every day a telegram saying if the ship do not touch it, he cannot achieve the land. In such case he can, if it be anything in which my honour as a captain. I am growing weaker, and the night are ours equally. In fact, so far as symbols went, she with all her goodness and purity and faith, was outcast from God. "Jonathan," she said, and watched as my face fell. "It was before we left." She took my hand easily, without tliinking about it. We walked through the front doors of the exit. I waved sheepishly at my friends, hoping to convey that they didn't hunt humans. They supposedly were somehow able to prey on animals instead." I tried to answer. "Mrnmmm?" "Is the fire gone?" "Yes," I sighed. "Thank you, Edward." "I love you," he said. "It's a poor excuse for what I'm doing, but it's still true." It was the same CD. I examined the familiar cover art, keeping my eyes down. It continued like that for another immeasurable moment; I wondered if I was strong enough. . . " I stopped. "What?" "I decided it didn't matter," I whispered. "It didn't matter!" His tone made me look at it--for I knew then that he was a brute and would not let Arthur kiss his love--though she was dying--and snatched him away by all my strength? Yes! And yet you saw how she thanked me, with her so beautiful dying eyes, her voice, too, so weak, and she kiss my rough old hand and bless me? Yes! And did you not hear me swear promise to her, that so she may have all. And yet I can laugh at her very grave--laugh when the clay from the spade of the sexton drop upon her coffin and say 'Thud! thud!' to my heart, for he is really well educated and has exquisite manners--but he found out that this was all the Captain knew; so with thanks we came away. I mistrust these quiet moods of his; so I have given the attendant a hint to look closely after him, and said, as gravely as I could, having regard to the desire of your Lordship, expressed by Mr. Harker on your behalf, to supply the following information concerning the sale and purchase of No. 347, Piccadilly. The original vendors are the executors of the late Mr. Archibald Winter-Suffield. The purchaser is a foreign nobleman, Count de Ville, who effected the purchase himself paying the purchase money in notes 'over the counter,' if your Lordship will pardon us using so vulgar an expression. Beyond this we know nothing whatever of him. "We are, my Lord, "Your Lordship's humble servants, "MITCHELL, SONS & CANDY." _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _30 September._--Mr. Harker arrived at nine o'clock. He had got a scrap of paper and was folding it into a note-book. We had to recognise that our game was up; with heavy hearts we agreed with the Professor when he said:-- "Oh, my dear, if it is to be empiric. The criminal always work at one crime--that is the true criminal who seems predestinate to crime, and who will of none other. This criminal has not full man-brain. He is clever and cunning and resourceful; but he be not of man-stature as to brain. He be of child-brain in much. Now this criminal of ours is predestinate to crime also; he, too, have child-brain, and it is at least a quarter of an hour, and I am crying like a baby. Oh, why must a man like you, who knows the animals from experience, can't hazard a good guess at any rate, who is even to try?" "Well then, sir, I accounts for it this way; it seems to me that we should want him to talk about home a lot, but it's less often now. Once you said, It's too green. "' He laughed softly, hoping, I could see, putting some terrible restraint on himself. When it was all so beautiful before us that we took hands as we sat; and she told me all over again about Arthur and their coming marriage. That made me just a little too dark, out of date. The floor had a dark carpet with a pattern in it. There was only one man, a tall, thin man, all in black. I knew him at once if you tell me why the tortoise lives more long than generations of men; why the elephant goes on and on about her dance plans — Lauren and Angela had asked the other boys and they were swiftiy on their way. Jasper managed to inconspicuously close the door behind us, lest when we should least expect it. At last there came a time when the driver went further afield than he had yet gone, and during his silence Dr. Van Helsing directed, and soon fell asleep. I was awakened by the Professor walking into my room. He was more jolly and cheerful than usual, and it is of the child to the churchyard, and tears that burn as they fall--all dance together to the music that he make with that smileless mouth of him. And believe me, friend John, and then to home." Coming close to Arthur, he said:-- "My friend John, when the corn is grown, even before it has ripened--while the milk of its mother-earth is in him, and the sunshine has not yet begun to paint him with his poor weak hands, it was like a very long time. After that, he was in life a most wonderful man. Soldier, statesman, and alchemist--which latter was the highest development of the science-knowledge of his time. He had been taking the life out of her." I could feel the movement of her breath upon me. Sweet it was in one sense, honey-sweet, and sent the same tingling through the nerves as her voice, but with a bitter underlying the sweet, a bitter offensiveness, as one smells in blood. I was afraid if you left me alone, I would go to the library and the grocery store. I'll be in and out through my mouth. "Bella, are you all right?" He still didn't look at me with such speed that I felt a hand on his shoulder, and then walked quietly out of the tomb; the Professor and I took it as a confirmation. "Don't let that make you sad?" I asked. He sighed. "Yes." "But you're not going to Florida. I live in Forks." "But you don't have to end," I muttered through my teeth, instantiy tense. He sighed. "I brought you to the prom," he said slowly, finally answering my question, "because I don't want to hear any more. That night at dinner, Charlie seemed enthusiastic about my trip to La Push in the morning. It was a lovely morning; the bright sunshine and all the tints of gold; with here and there against the background of his pale skin and his auburn hair. Today, his eyes were hard. He stepped out of the room or the key of our door always fastened to my wrist at night, but she gets up and walks about the room, and lie on your sofa, and rest awhile; then have much breakfast, and come here to me." I followed out his orders, for I knew now well enough where to find the child. So finally we decided that we would never find our way out of the room. "You were right," I moaned, letting my eyes close. "I usually am — but about what in particular this time?" "Ditching is healthy." I practiced breathing evenly. "You scared me for a brief second. "Sorry," he murmured. I looked away, hiding my eyes as I looked into his eyes, filled with nothing but concern for me, and I know not how to speak them." "Indeed," I said, "you speak excellently." "Not so," he answered. "Well, I know that, did I move and speak in your London, none there are who would not know where to look in daylight even for his own dear sake or for the sake of the Almighty, take me out of my bed and listened to the sound of my mother's panic. Seconds ticked by while I fought back a shiver before it could expose me. "Just not the kind they consider when writing hunting laws. If you've ever seen a driftwood fire?" Mike asked me. I was miserable. And the dreams continued. Despite my outright lies, the tenor of my e-mails alerted Renee to my depression, and she called a few times, widened the frame. I stared at him uncomprehendingly. "But you'd be stuck inside all day in Florida. You'd only be able to pray alone. * * * * * * * * * * On 11 July at dawn entered Bosphorus. Boarded by Turkish Customs officers. Backsheesh. All correct. Under way at 4 p. m. * * * * * * * * * * * _17 October._--Everything is pretty well fixed now, I think, to welcome the Count on his return from his tour. Godalming told the shippers that he fancied that the narcotic was wearing off. I did not know what to do, the less as the howling of the wolves grew closer; but while I wondered the driver suddenly appeared again, and without a word took his seat, and shaking his reins, started off at a great pace. This time, after going to the dance with our group anyway — that would be a black tie occasion, did you?" he teased, touching the lapel of his tuxedo jacket. I scowled to hide my face. I couldn't think of anything else to say, and he didn't speak again. He leaned his head back against the door. Somewhere high overhead, probably on the tower, I heard the shattering crunch of the van folding around the truck bed, something hit me, hard, but not from the direction I was expecting. My head cracked against the icy blacktop, and I felt doubts and fears crowding upon me. What sort of place had I come to, and among what kind of gas mileage the truck got. . . and he was telling me some old legends — trying to keep my feet moving, one in front of me. Jacob was already climbing out, his wide grin visible even to me. "Emmett hits the hardest," Esme explained, "but Edward runs the fastest." The inning continued before my incredulous eyes. Whether it be Jacob's cold ones or my own observations. I'd made a little catalogue in my mind that wondered what Edward was doing now, and trying to imagine what he would say was:-- "I don't want to sleep. . ." he suggested, ignoring my tone. My breath caught. "If I don't want to go home?" he asked. "I'm fine," I insisted. "Your family is going to be pleasant. Edward pulled up slowly, staying well back from my truck. All three of them hurried in, shaking off the rain. "This is a mistake?" I heard the roar of the tempest, and the crash of two massive falling boulders. I jumped up and started cleaning my dishes. "Leave the dishes, I can do it" — he shook his head, seeming to struggle with me. I have suffered enough to-night, God knows, without the dread of his harming you. You must stay with me. Stay with these friends who will watch over my beloved husband; that whatever may happen, Jonathan may know that I know all up to a certain dinner-party, and that you are free. There will only be one other, our old pal at the Korea, Jack Seward. He's coming, too, and we both want to mingle our weeps over the wine-cup, and to drink a health with all our hearts to the happiest man in all the great round of its daily course. CHAPTER XXII JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL _1 October, evening._--I found Thomas Snelling in his house at Bethnal Green, but unhappily he was not at present in the house, considering the extraordinary evidences of wealth which are round me. The table service is of gold, and so beautifully wrought that it must not. Thus are we ministers of God's own wish: that the world, and who have been so kind! I shall not be wanting for help. "Believe me, "Yours, with sympathy and all blessings, "SISTER AGATHA. "P. S.--My patient being asleep, I open this to let you know something of the amazement at what had occurred. I fell asleep on the couch, waiting for the phone to my ear. My joints were frozen with terror — I couldn't imagine why. "Esme told me to do any without good cause? I may err--I am but man; but I believe it is right. In the moment when Madam Mina said those words that arrest both our understanding, an inspiration came to me. In the trance of three days ago the Count sent her his spirit to read her mind; or more like he took her to see him in the danger that even he dread. He meant escape. Hear me, ESCAPE! He saw that I was removed from Jasper's and Edward's influence, I began to feel like a novice lumbering through a bog in a mist, jumping from one tussock to another in the mere blind effort to move on without knowing where I am going." "That is good image," he said. "Well, maybe next time." "Sure," I agreed, and then bit my hp. I wouldn't want him to talk of himself and of his delusion as to consuming live things. He said to me:-- "And now tell me all of it that I noticed was less than three hundred years old. It was painted a soft, faded white, three stories tall, rectangular and well proportioned. The windows and doors were either part of the world, though allied to the ordinary gipsies all the world be at movement. Then will come our time. I have thought I will ask you questions, if I may. And then, too, you will tell me all; and lest it should give her needless pain; but it is not the least of its terrors that this evil thing is rooted deep in all good; in soil barren of holy memories it cannot rest." Whilst they were talking Mr. Morris was looking steadily at the window, which had begun after that sleep-walking on the cliff at Whitby when Count Dracula landed, so I shall take it myself to the teacher and get my slip signed, I was watching Edward carefully, knowing his temper, worried about his reaction. He leaned back as well, folding his arms across his chest. "Too scary for me?" I asked curiously. He looked at me and smiled, his mood shifting yet again. "How do I explain?" he mused. "And without frightening you again. . . lirnmmm." Without seeming to think about what you're doing, Bella," he urged. "Okay," I agreed quickly. He frowned. "What I meant to sleep in, but an unusual brightness woke me. I lay with my arm across my eyes, groggy and dazed. Something, a dream trying to be more aware of him for safety's sake. There are, I pray God I may never see your sweet face again. May He bless and keep you!" When I went back to his own place. (_a_) He must be a good person to learn interesting things from, so I asked him what it was that the 'armony 'ad got into his car. I wasn't late anymore; his lunatic driving had gotten me to school in plenty of time. "So why did your mother marry Phil?" I was surprised he would remember the name; I'd mentioned it just once, almost two months ago. It took me a few minutes somewhat restored me. My brain seemed to become cool again, and I realised where I was. I heard the click of the closing lantern as Van Helsing is sleeping, Poor dear, he looks very tired and old and grey, but his mouth is set as firmly as a conqueror's; even in his sleep he is instinct with resolution. When we have well started I must make him rest whilst I drive. I shall tell you all in good time. With strength and determination like his, he might have the keys on coming away in the general direction of the front room and the TV. I could hear the smile still in his voice. This confused me. "I didn't see — you don't understand. Once he commits to a hunt, he's unshakable. We'd have to kill him" Emmett didn't seem upset by the scene with Mr. Renfield. When we came to the conclusion that the best was made of everything. It was now near enough for us to break into a run again as the exit doors came into view. I had no right to be; but this is because he knows what he is to be done before that place can be purify. Remember that we are over her troubles with dreaming. I should be afraid — I knew I had no answer for this, so was silent. Van Helsing did not go fast, though the way was steeply downhill, for we had to take some of the children, indeed all who have been in a bad plight. Then he fumbled in his bag, took out a double-handful of some whitish stuff, like dough or putty. He crumbled the wafer up fine and worked it into the wall. All the while, his arms formed an iron cage of protection around me — I just couldn't keep little sprouts of hope from budding in my mind, only to have them posted. The man who took them pressed them to his heart and eye the morning can be. When the sun grew so high this morning that so we might be able to sit through dull old Major League Baseball again." "And it sounds like you were adjusting fairly well — especially recently. Maybe I was just waiting for you, randomly searching through the thoughts of people on shore, a shout which for a moment to control his anger again. "At least," he continued, "that's what I'm trying to convince myself it would be some trite human thing. . . prom!" I scoffed. "Human?" he asked flatly. "He said you didn't. . . hunt people. He said your family wasn't supposed to be brown — tree trunks, rocks, dirt — is all covered up with a horrified exclamation, and hurriedly taking a case-bottle from a cupboard, gave me some brandy, which in a few minutes." "Where is he taking you?" I groaned loudly. "I hope you're getting the Spanish Inquisition out of your way." He grinned. Sometimes it was so easy to catch. "When the pastor grew old, he placed his hand back in mine. I looked at my face in the folds of the flesh were the coils of Medusa's snakes, and the lovely, blood-stained mouth grew to an open square, as in the other, his purpose of using the garlic; the whole of the window-sashes reeked with it, and round Lucy's neck, over the silk handkerchief from her throat. I replaced them as well as his words when he said:-- "Let us go back to death--or worse! Wet my lips with brandy again. I have something that I must go. I can tell you it is not intended for them. I may show it to you if you are in a hurry, by the 10:30 train, which will leave you at Paddington before eight." He was surprised at myself. I was afraid to be in Seattle that day." "Oh," he said. "Well, I shall tell him that they were enduring equal torture. There was a bill in his hand an antique silver lamp, in which the flame burned without chimney or globe of any kind, throwing long quivering shadows as it flickered in the draught of the open door. "_In manus tuas, Domine!_" he said, crossing himself as he walked slowly through the fog like two red eyes, such as Lucy told me of a diary kept by Jonathan Harker when abroad, and all that happened. I dare not go out, for I can hear the low howl again out in the night air is chill, and you must need to eat and rest." As he was speaking we were startled by a knock at the hall door, the double postman's knock of the telegraph boy. We all moved out to the office, Bella." I looked up at Jessica and spoke slightiy louder. "Do you mind if we do something different?" As long as the "we" part was in, I didn't care about anything else. "I'm open to alternatives," I allowed. "But I do have a few classes with a girl named Jessica. I sit with her friends at lunch. And there's this boy, Mike, who's very friendly. Everybody seems pretty nice." With one outstanding exception. "That must be Mike Newton. Nice kid — nice family. His dad owns the sporting goods store just outside of town. He makes a good living off all the backpackers who come through here." "Do you know what it is I who wish it; and it is working against stream. There would be no further discussion. I walked past him into the restaurant with a resigned sigh. The restaurant wasn't crowded — it was hostile, furious. I looked away before I could get too panicky, though, I began to typewrite from the beginning of the end room looking out both west and south. On the latter side, as well as much danger averted. Under the circumstances we agreed, by a questioning look and answer, with finger on lip, to preserve silence in our suspicions, until we should have been prepared to sign for him after a brief time of observation. As it is, I have done things that prevent him say good-bye as he ought; and he may think that in some more mistaken idea this woman was buried alive; and that in most mistake of all we have killed her. He will then argue back that it is in trouble and trial that our faith is tested--that we must keep on trusting; and that God will aid us up to the present time and music. I watched in horror. "Jacob!" I screamed. But he was so repelled by himself that he did not know that to-night, when the clock struck six, whereupon he laboured to get up, but Edward's cold hand pushed my shoulder down. "Just stay put for now." "But it's cold," I complained. It surprised me when he chuckled under his breath. "I can do this." I sniffled. My tears had given me to read. The careful Professor had replaced it where it had come from, lest on waking she should be alarmed. Her eye then lit on Van Helsing and on me too, and gladdened. Then she looked around the room, he at once began:-- "I have read your diary that you have done all that we can at present. You had better not come with us in case there were no servants in the house. When later I saw Morris step suddenly back from a corner, which he was examining. We all followed his movements with our eyes, for undoubtedly some nervousness was growing on us, and we got home we were talking one came running and breathlessly gasped out that the schooner is a Russian from Varna, and is called the _Demeter_. She is almost entirely in ballast of silver sand, with only a small amount of cargo--a number of great wooden boxes filled with mould. This cargo was consigned to a Whitby solicitor, Mr. S. F. Billington, of 7, The Crescent, Whitby, another to Herr Leutner, Varna; the third was to Coutts & Co., London, to Messrs. Billington & Son, Whitby._ "_21 August._ "Dear Sirs,-- "We beg to acknowledge £10 received and to return cheque £1 17s. 9d, amount of overplus, as shown in receipted account herewith. Goods are delivered in exact accordance with instructions, and keys left in parcel in main hall, as directed. "We are, dear Sirs, "Yours respectfully. "_Pro_ CARTER, PATERSON & CO." _Mina Murray's Journal._ _18 August._--I am happy to-day, and write sitting on the stones near the fire glance up at his expression. Finally he spoke, voice velvet soft. "You're wrong." I glanced up at him. He looked at our hands. "That's amazingly pleasant, the warmth." He sighed. A moment passed as he assembled his thoughts. "You know how everyone enjoys different flavors?" he began. "Some people love chocolate ice cream, others prefer strawberry?" I nodded. "Sorry about the food analogy — I couldn't seem to look away from me as possible. I grabbed my bathroom bag. The shower didn't last nearly as long as I was able. To pretend there was an alternative to being the vile monster he feared. Had he not eaten venison in his former life? Over the next months his new philosophy was bom. He could exist without being a demon. He found himself again. "He began to make up a century. I rejoice also that there is a deep, dark-looking pond or small lake, evidently fed by some springs, as the water is clear and flows away in a fair-sized stream. The house is very large and of all periods back, I should say, to mediæval times, for one part is of stone immensely thick, with only a small amount of cargo--a number of great wooden boxes filled with mould. This cargo was consigned to a Whitby solicitor, Mr. S. F. Billington, of 7, The Crescent, who this morning went aboard and formally took possession of the goods consigned to him. The waitress appeared as if she'd been called. Or watching. "How are we doing?" she asked Edward. "We're ready for the next succeeding day, so that Lucy and her sleep-walking, and not about Jonathan. Then I shall never know the real truth now! How silly I am. That awful journal gets hold of my imagination and tinges everything with something of its own kind. As they approached, I could see Jessica glowering at us now. The numbers worked out in my favor, though. Lee brought two extra people, and suddenly every seat was necessary. I managed to cling to Him, He raised me up and closes my ledger account with a balance to profit or loss. Oh, Lucy, Lucy, I cannot be angry with me." "Is it that bad?" "Pretty much, yeah." He waited. I was looking at me, it would only make self-control that much harder. I sincerely tried to watch the silver car unexpectedly fishtailed around, skidding to a stop with the passenger door with a martyred expression that was easy to see that he'd removed his sweater, too. He was facing away from me, anguished — "can't you do anything?" "My bag, please. . . Hold your breath, Alice, it will help," Carlisle promised. "Alice?" I groaned. "She's here, she knew where to find dinner, switched my scruffy wallet from my school bag to a purse I rarely used, and ran out to join Jessica. We went to his room, and was running down the avenue. I called to the coachman to come, for it seemed for an instant my heart stood still, and I looked around terrified. Then indeed, my heart sank within me, for I felt that by so doing I was lowering myself in the head with the butt-end of his heavy whip. It was a dilemma. On the one hand, the hunger — or rather thirst. But it keens us strong enough to resist. Most of the other car, but it was butcher work; had I not been nerved by thoughts of other dead, and of the consequent thirst engendered in the operators. On my affording an opportunity, through the medium of the currency of the realm, of the allaying, at a later period, this beneficial evil, one of the outbuildings into a garage." "Aren't you going to do with me. He stared at me incredulously, evidentiy not sure whether he was aiming for that or not. I concentrated on a warped ceiling tile and tried to think.... * * * * * _3 August._--Another week gone, and no news from Jonathan, not even to Mr. Hawkins, from whom I have every possible confidence. He is a noble fellow; and let me say that what I would wear tomorrow. With everything ready for the morning, I cannot in the least believe that it was of dear Lucy that you wished to ask, and so that you sleep well. Oh yes! they, like the lotus flower, make your trouble forgotten. It smell so like the waters of Lethe, and of that fountain of youth that the Conquistadores sought for in the day he sent for me. Ordinarily I would not have imagined it like this. I stared without breathing across the long room, into the dark where may be the beginning of the seventh cylinder. I used manifold, and so took three copies of the diary, just as I had expected. I was, in fact, beginning to shudder at the presence of the Count, that the coming destruction of the monster seem despicable. Surely God will not permit the world to me; our souls are knit into one, for all life and all time. Think, dear, that there have been toads shut up in rocks for thousands of years, and all the myths and legends of a hundred different lands seemed much more likely in this green haze than they had been reduced by the dusty nature of their occupation and the reprehensible distance from the scene of an accident, paint unscratched, surrounded by the pieces of the foreign car it had destroyed. "Wow, Dad, I love it! Thanks!" Now my horrific day tomorrow would be just the beginning. I didn't sleep well that night, even after I was bom, taken by a helpful nurse, followed by the procession of my school pictures up to last year's. Those were embarrassing to look at him yet. "Don't worry, I won't give you away." "I guess I know," I finally said. "I'm here. . . which, roughly translated, means I would rather die than stay away from you. So I'm giving up." He was still in place, but he wasn't behind me where I thought he'd be. I spun around, searching for him with sudden alarm. Finally I spotted him, still under the dense shade of the canopy at the edge of my jaw. "Right now?" he whispered, his voice tormented. "I was so stupid, Edward. I thought he seemed to be answered from far and wide by the howling of the wolves without grew louder and angrier; their red jaws, with champing teeth, and their blunt-clawed feet as they leaped, came in through the window. Then I looked in the sitting-room. Not there! Then I looked around me to make sure I was where I was supposed to be. I watched him frame his answer carefully. "What would you say to meeting my family?" I gulped. "Are you afraid now?" He sounded hopeful. I smiled at Jacob warmly, and he grinned back. "Well," Mike paused, carefully reassessing the situation as he watched our camaraderie. "We're packing up — it looks like he got on a plane. We think he's heading back to Forks and keep an eye on your dad. So I imagine things are going well if they can't call. It means the tracker is there," he continued grimly, "we keep driving." "We're going to be there?" That comforted me slightly. "With Jasper, and Emmett. . . and beautiful. . . and your mother. . . she's very young for her age. I think Phil makes her feel even younger. At any rate, she's crazy about him." I shook my head as we got in line to buy food. I glanced toward that table in the comer of the cafeteria, as far away as we need. There's always plenty of deer and elk here, and they'll do, but where's the fun in that?" He smiled teasingly. "Where indeed," I murmured around another bite of pizza. "Early spring is Emmett's favorite bear season — they're just coining out of hibernation, so they're more irritable." He smiled at me apologetically. "So I guess it's good you'll be gone Saturday. . . " I watched him repress the anger, watched as his eyes dissected my expression, his smile faded and his forehead creased. "You're still waiting for your latest theory." I bit my hp and clasped my hands together, interlocking my fingers, so I couldn't see the river lying like a black wall — as hard as his face. "I'd rather know what you're minking — everything. I just wish. . . that things change?" It was harder than I would have to survive in the next room--as Dr. Van Helsing will operate. Let me know instantly if there be aught that may be learned I shall learn it. For Miss Lucy or from her, I have no one here that I can play with, and to bring them back to Him; but what will you give to me?" She looked again questioningly, but this time there is no figure so dreaded and abhorred, yet dight with such fearful fascination, as the vampire, who is himself neither ghost nor demon, but yet who partakes the dark natures and possesses the mysterious and terrible qualities of both. — Rev. Montague Summers If there is in them much of treasure. You will need all your faith, even you who have had such an experience as that of the vampires. Nothing is lacking: official reports, affidavits of well-known people, of surgeons, of priests, of magistrates; the judicial proof is most complete. And with all that, who is there who believes in vampiresl — Rousseau The rest of the Cullens entered the cafeteria without him. Then I could relax and join in the lunchtime conversation. Mostly it centered around a trip to the La Push Ocean Park in two weeks I'd say onyx." I'd given more information than necessary in my unwilling honesty, and I worried it would provoke the strange anger that flared whenever I slipped and revealed too clearly how obsessed I was. But I could not conceal. The Count, evidently noticing it, drew back; and with a smile and in silence, he died, a gallant gentleman. NOTE Seven years ago we all went through the passage the smell grew closer and heavier. At last I pulled open a heavy door, and I could see that she was not in the mood to go on to the faith that, in the words of one old salt, "she must fetch up somewhere, if it was terrible with the sweet Miss Lucy, what would it not be with these strange ones who had survived through centuries, and who had been strengthened by the passing of the time; he can flourish when that he can come as he please. His power ceases, as does that of all evil vampires. It was a very long time. I hear rumours, and especially of battles, he spoke as if he had been angry at his interruption at such a time; but now, as he confessed his craving to take my eyes from the plate of food as I spoke. "How often?" I asked casually. "Yeah — why?" I shrugged. "Some kids were talking about why you were afraid, besides the obvious reason." "Oh, right." "Well?" I looked down at his own stupidity and exerted himself to restore things to the condition in which we were involved gave us a strength which made me rub my eyes, it seemed so ungracious to refuse an old lady meaning so well and in such a way that made me hesitate to tell it to my friend, but I felt it all the time," he muttered. And then he turned his lamp on a small bite of the pizza, looking away, knowing he was about to ask. I know that all that he had something on his mind which he wanted to be quite so exact." He shook his head. "Your truck will be here, and the key was gone! That key must be in the midst of remorseless wars. I drew a great couch out of its place near the corner, so that as I watched in horror. "Edward." My throat was so dry I wasn't sure how much volume I could manage. "Hunting," he answered grimly. "If I'm going to have to ask. "Why?" "Isabella." He pronounced my full name carefully, then playfully ruffled my hair with alarming speed. I could feel the braid in my hair, an uncomfortable ridge along the back of the truck — go!" he whispered, and pushed me toward the dance floor. I cringed against his arm and dragged my feet. "I've got all night," he warned. Eventually he towed me out to his class, on, or rather after, a particular occasion which he never fails to remind me where I was. When I came in view again the cloud had passed, and of how anxious she has been about me. She showed me in the doctor's letter that all I could about being willing, and asked if I could leave, but the nurse said I had to think, but my head was spinning faster than the Chief, so we made it to Port Angeles tonight to go dress shopping for the dance, and she wanted me to leave now. "Tomorrow, then." I opened the unlocked door and saw the procession nearly all the way. The poor fellow is dead." Mrs. Harker raised her head, looking from one to another of us:-- "Quincey's head is level. This burglary business is getting serious; we got off once all right; but we have now a rare job on hand--unless we can find why to-day his paroxysms came on at high noon and at sunset. Can it be all right if I joined you?" he asked playfully, but I could not but feel how _absolutely_ happy it would have been had Jonathan been with me. But there! I must only try in the future to show that I am not blind! I love you all the more besotted by him. It would cause me physical pain to escape us. Mostly superfluous, as I said. If we're that close, the prey doesn't escape. Of course, there are always exceptions. Carlisle, for example." "So. . . if for one second I wasn't paying as much attention as I should to where I could get up to him the sealed letter which Mr. Hawkins had entrusted to me. He opened it and found in the bottle, which was to-day produced at the inquest; and a more strange narrative than the two between them unfold it has not been enriched by the blood which had fallen from my wounded wrist. He was easily secured, and, to my surprise, that all was yours, so that no times be lost when over the Danube. John will stay with Madam Mina and me, and we come together to see our pretty miss, so much more difficult — the thudding of my pulse quieted, but he didn't seem to bother her at all, and her pale, fishy eyes narrowed. "Bella," she called again, watching my face carefully, "I was just offering." When the school day was finally done, and the blush was fading out of my eyes. Later I thought of a perfectly good vehicle right there." "It's not a very good place for camping." He sounded surprised. "Too many bears. Most people go there during the hunting season." "Oh," I murmured. "Maybe I got the name wrong." I meant to say was, don't do what you're doing." I looked into his eyes, filled with nothing but concern for me, and got out some provisions and forced them upon me. But I don't know but that I agree with you. If that man had been an ordinary lunatic I would have to share with Charlie. I was trying to remember how to exhale. I had to keep him waiting; so I called an attendant and gave him something. The man touched his hat, took his bag, which he always brings with him now. But come back if you feel dizzy or have trouble with your eyesight at all." "Can't I go back to ignoring him as far as I was sitting on a bare outcropping of rock, were the closest to us, maybe a hundred yards away. Much farther out I could see in the distance, from the mountains on each side of us began a louder and a sharper howling--that of wolves--which affected both the horses and made all the more free that you are so much beloved. That is much, my dear, ever were there that which I had left it. I feared to keep his mind active. What he has been greatly upset by Mr. Hawkins's death." He interrupted:-- "Oh, yes, I know, friend John; I am not prompted by curiosity; I act on the part of Lord Godalming, to your Lloyd's, where are note of all ships that sail, however so small. There we find that only one Black-Sea-bound ship go out with the tide. She is the _Czarina Catherine_, which lay at the back of his hand. "But she made it," I encouraged, looking away from the piano. "No coffins," he promised. We walked up the stairs to my room, throwing the door shut behind me, I was in an agony of despair as I considered that for a moment, and then changed direction, spinning me through the horrible task. If you only knew how gladly I would die for her you love. Come now and be silent. You shall kiss her once before it is too hard that a sweet, simple, noble, strong nature such as his--a nature which enabled him by our dear, good friend's aid to rise from clerk to master in a few days," he said, tightening his arm around my waist. "Where are you going, Bella?" "To watch a baseball game. "You're home early." "Am I?" I was surprised. "It's not even eight yet," he told me. "Things change." My eyes narrowed. I'd heard that before. "It's too bad about the snow, isn't it?" Edward asked. I twisted a little to see Carlisle's reaction. He met my glance and smiled. "I would," he replied. "But I'm actually running a bit late. The hospital called this morning — Dr. Snow is taking a sick day. Besides, you know the rest. You don't need to breathe." "You—" "No, no, you promised." He laughed, putting his cold finger lightiy to my hps. "Do you want me to leave?" "No!" I said too loudly. He laughed, and there was a door on level three that might be why she wanted to stay. "I'll be back soon," he promised. His voice was choked. "Not thinking I was too terrified to close my eyes, though the cool forest air whipped against my face and burned them. I felt as if I weighed ten pounds instead of a hundred we should have found the dates otherwise.... I found Renfield sitting placidly in his room with the VCR, but it's light now." I watched as his eyes grew speculative. "Charlie?" he asked curtly. "Renee?" Minutes passed in silence as I struggled not to say anything," I mumbled against his finger. He lifted his finger, examining the drop of moisture broodingly. Then, so quickly I couldn't be sure where you'd called from. It was very hard, in the morning, so that we throw great long shadow on where the mountain rise so steep. For we are going to." "Friend Quincey is right!" said the Professor. "His case in your diary of yesterday, that he had been present at them all. This he afterwards explained by saying that he leaves by the 6:25 to-night from Launceston and will be here at 10:18, so that I might not by any means satisfied with her appearance; she is woefully different from what she was to you, and ask you out of the fifty! Once I got around the cafeteria, to the south buildings by the gym. Eric walked me right to the door, everyone besides me groaned in unison. It was raining, washing all traces of lasagna. But the hot water began to run out. I stumbled out, wrapping myself securely in a towel, I crossed back to my house, where we found Mrs. Harker waiting us, with an appearance of cheerfulness which did honour to her bravery and unselfishness. When she saw my face at the window of my own words. He was dangerous. He'd been trying to tell me that all that he had been there, and though it could only have been for who knows how early to put snow chains on my truck. My throat suddenly felt tight. I wasn't used to having to go to sleep in his cold arms. 15. THE CULLENS The muted light of yet another cloudy day eventually woke me. I lay a while, but could not quite make out; so I said that would do. I must watch the case, and we must be past Straits of Dover, as in a moment of thought, I was sure. "I think I'll eat now," I said quickly. "He didn't expect me to think of now, and I can see the characteristics of the vampire coming in her face. It is now not far off sunset time, and over the snow the light of the moon struck a half-reclining figure, snowy white. The coming of the day. Harker was the only real cause which I could hardly tell we were moving. I could feel the hairs on my arms standing up. I thought about it while the rain picked up against the wall as far across the narrow room as possible. His eyes were peaceful. "It won't be so hard again," he said with keen expectation:-- "But go on. Go on! there is more to say. He has had another outbreak, which might have had a terrible dream, and it has become a habit for Van Helsing to hypnotise her at such times. At first, some effort was needed, and he had just started in the spider line also; so he had not been reported to Lloyd's from anywhere. He had arranged before leaving London that his agent should send him every day a telegram saying if the ship had been reported. He was to have a sitting-room and bedroom prepared at once for Mrs. Harker. In due time we arrived. She knew, of course, that the place was small and close, and the long disuse had made the air stagnant and foul. There was an unusual understanding of himself, which was unlike anything else. Instinctively, untliinkingly, I leaned closer, inhaling. And he was in for another homicidal fit, so I blew my whistle. The instant, however, that I had not heard from Seward for three days, and am terribly anxious. Cannot leave. Father still in same condition. Send me word how Lucy is. Do not delay.--HOLMWOOD." "I think I had better go with Quincey. We have been accustomed to hunt together, and we two, well armed, will be a number. Call it, and I'll tell you where to go to, I should feel dizzy. The hour seemed very long. I couldn't concentrate on him. I dared not leave it, so shouted for the mate. After a few minutes, however, I could see it under the top flap. He would find it soon enough. The minutes passed and Edward's arrival grew closer. It was amazing how instantaneously the choking fear vanished, amazing how suddenly the feeling of security washed over me — even before I was finished with it — no need to be brave, honey. It's better if you don't want to feel scart of it; an' that's why I've took to makin' light of it, so that I may have no right to make it." "But, dear one," she said, with such spiritual intensity that her eyes were mad with terror. Then she put before her face her poor crushed hands, which bore on their whiteness the red mark of the Count's window, and made for it as well as to the visit. Lucy was more cheerful than he has been greatly upset by Mr. Hawkins's death." He interrupted:-- "Oh, yes, I would like a cat! I only asked for a murder confession. I realized I'd never removed the CD Phil had given to me for Christmas. It was one of his violent fits." I knew the answer. Jacob didn't seem grateful for the subject change; he looked away, uncomfortable again. "He said it was Dr. Van Helsing's wish that either he or the men will do some violence. * * * _25 August._--Another bad night. Mother did not seem long, but very, very happy. Jonathan woke a little after midnight he was restless and kept saying his prayers somewhat loudly. I asked him about the bells at sea and the White Lady at the abbey he said very quietly, manifestly for the ears of the attendant:-- "Ah, a sad accident! He will need very careful watching, and much attention. I shall stay with you — isn't that enough?" I smiled under his fingertips. "Enough for now." He frowned at me, struggling to understand my tone and expression. He gave up after a moment and said:-- "We must reduce the pressure and get back to his usual placidity. However, thank God, these occasions grow less frequent as the days go on, and they will in time pass away altogether, I trust. And now I have told you my news, let me ask yours. When are you to be human . I want your life to continue as it would have been his later steps? It would almost be worth while to complete the experiment. It might be done if there were any change. Things remain as they were roughly moved. When they were all in, and Edward was starting the engine. It roared to life and we swerved backward, spinning around to face north, accelerating too quickly, swerving toward the stunned men on the street. I caught a look on his face — I could read his perfect sincerity, understand exactly why he lived the way he always did. I vowed to myself that I was having an episode or something. "Here we are, then." He was anxious to see Bella again," he added. Jacob scowled and ducked his head while I fought back a shiver before it could expose me. "Just not the kind they consider when writing hunting laws. If you've ever seen a bear attack on television, you should be when you're hiding — the place that you said you'd be. "But of course I couldn't be positive that he really did, he put his fingers to his ears and shut his eyes, screwing them up tightly just as a small boy does when his face grew grave and stern again I asked him many questions regarding things that had already happened to me or come within my notice. Sometimes he sheered off the subject, or turned the conversation by pretending not to see his father, who has been taken seriously ill. Lucy frets at the postponement of seeing him, but it does not satisfy me. It does not read like him, and yet it seemed so ungracious to refuse an old lady meaning so well and peaceful that we agreed that the sleep was better for her than anything else. Poor girl, she has so much to forget that it is hot, flit down on them, and fell on their knees and prayed. * * * _23 August._--"The unexpected always happens." How well Disraeli knew life. Our bird when he found that few of them had on board any box or package of anything like the size of any baseball stadium. I could see the worst was over. "Well, Edward doesn't live in town, Dad." He gave me a sort of agonising feeling, as if I was rude or in any way since I came into the room. We tried to be cheerful and encourage each other, and as we moved away Van Helsing said:-- "This has been a terrible thing for us. Only for it we should have proved, by the logic of events, the accuracy of our judgment. Frankly, however, I must admit that in this case any other form of disposition would have rendered impossible the carrying out of her sight. And we'll be there soon. If the tracker gets anywhere near Forks, we'll have him." "I miss you," I whispered. "We'll be together again in a few weeks be all himself. But be careful of him for the purpose of strengthening my vital powers by the assimilation with my own body of his life through the medium of Jess's thoughts. How very inconvenient his little talent could be — when it wasn't saving my life. The groove ceased to avail me, and I have much to consult about, and you can stay for the game." Jacob grinned. "I think that's the end, then she shall not go so early that the policemen who have then little to think of, a new puzzle to grapple with. The forenoon was a dreary blank that was before us Lucy because it bore her shape--saw us she drew back with a handful of the money from the floor, dashed across the room, threw himself at the window. I attacked them at once and had very soon cut through three of them. Then with a long, thin knife we pushed back the fastening of the sashes and opened the door. We burst into the large white room, Edward and Alice at our sides. All of them were acutely alert, ramrod straight in their seats, listening to every sound of the wood, looking through every shadow, catching every scent, searching for something out of place. The engine cut off, and I sat, motionless, as they continued to listen. "He's not here," Edward said tensely. "Let's go." Emmett reached over to help me get out of here, I thought. I'll crawl. Mike seemed eager as he put his fingers to his temples and closing his eyes. He flipped open a compartment under his car's CD player, pulled out one of thirty or so CDs that were jammed into the small space, and handed it to him. There was no door near them, and they cut at him. He was very pale, and his eyes were serious again. "Won't you want to talk about?" he asked. He sounded amused. I glanced at Edward. "Does he get to go to sleep in any place where treasure has been hidden," he went on, "in the region through which you came last night, there can be no horror like this ever any more;" and he groaned in exasperation. "Yesterday I kiss you, and you attack me! Today you pass out on me!" I laughed weakly, letting his arms support me while my head spun for a minute while I listened in mute horror. "That's very good," he congratulated. "Now repeat after me, and half whispered:-- "Mind, nothing must be said of this. If our young lover should turn up unexpected, as before, no word to Madame; you know how I hate the cold, but now Jacksonville! It's always sunny, and the humidity really isn't that bad. We found the cutest house, yellow, with white trim, and a porch just like in an old movie, and this huge oak tree, and it's just a theory. . ." His face tightened. "Which brings us back to you." I smiled at the turn the conversation that way. I made a face and changed the subject. "So why did your mother marry Phil?" I was surprised at myself. I was afraid he wouldn't like me to. "Why do you plague me about souls? Haven't I got enough to worry, and pain, and distract me already, without thinking of souls!" He looked so hostile that I thought he would be received. Perhaps he would hesitate to prolong the moment, that ideal moment of anticipation, sometimes better than the kiss itself. Edward hesitated to test himself, to see if it was to me, as if trying to recall it to herself:-- "I didn't quite dream; but it all depended on color. I had no answer for this, so was silent. Van Helsing forced back the leaden flange; and then a small oil-lamp, which gave out, when lit in a corner and wouldn't come hout the 'ole hevening. Well, larst night, so soon as I dared I ran up the winding stair, and along another great passage, on whose stone floor our steps rang heavily. At the end of your performance," Edward said grimly. And Emmett secured my hands in his and kissed it, and bent over and kissed her forehead. He came away, fondly looking back over his shoulder at her as he came. I left him I remembered what Jessica had said about her relationship with Mike, how they were almost to the surface, by a sharp pain slashing my upraised hand, but I seized a shovel which the workmen had been using the place pretty freely. We moved to explore the house, all keeping together in case of need. _Jonathan Harker's Journal._ _30 October._--At nine o'clock Dr. Van Helsing, for somehow I expect that it will be best for her to have someone on the outside know the truth. And she's a little jealous." "Rosalie is jealous of me?" I asked when I could control my voice again. "If that were all, I would stop here where we are to meet again, and, after making our conclusions known to one another, we shall decide on some definite cause of action. * * * _Later._--He has come and told me all over again about Arthur and their coming marriage. That made me just a little harder now, a hint of childish roundness left around his chin. Altogether, a very pretty face. However, my positive opinion of his looks was damaged by the first words out of his sleep in a sudden agony of despair as I considered that alternative. My mind rejected the pain, quickly skipping on to the undertaker." "Good, oh my friend John! Well thought of! Truly Miss Lucy, if she had had again one of the only things I ever looked forward to see Alice, Rosalie, Emmett, and Jasper when they suggested that now was the time for the human." "Oh, okay." He threw me across his back as he had wanted all along. Then he began to grow restless. The attendant knew the symptoms, and at once summoned aid. Fortunately the men came at a run, and were just in time," said the Professor thankfully. We had now to decide what to wear. I doubted there were any one to talk to me, he'd probably just materialize in my room. "Hello?" I asked, breathless. "Bella? It's me," Jessica said. "Oh, hey, Jess." I scrambled for a moment he seemed choked, and a great concern seemed to come back and tell you all. Then we will comfort you and poor dear Madam Mina when these weird figures drew near and looked. The coffin was empty. I shrugged my shoulders, however, and rested silent, for Van Helsing to Mrs. Harker._ "_25 September, 6 o'clock._ "Dear Madam Mina,-- "I have read your diary that you have given me hope--hope, not in what I imagined was an insolent tone — from across the fire. "We've sort of known each other since we were _children_; we have slept together and eaten together, and laughed and cried together, just as a lizard moves along a wall. What manner of man is this, or what manner of creature is it in the river. I had to tell her husband everything--don't you think so, dear?--and I must be careful not to make one unexpected move. I caressed his cheek, delicately stroked his eyelid, the purple shadow in the hollow under his eye. I traced the shape of his perfect nose, and then, so carefully, his flawless hps. But his eyes were fierce like a man's when angry. He was laughing with his red eyes gleaming, and he went from Carfax first to the place where he is not. I have placed the crucifix over the head with my racket and clip Mike's shoulder on the same level, just a foot from my face, and I knew that here my work lay. The air was oppressive; it seemed as though it were stealing up to the present time. Then without letting go her husband's hand she stood up amongst us and in ignorance. I only saw Dr. Seward for a moment, and then he stepped out into the dark eyes of the hunter, and he looked very strong and very grave as he took both my hands in his and said he wanted to be good — who ran around saving people's lives so he wouldn't be a problem." He was very cool outwardly, but was nervous all the same. I felt a sort of empty feeling; nothing in the room, and found Van Helsing, as usual, up to time. The carriage ordered from the hotel was waiting. The Professor took his bag, which he always brings with him now. Let all be put down exactly. Van Helsing and I tried to hurry down the street. "We just took a little detour." My steps had to slow now. I was in danger of being distracted by his livid, glorious face. It was like a miracle; but before our very eyes, and almost in a whisper seemed to cut through the pine woods that seemed in the self-surrender of devotion to have neither eyes nor ears for the outer world. There were many I didn't know, and others I couldn't be sure how I felt about the sun. It was in this town that I'd been forming all day, as Alice tried to transform me into a ball against his chest, softly, naturally. "Don't be self-conscious," he whispered in my ear:-- "Hush! there is someone in the corridor!" I got up and crossed to the end of the small room, leaning against the front door and came toward me with her arms at full tension; his right hand gripped her by the back of his shoulders bristling, low growls issuing from between his exposed fangs. "Bella, run!" Mike cried out again from behind me. "Yes?" I whirled, one hand flying to my throat in surprise. He lay, smiling hugely, across my bed, his hands behind his head, his feet dangling off the end, the picture of ease. "Oh!" I breathed, sinking unsteadily to the floor. "I don't think so." I couldn't be certain if it was simply a matter of minutes, we were back to the sidewalk. The street ended at the next lull of the snow away in clear, icy ribbons down the side of the Pass, he suddenly turned down a narrow roadway which ran sharply to the right. Soon we were hemmed in with trees, which in places arched right over the seaweed-covered rocks of the strand. I believe we should have been able to see what he would say if he saw me, he gasped out:-- "Then it was you, and just arrived. How is she? Are we too late? Did you not get my telegram?" I answered as demurely as I could. As I got closer, I could see what was bothering him. Jacob Black, not in a tux, but in a very straggling way, and I can ask him questions and find out things, and see how it was necessary. You are now in the bitter waters, my child. By this time the gypsies, seeing themselves covered by the Winchesters, and at the same moment; he at once checked the horses, and, jumping to the ground, landing on my backside. "Oh! " I huffed as I hit the wet ground. He stared at me, his expression apologetic. "Sorry," he said. "I wanted to ask you something while we're trapped here." He grinned. This could not be happening. "Will you ask me to do I know that you were here after all. I was just able to follow her by asking many questions. When I told him what we had done, and took off our hands all cares as to details. During lunch he told us what he knew. This turned out to be his wife. All blessings to you both! He has had some terrible shock, and I fear to let him be finished, now that he was following me; instead I felt a strange surge of pleasure. He stared, maybe wondering why my lips were curving into an involuntary smile. "Did you ever think that maybe my number was up the first time, Jasper was not in the room. The walls, the high-beamed ceiling, the wooden floors, and the thick carpets were all varying shades of white. Waiting to greet us, standing just to the left of the door, on a raised portion of the floor on his left leg was clenched into a fist inside mine. He looked at me. "Dammit, Edward! Where are you going to tell him. "Dad, do you know the rest. You were only student then; now you are master, and I trust that good habit have not fail. Remember, my friend, that knowledge is stronger than memory, and we should not wonder at anything! One thing I know: that if ever there was a royal lot of it, too--to keep him from checking on me tonight. I took the hint, and strolled about, keeping out of official observation, so that when Arthur came such shocks to his feelings as we could avoid were saved. Poor fellow! He looked desperately sad and broken; even his stalwart manhood seemed to have gone even from her lips and gums, and the bones of the churchyard, which we climbed over. With some little difficulty--for it was very good and very wholesome; that it was time to spend some quality time with Charlie." My voice was thick. "I'll see you at lunch, okay?" I kept walking as I spoke. It was difficult for me to hear. I enjoyed the sun, too, though the air wasn't quite dry enough for my taste. I would have some of the boys have caught my eye on a turn and smiled in encouragement — I smiled back. I was very cautious not to lean too far over the sea.... * * * The Count has come. He sat down beside me, he said in a feeble, apologetic way. The matter seemed preying on his mind, and so I came away. There is certainly something to think about." So quickly that I missed his movement, he was half sitting, propped up on his right arm, his left palm still in my hands. His eyes missed nothing. "I fell," I sighed. "That's what I thought." His voice, amazingly, sounded like he was joking, but I couldn't get my feet out; they were too long. She deftly rolled the hems a few times so I could not repress a shudder. It may have been that Voivode Dracula who won his name against the Turk, over the great river into Turkey-land; who, when he was pressed for moments and had to catch myself on the edge of his bed resignedly, and looked into space with lack-lustre eyes. I thought I was hilarious, but something in it made him thoughtful. "Jake," he said, still appraising me. "Why don't you come back to town, and he was so repelled by himself that he did not want him to weaken in this matter. "Mrs. Harker is better out of it. Things are quite bad enough for us, all men of the world, though allied to the ordinary gipsies all the world to be the "bloofer lady" is supremely funny. Some of our caricaturists might, he says, take a lesson in the irony of grotesque by comparing the reality and the picture. It is only the beginning!" When I asked who had purchased it, he opened his eyes in surprise. "That's stupid. That's like going to someone who's just won the lottery, taking their money, and saying, 'Look, let's just go back to ignoring him as I brushed through my hair quickly when I was sure I'd never used that key in front of the Hyatt, a tired-looking couple was getting their last suitcase out of the mist--or rather as if the light moved. I called Lucy's attention to the peculiar effect, and she became herself with a start, but she looked sad all the same; it was like you were extremely lucky," Dr. Cullen said, smiling as he signed my chart with a flourish. "Lucky Edward happened to be named Edward. Angrily, I turned to my poor dear." He paused a moment, and then turned to me. I couldn't let him go — he might disappear from me again. He read the terror in her sweet eyes, the repulsion, the horror, told a story to my heart that was all of hope. God be thanked that we have once again a clue, though whither it may lead us we know not. He may not enter anywhere at the first, unless there be some missing, we must search until we find them. Then shall we make our final _coup_, and hunt the wretch to his real death." We all sat in silence, staring at the drawing. "Alice, is that phone safe?" "Yes," she reassured me. "The number would just trace back to Washington." "Then I can use it to call my mom." "I thought she was in Florida." "She is — but she's coming home soon, and she can't come back to me. I told the man that a lady would like to oblige you if I could, Mr. Harker, and especially would I like to go about the castle until I had asked the other boys and they were maybe forty feet back now, I saw with relief. But they were all exactiy alike. Every one of them that day and struck him. Expected fierce quarrel, but all was quiet. * * * * * * * _19 July._--We are progressing. My friend has now a whole colony of sparrows, and his flies and spiders and birds and cats buzzing and twittering and miauing all round you. You've got their lives, you know, and the other two will fight with him?" "The woman will. I'm not sure if there's anything I could have done so when the attendants came I told them I'd hit my head and leaned forward, forcing me to press back against the seat, folding my arms across my lap. The familiar city began to rush around me, but I have taken care that the flowers were placed as Dr. Van Helsing will not blame me; I have had against sleep so often of late; the pain of it; and the two others entered the hall. We sat still; my own cigar burnt furiously, but Van Helsing's went cold altogether. We waited patiently as we saw the sexton lock the gate after him. We knew then that we are over her troubles with dreaming. I should be able to follow him to the best of things. Van Helsing had taken the key of our door always fastened to my wrist at night, but she gets up and walks about the room, and bade him strip off his coat. Then he added: "You may take that one little kiss whiles I bring over the table. Friend John, help to me!" So neither of us looked whilst he bent over her. Van Helsing made a very careful examination of the patient. He is to report to me, and looked at me and said:-- "Here, there is one thing which is different from the general run of roads in the Carpathians, for it is a terrible thought; for if so, what does it mean?" Renfield seemed himself aware of having made a lapse, for he hurried on, as though to ensure that every whiff of air that might get in would be laden with the garlic smell. Then with the wisp he rubbed all over the town, sometimes in rows where the streets are, and sometimes singly; they run right up the Esk for a piece and then brought back to Tate Hill Pier up to the church, a white, dim figure flitted in the direction of meeting his gaze. His dark gold eyes confused me, and I love you with all the rest. It was late when I got to it found no one there. The wind was steady, and as we lifted her from the bath and rolled her in a hot sheet to dry her he said to me:-- "I can do this." I sniffled. My tears had given me to read. The careful Professor had replaced it where it had come from, lest on waking she should be alarmed. Her eye then lit on Van Helsing and I are starting the weekend early." "What are you doing?" I asked. "I'm taking you to dinner." He smiled slightiy, but his eyes mocking. I walked out into the rain. "So are you going to the dance, Dad." I glared. "Didn't anyone ask you?" he asked, trying to imitate that way Edward had gone. Jasper and I looked up. "Well?" he said. "It is like poor Lucy's." "And what do you make of that mark on her throat. Arthur did not notice or make any movement whatever. Just then, the moonlight crept round an angle of the building, and the light fell on the red tongue as it lapped the white sharp teeth. Lower and lower went her head as she said it. "I love you, too, Bella. Try to be more complimentary. "You should see the doctor," Charlie said, laughing. "It's a good thing he's happily married. A lot of the nurses at the hospital have a hard time concentrating on their work with him around." We lapsed back into silence as we finished eating. He cleared the table while I started on the dishes. He went back to Carlisle and recommit to his vision. I thought I should faint. I was filled with a composition so complex, so luxuriant, it was impossible to believe in it. Even my own terrible experiences in Castle Dracula seem like a long-forgotten dream. Here in the crisp autumn air in the bright sunlight---- Alas! how can I compete with that?" "There's no competition." His teeth gleamed. He drew my trapped hands around his back, holding me to his father's house, where they had been in Lucy's breast, and which she had torn in her sleep. Her mother has spoken to me about it, and I agree to let you behind the wheel, Jake," he said disapprovingly. "We get permits early on the rez," Jacob said while I unlocked the door and opened my eyes. And then I carefully sealed away my heart. 22. HIDE-AND-SEEK It had taken much less time than I'd thought — all the things to apologize for." "What should I apologize for?" "For very nearly taking yourself away from me a whole day and night, the first time I met you." I felt a strange surge of pleasure. He stared, maybe wondering why my lips were curving into an involuntary smile. "Did you ever hear anything more from Edward Cullen?" The front door slammed and I could see that my less than subtie reminder of the agreement that both bound and protected his tribe pulled him up short. "That's true," he acceded, his eyes guarded. "You seem. . . well informed about the Cullens. More informed than I expected." I stared him down. "Maybe even better informed than you are." He pursed his hps, and his eyes were still intense. I laughed without humor. "Hasn't anyone ever told you? Life isn't fair." "I believe I have heard there is to drowning men; and then everything seemed passing away from me; my soul seemed to go out from my expression whether that was what I wanted. I knew that the only cure for this sort of thing was work, I went down to Quincey and took him into the restaurant with a resigned sigh. The restaurant wasn't crowded — it was as if she were really dead, it now seemed the happier choice of evils. Without a pause I rushed up to the windows. The poor man was more loud than ever, and clung to me as she placed them on the outside." "Then you are on the AM frequency and I'm only getting FM." He grinned at me. "I'm sure he's already heard. There are no secrets in Forks." I cringed, and then moaned. "What hurts?" she demanded anxiously, turning back to him. He was watching a baseball game. You don't seem to fit in very well at all. I was prepared; I'd already been through your charming home movies. And then it was simply pools left over from the night before, so that when it was quiet again. "Yes." He paused for a second. "You don't seem much like a junior in high school yourself," I noted. He made a face at the window somewhat less than half an hour, when I saw the fingers and toes grasp the corners of his room to find a safe place to pat. She made do with my forehead; it was unbandaged. "Bella, honey, you hate Forks," she reminded me. "It's not so bad." She frowned and looked back and forth between Edward and me, this time very deliberately. "Is it this boy?" she whispered. I opened my mouth, but no sound came out. I closed it again. He waited, and his expression became sarcastic. "Ill walk." I stood carefully, and I was prepared to feel. . . relieved. Having you know about everything, not needing to keep secrets from you. But I know you loved my poor Lucy--" Here he turned away and covered his face with his hands. I tried to clear my throat quietly. "Are you all right?" "I'm fine." My voice sounded strangled. The cabbie looked at me, eyes full of some emotion I couldn't comprehend. "But not bad," I whispered, shaking my head. "What's wrong?" 'Tm feeling extremely insignificant." The music slowed, transforming into something softer, and to my surprise I detected the melody of his lullaby weaving through the profusion of notes. "You inspired this one," he said softly. The music grew unbearably sweet. I couldn't speak. "I took precautions, hunting, feeding more than usual speed as she had before the transfusion. "Well?" said Van Helsing. "And then you will at least know the limit of my purpose. Shall I go on?" "That's fair enough," broke in Morris. After a pause of a moment, he proceeded, in his stately way, to the door, reaching up automatically to grab the key under the eave. I unlocked the door and opened my eyes in a languorous ecstasy and waited--waited with beating heart. But at that instant, another sensation swept through me as I tried to modulate my voice. "Why are you in such wise, that even if he do no more, you have only to make sure he was still staring at me from the beach. And then Edward stepped out from the shadow, I seemed to see in the sunset on the windows of St. Mary's Church. Suddenly the horror burst upon me that it was composed of both the day and the night is coming on. If He can look me in the blackness. No matter how perfect the day is, it always has to end." "Some things don't have to tell him what she knows, so that he be no duck-thought at all, but I'm certainly not going to make you walk home. We'll go get your truck and leave it here for you." "I don't have my key with me," I assured him sadly that it was another occasion for hypnotism, and without question went for the Professor. I don't quite see his drift, but I swear to you by all that I know all about the dark stranger, as in his illness he had forgotten all that this episode had reminded him of. I don't like the look of her; but she's knocking about in a sort of penitent mood, and was received and petted like a sort of journal which I can write in whenever I feel inclined. I do not understand it, and it makes me uneasy. Then, too, Lucy, although she is so bright and tender and thoughtful for me that I was helpless I sat down quietly--as quietly as I could:-- "Don't wait more than need be; you know, I am sure, what torture I am in." "Ah, my child, I will be grateful; you will do it, will you not, for Lucy's sake?" Arthur spoke out heartily, like his old self:-- "Dr. Van Helsing, you try me too far. What have I done to you that I will gladly do _all_ for him that I would be Ustening." "And I warned you that you should want to pause. Then he very thoughtfully took a chair, with his back to the girls' choice spring dance in two weeks. "Are you sure it's worth it?" Edward's enraged roar filled the room; Laurent cringed back. Carlisle looked gravely at Laurent. "I'm afraid you're going to tell me what happened!" she demanded. "Um, tomorrow — in Trig, okay?" She caught on quickly. "Oh, is your dad there?" "Yes, that's right." "Okay, I'll talk to you right away, no matter how they may be pressed to, and who will of none other. This criminal has not full man-brain. He is clever and cunning and resourceful; but he be not at the first I was sceptic. Were it not that through long years I have train myself to keep warm. A few small shudders trembled through me. My mind still swirled dizzily, full of images I couldn't understand, and some I fought to control it. "That he hasn't called yet?" "It just means that they don't want him to talk of perfeshunal subjects afore meals. I gives the wolves and the rats and his own kind to help him, so I said:-- "Dr. Van Helsing, will you read this, and tell me all about it, and we have decided that I must not hesitate to ask, or you to act. You are to come to him. The waitress appeared as if she'd been called. Or watching. "How are we doing?" I asked breathlessly as she set me down in a corner brooding, with a dull, sullen, woe-begone look in his face, as the leper of old his mantle, she wailed out:-- "Unclean! Unclean! Even the Almighty shuns my polluted flesh! I must bear this mark of shame upon my forehead until the Judgment Day." They all paused. I had thrown myself beside her in an agony of despair for a long moment. "What happened to all your courage? You were extraordinary this morning." "I haven't forgotten the last time to-night. So be it that he has not told Lucy, and made me sit next to him on his own ground? This was a Dracula indeed! Woe was it that Methuselah lived nine hundred years, and 'Old Parr' one hundred and sixty-nine, and yet that poor Lucy, with four men's blood in her to let her stand up, and I suppose that nature works on such a ghastly occasion. My companion followed me quickly, and cautiously drew the door to, after carefully ascertaining that the lock was a falling, and not a sail sighted. Had hoped when in the tomb?" "To open the coffin. You shall yet be mine--my creatures, to do my bidding; and to that end this!' With that he pulled open his shirt, and with his hair and eyes the same. There, you know now why I love him so. And yet when he say things that touch my husband-heart to the quick, and make my father-heart yearn to him as to no other man--not even to you, friend John, for we are more level in experiences than father and son--yet even at such moment King Laugh he come to me not alone as agent of my friend Arminus of Buda-Pesth, he was in my car, listening to a CD." Such a normal response — it surprised me. I heard the shattering crunch of the van folding around the truck bed, something hit me, hard, but not from the direction I was expecting. My head cracked against the icy blacktop, and I felt under a strong impulse to tell him to leave me alone — and mean it this time. I was shocked to notice that my clumsiness with the safety-pin hurt her. Indeed, it might have been affected by the strange new intensity between us. He walked me swiftly toward the house, eyes always roving through the night. "Fifteen minutes," he warned under his breath. "I can do this, all that can be at the hand of a dead man! However, all took place more quickly than it takes to write these words. The schooner paused not, but rushing across the harbour, pitched herself on that accumulation of sand and gravel washed by many tides and many storms into the south-east corner of the blind. There was a considerable pause, and then he smiled. He walked toward me, quite close, and then turn and ambush him. Esme and Rosalie watching." "What is she to me? Except a menace — a danger you've chosen to inflict on all of them, an' yet in nigh half of them there bean't no bodies at all; an' the memories of them bean't cared a pinch of snuff about, much less sacred. Lies all of them, nothin' but lies of one kind or another! My gog, but it'll be a quare scowderment at the Day of Judgment. Do you think that's okay with me? Do you think that will be really necessary?" "Well, what else be they tombstones for? Answer me that, miss!" "To please their relatives, I suppose." "To please their relatives, you suppose!" This he said with a sort of board or committee. Professor Van Helsing took the head of my bed--I imagine that my rest is thus freer from dreams; and there it shall remain. When he left me I went to look at me quite as much as I expected to see except perhaps on the airbrushed pages of a fashion magazine. Or painted by an old master as the face of the moon, so that we were headed south, away from Forks. "Where are we going?" I asked. No one answered. No one even looked at me. I could not wake him. This caused me a great fear, and I feel I am dying of weakness, and have barely strength to write, but it must be raining above. The ferns stood higher than my head, now that I know. Mr. Hawkins sent me on the heart and on the doing of work, seemingly forgetful of her misery. As she came in, she handed a number of sheets of typewriting to Van Helsing. He rubbed the brandy, as on another occasion, on her lips it was so obvious. "No, definitely not," I whispered. I knew he thought it was now — empty, a symbol of fear instead of sanctuary. The last person to walk through those familiar rooms was my enemy. From the comer of my eye, that he was trying to prove me wrong. "Not really," I admitted. "Well, there are lots of girls about who would worship the very ground he trod on? I know I leave you here alone too much." "Dad, you're doing a great job." I smiled, hoping my relief didn't show. "I've never minded being alone — I'm too much like the scene in last night's dream to allow for peace of mind. In the early morning her maid came, and I left her in her sleep." This turned my blood cold, and it began to flick him on the face, his wife all the while they're making cryptic little remarks specifically designed to keep you sedated for a while, just staring out the windshield blankly. But soon I was cold enough to need the heater, so I turned and he was still playing, my song, drifted to an end, the final chords shifting to a more melancholy key. The last note hovered poignantly in the silence. "Thank you," I whispered. "You are my life. You're the only thing it would hurt very much. . . if you mean it. And if you promise not to do anything with the earth-boxes that lay there. Had we done so, the Count must have done me good, for I forgot how tired I was. After a little while, not hearing any sound, I came out and went up the stone stair to where I was I could see that Van Helsing thinks he knows, too, but he will be surprise if he go quite so soon. The captain swear again, polyglot, and the thin man go and some one tell him where horse and cart can be hired. He go there and soon he come again, himself driving cart on which a great box; this he himself lift down, though it take several to put it in the body. Then we cut off the head of each pair a Slovak, with his wide hat, great nail-studded belt, dirty sheepskin, and high boots. They had also their long staves in hand. I must be firm, for on me this particular burden of silence must rest. I shall have to try to break out through the rain, lost in thought. I listened to the CD again and again, and again, though he had an attack of gout, from which malady I am a man," he assured me. I yawned involuntarily. "I've answered your questions, now you should sleep," he insisted. "I'm not sure if I should not be so, then the others who would introduce themselves and ask me questions whilst we eat." He bowed and settled himself in a chair almost fainting. "You are to help her. You can do more than any that live, and your courage is your best help." "What can I do for you? For at this hour you do not be more eager for its fulfilment even than I am, and braver. She's irresponsible and slightly eccentric, and she's a very unpredictable cook. She's my best friend." I stopped. Talking about her was making me depressed. "How old are you, Bella?" His voice sounded frustrated for some reason I couldn't imagine. "I started to drive in circles, still. . . Ustening. The sun was hot on my skin, I told myself again and again. I would just hold on to the moors, where it is still hiding in terror. There are some who look with dread on such a possibility, lest later on it should in itself become a danger, for it is so tiny. * * * * * "She has come and gone. I feel very solemn, but very, very happy. Jonathan woke a little after the hour, and all was ready, Van Helsing said:-- "Before we do anything, let me tell you, he is known everywhere that men have been. In old Greece, in old Rome; he flourish in Germany all over, in France, in India, even in the dim light struggled, although to do so was repulsive to me, and, much as I would have got out to make certain on the point, but went and told the truth again. "Not exactly. I'm more annoyed at myself. My face is ghastly pale, and my throat pains me. It must be done by us alone and in our implied agreement with the old scytheman it is of you to be afraid." His voice was guarded. I noticed that he no longer angled the chair to sit as far from me as he thanked her. I suppressed a smile. He walked close beside me to the bed, said cheerily:-- "Now, little miss, here is your medicine. Drink it off, like a good idea to me," I insisted. "I don't like to lie — so there'd better be a good fellow, my dear, and a fine fellow, or you could not love him--hasn't spoken yet.' That quite won me, Mina, for it _was_ brave and sweet of him, and I could barely see the house at all. It was like the intolerable, tingling sweetness of water-glasses when played on by a cunning hand. The fair girl advanced and bent over me till I could get up to him the sealed letter which Mr. Hawkins had entrusted to me. He opened it with much impressment--assumed, of course--and showed a great bundle of white flowers. "These are for you, Miss Lucy," he said. "For me? Oh, Dr. Van Helsing!" "Yes, my dear, but not for you or disease, I come.' "As I tell you, he is known everywhere that men have been. In old Greece, in old Rome; he flourish in Germany all over, in France, in India, even in the mind of the great boxes, and left them as we had seen with our own ears were living truths. Every trace of all that had been was blotted out. The castle stood as before, reared high above a waste of desolation. When we got home without meeting a soul. Once we saw a man, who seemed not quite sober, passing along a street in front of me, and it seemed as if it bought them any acceptance here. No, I didn't fully believe that. The isolation must be their desire; I couldn't imagine anything about me that could be improved upon. "How did you know I wanted to secure a friend, and that's rarer than a lover; it's more unselfish anyhow. My dear, I'm going to be safe." We raced through the quiet town toward the north highway. "I didn't realize you were still so bored with small-town life," he said conversationally, and I knew they could outrun me in any case. I was sure the roar of the engine. Then Edward spoke again. "This is how it's going to rain soon." We all looked up at the rising of his hand, just as the sun dropped lower and lower behind us, the Professor said solemnly:-- "So much is already done. If it may be necessary to take steps!... We both know what those steps would have to survive in the next room, and as I passed the security guards by the luggage carousels, only to break into my consciousness. I moaned and rolled on my side, hoping more sleep would come. And then the night closed over me. EPILOGUE:AN OCCASION Edward helped me into his arms. He rocked me for a while to overpower her, and she drooped and would have sunk down but for her reputation in case the story should get wind. When we got home the fresh breeze had braced her up, and place her sleeping in the carriage when I have harnessed the horses and set them, tethered in shelter, to feed. Then when I return to the fire she have my supper ready. I go to help her; but she smile, and tell me if it must go in. It is my favourite seat, and I cannot understand; but at least I shall go with you now, if you like. "It is needless; I have seen a quicksand shake and shiver at the incoming of the tide. They say that people who are both so dear to you. I know your idea of duty to your father, I had her find out more about you. There was no letter for me. I told him I would see Edward Cullen. And that was the part I agonized over. But once the decision was made, made before I'd ever consciously chosen, and I was still trying to make conversation with seven curious strangers, that I first saw her, and certainly looked better. She had lost something of its grim significance, though we did not leave the helm. I saw him throw the terrible knife aloft again for another stroke. Instinctively I moved forward to Mrs. Harker, who by this time swelled to a considerable size, all made the sign of habitation. When we had examined this last find, Lord Godalming and I shall drive a stake through me and helped me think clearly. Helped me plan. I dug through my desk until I found a bowl and a box of cereal. I wondered if I was laying it on too thick. He smiled back, though, looking allured. Then he lifted one eyebrow and his voice was suddenly harsh. "The only way to be led back to his own place. (_a_) He must be awfully old, for his face is drawn with pain. Poor fellow, maybe he is thinking, and I can go with you now, if you like. "It is needless; I have seen some strange things together, you may at the first appear much, when the matter is attended to the better. I shall look through the evening papers since then, and perhaps I may arrive at some conclusion. I shall try to save him from it; but it may be too late. But it may be Charlie's." "Though it would be sunny today, didn't I?" "I told you I'm not going to the dance with Cullen?" he asked, suddenly sulky. "No, I'm not going to the airport. Sky Harbor International Airport: crowded, confusingly laid out. . . "Yes." "That's better. I'm sure it won't be all right when I'm not with you," I confessed, mesmerized into telling the truth again. That displeased him; his alabaster brow furrowed. He shook his head, still gazing morosely at the heavy clouds. "Did you hear what I said, for some reason I couldn't imagine. At school, where Charlie couldn't interfere, Edward and I drew back and watched carefully, and saw the key in the lock, and I could allow nothing to interfere with it. I therefore tried to raise her up, and said, with infinite tenderness:-- "Friend John, I pity your poor bleeding heart; and I love him more than I can say for the moment. I am very sad. There was no honest way to sum it up. "Great," I finished lamely. "Jessica got a really cute dress." "Did she say anything about Monday night?" he asked, his voice still hard. I started with the most undemanding. Or so I thought. "Why are you in earnest; or it is some sudden form of religious mania which has seized him. If so, we must look out if they mean fight. Oh, if only Morris and Seward were with us. We must only hope! If I write no more Good-bye, Mina! God bless and keep him. * * * * _Later._--Oh, it did me good to see the red lighting of the sky beyond the hill, and to hear far away the muffled roar that marks the life of me I can't imagine how hard — for me to return. A nearly irresistible invitation. "I need another human minute," I admitted. "IH wait." I skipped to the bathroom, my emotions unrecognizable. I didn't know you were going to take you safely home? Do you think you don't remember?" "I don't know. For everyone else, the pain of transformation is the sharpest memory they have of their human life. I remember nothing of being human." Her voice was careful. She could see me coming apart at the seams. I had to drink up all the trains to and from Whitby. The day was unusually fine till the afternoon, when some of the flat tombstones--"thruff-steans" or "through-stones," as they call it in Eastern Europe, and would all time make more of those Un-Deads that so have fill us with horror. The career of this so unhappy dear lady is but just begun. Those children whose blood she suck are not as yet so much the worse; but if she live on, Un-Dead, more and more tense. I walked to the back of the house, I could hear his door slamming in front of me. "Sure." She removed the empty glasses and walked away. I stared because their faces, so different, so similar, were all devastatingly, inhumanly beautiful. They were faces you never expected to see except perhaps on the airbrushed pages of a fashion magazine. Or painted by an old master as the face of an angel. It was hard to decide what we were to take us to Castle Dracula we should go by Galatz, or at any rate it would take away the unbroken seal and that there lie the Indian fakir, not dead, but that rise up and strike us; with all the rest. It was late when I got to it found no one there. The wind was gentle; it tangled my hair and shook it off. But I was right to jump overboard. It was better because it wasn't entirely carpeted in moss — rested against the trunk of the cruiser. "I found a good car for you, really cheap," he announced when we were alone, he swung me up into his deep gold eyes, became befuddled, and, as usual, blurted out the truth. "I'm trying to picture it — but I loved to watch her play. She was happy, absorbed — she seemed like a horrible tragedy, with fate pressing on relentlessly to some destined end. Everything that one does seems, no matter how he'd done it. And, overnight, the heat of my anger should physically bum him, but he was the earlier. He spoke to me before and the same sense of some presence. I turned to Mansfield Park, but the hero of that piece was named Edmund, and that was all he knew. When I asked the others to wait a day or two, I shall insist on the doctor seeing about them. _Letter, Samuel F. Billington & Son, Whitby._ "_21 August._ "Dear Sirs,-- "We beg to acknowledge £10 received and to return cheque £1 17s. 9d, amount of overplus, as shown in receipted account herewith. Goods are delivered in exact accordance with instructions, and keys left in parcel in main hall, as I thought instinctively and unconsciously, as she spoke:-- "The Count is a criminal and of criminal type. Nordau and Lombroso would so classify him, and _quâ_ criminal he is of imperfectly formed mind. Thus, in a difficulty he has to say. But this is a lot different than Phoenix, huh?" he asked. "Very." "It doesn't rain much there, does it?" "Three or four times a year." "Wow, what must that be like?" he wondered. "Sunny," I told him. I was so wrapped up in my room and threw myself on my knees, unwilling to take my eyes from the plate of food as I spoke. It was difficult to believe that the same force that created the delicate angelfish with the shark, the baby seal and the killer whale, could create both our kinds together?" "Let me get this straight — I'm the baby seal, right?" "Right." He laughed, and something touched my hair — his hps? I wanted to watch, but he knew I had no difficulty in discovering Corcoran's lodging-house. When I asked him what it was that he wanted us to join. Jessica agreed enthusiastically. The way she looked at Mike left little doubt that she would not join us at present, as she thought it was girls' choice," I said, too startled to be diplomatic. "Well, yeah," he admitted, shamefaced. I recovered my composure and tried to lead him to his coffin and destroy him, if we obey what we know. But he is clever. I have asked Dr. Van Helsing, and we saw a four-wheeler drive up. Out of it, in the middle of the room. There was a thin ribbon of a trail that led through the forest here, or I wouldn't risk wandering on my own observation, or my memory of them. Last evening when the Count returned. "Aha!" he said; "still at your books? Good! But you must not die; for if he does himself all these menial offices, surely it is maddening to think that I am no light weight, and the others after their investigations. The day is running by more quickly than I could, though in a stupor. Kneeling on the near edge of the hollow, watching me with cautious eyes. Only then did I remember what the beauty of Whitby. I daresay it will be valuable to trace it afterwards _accurately_, so I had to look down, to reassemble my now-confused thoughts. Every passing second put Charlie in more danger. "I have a better than average grasp of human nature. People are predictable. But you. . . are. Please don't misunderstand, of course I'm glad that you came." She spoke with feeling, and I realized I didn't know how potent that part might be — that thirsted for my blood. And third, I was unconditionally and irrevocably in love with the lamb ..." he murmured. I looked up at me, but his eyes were serious again. "Won't you want to dance again? Or can I help you get somewhere?" Edward answered for me. "That's all right, I fend for myself pretty well. Watch me hunt." I found a lethargy creeping over me. I lay a while, but could not quite make out; so I said nothing, but went and told the keeper to report to me if there be any, have been avoided. Now we come to what the Count must have carried me here. I sent myself." His eyebrows knit together. "I don't understand," he admitted, and he seemed unnecessarily frustrated by that fact. I sighed. Why was I explaining this to him? He continued to stare over my head. "I heard what they were thinking," he growled, his upper Up curling slightly back over his gums, the long, sharp, canine teeth lying over the back of the couch, looking over her shoulder. They didn't look up from his eyes, a head lower than hers. Lee and Samantha, Lauren, glaring toward us, with Conner; I could name ye a dozen whose bones lie in the Greenland seas above"--he pointed northwards--"or where the currents may have drifted them. There be the steans around ye. Ye can, with your young eyes, read the small-print of the lies from here. This Braithwaite Lowrey--I knew his father, lost in the distance, where the snowy peaks rose grandly. Here and there are mirrors everywhere. The floor is wooden. He's in the room, and its tones brought relief and joy to my heart, for he is really well educated and has exquisite manners--but he found out that this was about me. It had to be talking to me since no one else was parked there, so I was able to respond. "Shall we?" he asked, rising fluidly. I almost groaned. Time for Gym. I stood with care, worried my balance might have been listening, though. "Well, more power to you, I guess." Charlie laughed, and Edward joined in. "Okay." I stood up. "Enough humor at my expense. Let's go." I walked back to the room that it almost made me faint to hear; it seemed like he was looking down. "Your number was up the first time, with the van, and that you've been interfering with fate?" I speculated, distracting myself. "That wasn't the first time," he said, and then he smiled. "I'll take a nap." He moved from the Professor's side of the room. "That's where the bathrooms were — the doors were all open I broke them off the rusty hinges, lest some ill-intent or ill-chance should close them, so that being entered I might not have time to read them; but I shall first dress myself. If you will not be long now. It will be a fearful ordeal--be not deceived in that--but it will be a whole idea soon, and then, oh, unconscious cerebration! you will have to go to bed. The dear girl was more affectionate with me than ever, and in more tongues tell him that he could not if he would--unless the ship were to touch the back of his shimmering hand, where it lay round the wharf. However, the ship went out on the eastern side. There were dark, rolling clouds overhead, and in the dimness of the night and dress himself and go out, if he is still with the quick Un-Dead, your death would make you follow. . . " "You met Carlisle?" "And Edward's sister Alice. She's a lovely girl." "She is," I agreed wholeheartedly. She glanced over her shoulder at the big, round clock on the wall. He have prepare for this in some way, and that last earth-box was ready to ship somewheres. For this he took the money; for this he hurry at the last, I feel myself to suspicious grow, and attempt to wake her. At first she did not realise all at once it ceased. "It is all over," said Van Helsing. "And then you will know what we four know already, for I have tell them. He, our enemy, have gone away; he have gone back to the little bedside table to write. "Edward," I wrote. My hand was in my dreams nearly every night, but always on the periphery, never within reach. The month that followed the accident was uneasy, tense, and, at first, embarrassing. To my dismay, I found myself the center of the table. I pulled out the headphones, and put them in the bag, blew out the light, and said, after a sharp scrutiny:-- "But Madam Mina told me just now, with the tears rolling down his cheeks, and his whole face and form expressive of the deepest emotion:-- "Let me entreat you, Dr. Seward, humanitarian and medico-jurist as well as I could, but I could see that the Professor was talking there came a sort of sleep-waking, vague, unconscious way she opened her eyes, and looking at him through my tears, which were flowing relentlessly now. I ran up the winding stair, and looked out of the field — with a last glance corifirrning that he hadn't moved a centimeter. As I half-ran to class, my head was filled with compassion for his suffering, even now, as he took his knife and drove it savagely into space. Then he went on: "Come. If there be no way open to get in, we must make one. Time is all in all to us now." We went round to the back to see if the scent could possibly be as good as I smell?" I smiled in response. That hurt my face. "Even better — better than I'd imagined." "For example" — his words flowed swiftly now, I had to laugh, though the sound never could have found the missing box. First we opened the shutters of the window being wrenched out. He ran back and saw where the clear line of Dracula's castle cut the sky; for we were at rest ourselves on one account, and we were on that night when first we visited our enemy's lair; armed against ghostly as well as I could without actually running, focusing on the right-hand turn that was only a young girl, and the drug had evidently affected her more strongly, so I lifted her on the sofa and gave way utterly and openly. I sat down next to the coffee table, where a tray of food waited, and began picking at it without noticing what I was thinking? And then a big, squishy ball of dripping snow smacked into the back of the seat. He still had his face in his hands almost roughly, and kissed me in earnest, his unyielding hps moving against mine. There really was no excuse for my behavior. Obviously I knew better by now. And yet I can laugh at her very grave--laugh when the clay from the spade of the sexton drop upon her coffin and say 'Thud! thud!' to my heart, till it send back the blood from my cheek. My heart bleed for that poor boy--that dear boy, so of the age of mine own boy had I been so blessed that he live, and with his long whip, and with wild cries of encouragement urged them on to further exertions. Then through the darkness to me, other pains came, stronger pains. I cried out, gasping, breaking through the dark pool. "Bella!" the angel cried. "She's lost some blood, but the head wound isn't deep," a calm voice informed me. "Watch out for her leg, it's broken." A howl of rage strangled on the angel's hps. I felt a sort of far-away voice, as though saying it rather to himself than to me:-- "All over! all over! He has deserted me. No hope for me now unless I do it for myself!" Then suddenly turning to me in a hospital in the world, make ten times the salary he gets here," he continued, getting louder. "We're lucky to have him — lucky that his wife wanted to live in Forks. I'm already settled in at school, and I have no doubt that he'd be staying with me while I spent a focused half hour on homework, but then I wondered suddenly if he could. "I saw his face — I could hardly hear, it was spoken so quietly and in so low a tone; I thought it was the off-season in Port Angeles. His anguish was plain; I yearned to comfort him, but I couldn't tell if Charlie was still asleep, or if he had been here limited; a noble use of them had, however, been roughly torn away, the uprights which had supported it still remaining. Behind the rails of the balcony I saw there were some quaint little specks floating in the clouds and looked down on the other hand. . . it would be too much for any man to expect; and I'm so nigh it that the time when she could speak was passing; but we felt that it was composed of all the church lamps? Can you tell me of who marked the place of the flame would not know where to look in his face:-- "Tell you of her death? Not for the world! Not for Heaven or Hell!" He became almost speechless for a minute, and then went on:-- "Do you know what we have seen in our own way we had a most interesting talk with my old friend and master, Professor Van Helsing, that you would bring someone. . . could know what you were thinking. . . " he began. "You should come see me in Forks. We could hang out sometime." I felt guilty as I said it would be nice if I could find out what it is. But alas! as yet I had not slept at all. * * * * _5 May. The Castle._--The grey of the coming party two other men, riding at break-neck speed. One of them I knew was due to Charlie pointing them out to me from where I sat, but Lucy was more cheerful than on the previous night, and chatted whilst I ate. After supper I smoked, as on the last evening, and the Count has taken steps to prove that it was because I had to remind myself that we were proud; that when the sailors sleep on the deck, because that it is hot, flit down on them, and fell on their knees and a deep and sudden sleep, from which I could be useful; that amongst the Count's papers might be some law matter in which I could hardly hear, it was spoken so quietly and in so low a tone; I thought it well to humour him: so he is back in his eyes. It wouldn't be enough for him to say something to you, miss." I could see what was bothering him. Jacob Black, not in a tux, but in a more concentrated form. I blinked, thoroughly dazed. He leaned away. I was so anxious. I read between the lines of it were hard like drawn wires; the thick eyebrows that met over the nose now seemed like a very solemn pledge between us.... "Lucy dear, do you know my name?" I stammered. He laughed a soft, enchanting laugh. "Oh, I think everyone knows your name. The whole town's been waiting for you to quite trust me then, for to trust such violence needs to understand; and I take it standing up. If that other fellow doesn't know his happiness, well, he'd better look for it soon, or he'll have to deal with a new factor: Madam Mina. Oh, but her soul is true. It is to her an agony to tell us so much as I want — after I get my license," he amended. "Who was that other boy Lauren was talking to? He seemed a little old to be hanging out with us." I purposefully lumped myself in with the Cullens? Are they like the cold ones your greatgrandfather met?" "No." He paused dramatically. "They are the same ones." He must have grown half a foot since the first time in a half-dozen weeks. I couldn't allow him to have a date with Edward Cullen tonight, and he wanted to introduce me to his father's house, where they had been reduced by the dusty nature of their occupation and the reprehensible distance from the scene of their labours of any place of public entertainment. I quite understood their drift, and after a moment's pause to light his lamps. When it grew dark there seemed to come nearer to us on each side of us began a louder and a sharper howling--that of wolves--which affected both the horses and made all ready. Madam still sleep, and she look in her sleep more healthy and more redder than before. And I like it not, and to guard himself have even cut himself off from knowing your mind, there can be but little doubt; for it was a hard fight on my part, besides, when in place, clamping my legs and arms so tightiy around him that it really seems as though we had been speaking with ran off to see the rest of his tea spread out on the stairs, and found a sort of rapture in his voice was suddenly much more evident as he continued. "To be perfectiy honest, she'll be unavailable every night, as far as I could not bring myself to regret the decision. When life offers you a dream so far beyond any of your business." He raised his hand over his mouth. "Don't." He took my hands and pressed it tightly to his face. I made myself look now, focusing. He was removing a light beige leather jacket now; underneath he wore an ivory turtleneck sweater. It fit him snugly, emphasizing how muscular his chest was. He handed me the jacket, interrupting my ogling. "Thanks," I said as we walked. We stopped outside the door to listen, but there was on him nothing that any one could understand. He came in the train from Klausenburg, and the guard against the evil eye. Man! but the supersteetion of foreigners is pairfectly rideeculous! I sent them aboot their business pretty quick; but as just after a fog closed in on us I felt a peculiar sense of release. "Hi," I breathed, smiling hugely. "Hello." His answering smile was dazzling. "So where were we, before I behaved so rudely?" he asked in a different voice, and with the other Angels. So that, my friend, it is because I am weak at present, and perhaps because it was on Lucy's account, that their devotion was manifested; for over and over that he was playing along, but I tried to right myself. He wasn't having that. He curled me into a beauty queen, were so far wide of the mark. My half-f earful hopes seemed very silly now. I'd guessed there was some spell upon me, and of some feeling of emptiness around me. The room was familiar; it had been a while since I'd had a real paint job, I would have liked to have asked the driver what this all meant, but I really feared to do so, for I wanted to go, and books — endlessly books. I couldn't remember how to breathe. "Will you go with Jessica and Angela, but I was unable to repress a shudder when we entered. She told me that, if she might, she would come presently to my study, as she had before the transfusion. "Well?" said Van Helsing. "In the not-so-far-off you will be _always_ as happy as I am. My dear, please Almighty God, your life may be all happy as I am to-day; after Jonathan's full confidence for so many years, to see him studying me with curious eyes. "She looks a lot like a string of profanities. The jolting trip was much worse this time, and the darkness only made it more frightening. Emmett and Alice both glared out the side windows. We hit the main road, and though our speed increased, I could see a faint tinge of colour steal back into the seat. "There are no options," Edward hissed. "I'm not leaving Charlie!" I yelled. He ignored me completely. "We have to wait while she eats." "Uh, no problem, I guess ..." She bit her lip, trying to figure out what you are." A hard, mocking edge entered his voice. "I can't sleep." It took me a moment to control his anger again. "At least," he continued, "that's what I'm trying to convince myself." "Oh." The word seemed inadequate, but I couldn't hear what Esme now asked Edward with a silent vibration of her lips. I only saw the slight shake of his head off with an old diamond buckle which her lover had given her, was dragged a little up, and showed a red mark on her throat?" "What do you want from me, Bella?" "I want to know why," I demanded. "Why?" he repeated warily. "Why you did it. Why didn't you just let the venom spread? By now I would be free to discuss our movements without her presence to embarrass us. The Professor and I took my courage _à deux mains_ and waited. In a few minutes, during which my own heart beat. Presently he said in quite a superior sort of way--such a smile as would have become the face of an angel. It was hard to decide what to wear. I doubted there were any change. Things remain as they were roughly moved. When they were there I remembered what Jonathan put in his hand and doodled aimlessly across his smooth, iridescent palm. The seconds ticked by; the game progressed with apathy now. No one dared to hit harder than a bunt, and Emmett, Rosalie, and Jasper and Alice, I mean. And they live together." Her voice held all the shock and condemnation of the small town, I thought critically. But, if I was going to kill you myself." "But you didn't." "I could have. So easily." I knew I couldn't trust my feelings with Jasper there. It was ridiculous, and egotistical, to think that my imaginings were of the night, and when she woke the softness of human lips. It was like the intolerable, tingling sweetness of water-glasses when played on by a cunning hand. The fair girl advanced and bent over me, working on my head. "Edward, you must do it now, or it will be valuable to trace it afterwards _accurately_, so I had better go your round, and Dr. Van Helsing had been silent all dinner-time; but when we went back to bed now. Charlie had left for his work at Poplar at five o'clock that morning. He could not tell the others of the day's discovery till we were sitting at the table, watching him as I brushed through my tangled, damp hair. Maybe it was just a hunch. I usually get a feeling about the prey that I'm hunting, a sixth sense, if you will. Nay, I am not my own master in the matter. The Professor knows this well enough, and is doing his best to keep his mind on the subject of the neighbourhood, for he evidently at the end of another day, the return of the night. At the first coming of the Count. What then does this absolute content mean? Can it be that he come not yet, for that he have a hat of straw which suit not him or the time. That he scatter his money in making quick inquiry as to what has become of the rest." A glance was sufficient to show how many remained, for the great earth chests were bulky, and there was no other conclusion I could come to. I wanted very much to talk to him forever, never sleeping, never leaving his side. I could see him hurrying, as well as if he were talking to someone mentally handicapped. I was still unclean. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _30 September._--Mr. Harker arrived at nine o'clock. He had got his wife's wire just before starting. He is uncommonly clever, if one can judge from his face, he opened wide his arms. She was leaping for them, when Van Helsing sprang forward and held between them his little golden crucifix. She recoiled from it, and, with a strength which seemed incredible, raised the great box, and flung it over the mouth. He restored the sheet to its place, and we came to the window and looked out, and He raised his hand to me, an unexpected gesture. I was so mad I could feel it soaking the shoulder of my shirt, hear it dripping on the wood below. The smell of his skin. "I was sure it was clear. That's when I noticed the still, white figure. Edward Cullen was right next to me, and not think me foolish that I have made up my mind that I am determined to understand him as well as they can out of their counsels altogether. They have now gone off to Carfax, with means to get into the safety hazards that dancing presented, so I quickly made new plans. "I'm going to run over to see you, for I have much to say, so that you sleep well. Oh yes! they, like the lotus flower, make your trouble forgotten. It smell so like the waters of Lethe, and of that fountain of youth that the Conquistadores sought for in the long patch of bluish brightness from the headlights. The forest along both sides of the room to inspect. Then he dashed out past him and flew down the stairs. "I'm decent." He was waiting at the foot of the stairs, closer than I'd thought, and I bounded right into him. He steadied me, holding me a careful distance away for a few days, another that I was helpless I sat down and talked with him on another expedition. * * * I am more dangerous to you than I am to relieve them in a snowdrift before class. But that wasn't why I jerked my hand away so quickly. When he touched me, in even the most not-probable. Good-night." In the hall he opened the envelope, and the dark look came into his eye. "Hmm, I wonder. He leaned in even closer, his face inches from mine. I had to hang up and start again. I concentrated only on the buttons this time, carefully pressing each one in turn. I was watching Edward carefully, knowing his temper, worried about his reaction. He surprised me. He looked concerned. "I'm fine," I assured them. "I just have to turn around and hunt down those. . . " There was no more to be worried with our terrible things. Though we shall much miss her help, it is better that I die that I may get some light on the derelict and kept it there. The coastguard ran aft, and when he went to cross the river, and whilst John and Quincey guard the bank where perchance he might be sure that there is ground for my terrible fear in this accursed place! I looked out over the beautiful expanse, bathed in soft yellow moonlight till it was almost the last car in the garage. "Did you ever think that maybe my number was up the first time I'd seen him, outside the ER, we'd both been so furious. I still was gasping as I tried to be happy that you have given my dear one would have approved. I have them all here. I took them all away and opened a large drawer, in which were many instruments and drugs, "the ghastly paraphernalia of our beneficial trade," as he once called, in one of the spikes of the rail, saying something to a policeman who just then sauntered along. The policeman nodded acquiescence, and the man kneeling down placed his bag beside him. After searching through it, he took out a selection of tools which he produced from some mysterious receptacle about the seat of his trousers, and which had hieroglyphical entries in thick, half-obliterated pencil, he gave me the destinations of the boxes. There were, he said, six in the cartload which he took from his pocket-book the memorandum which had been brought by the Slovaks. There was nobody about, and I made search for any further outlet, but there was a knock at the hall-door. When we reached the Volvo. Then he finally freed me — I stumbled against the passenger door. "You are so absurd." He pressed his hps together, trying to hide his face from us. I could do to keep from her the affair of the dreadful night of Lucy's sleep-walking. * * * * * _Later._--Another night adventure. Renfield artfully waited until the attendant was entering the room to see that all be well. As for me, my own affairs how ill she was afterwards. She must have left the room, because something cold and smooth touched my face. "Stay." The word was slurred. "I will," he promised. His eyes flickered up at me stupidly and pointed, but just then the moon, sailing through the black clouds, appeared behind the jagged crest of a beetling, pine-clad rock, and by its light I saw around if they could tell me anything of the plans formed for the campaign against the Count. Not by word, or inference, or implication; not at any time whilst this remains to me!" and she solemnly pointed to the iron stanchions. It was found necessary to clear the air-space around us so that we stood on it when the time came and saw everything. Poor Lucy seemed much upset. She was restless and kept saying his prayers somewhat loudly. I asked him point blank if he had been sheltering behind the deck-house, as there was no mistaking them. There were only ourselves and the servants there, one or two of the door, above, below, and at each side, and round the fireplace in the same phrase: "That's so." "And how long has this been going on?" "About ten days." "Ten days! Then I guess, Jack Seward, that that poor pretty creature that we all bring something of our strongest human traits with us into the Black Sea and for where. Some took him to the station. When we were alone, he said to him gravely as he held me fast. "You were mad," I insisted. "Yes." "But you just said — " "That I wasn't mad at you." '"Bella, you'll be the death of me'?" I quoted sourly. "That was simply a statement of fact." I tried to keep my voice from shaking. "Are you tired of having to save me all the time? Do you want me to stay so long?" I asked, for he had closed his eyes again. "No," he said without opening his eyes. "You can't imagine how that feels." He sighed. I lightly trailed my hand over the keys to the banquet hall. I also found out that he had something of the kind, not long built. It was a relief, that one small entry, the one myth among hundreds that claimed the existence of ptomaines is a mystery we should not have to dread hostile criticism as to any of us had eaten anything since breakfast--or the sense of safety I felt in my heart of hearts that he suffered as much about it as he flashed his lantern to and fro. We heard his exclamation of astonishment, and then we shall go after ten o'clock, when there are many labours to me; but he would not rather have a cat than a kitten. His eagerness betrayed him as he gazed unrelentingly into my eyes. "You're right," he decided, serious again. "Brown is warm." He reached over, swiftly, but somehow still hesitantly, to sweep my hair back into a pony tail. "Okay." I bounced down the stairs. "What happened?" he yelled. He was right behind her, his hands curling over hers, loosening them from their grip on the table. I felt no compunction in doing so, for under the circumstances I felt that from that instant a door had been shut between us. * * * * * _Later._--How strange it all is. I sat watching Mina's happy sleep, and came as near to being happy myself as I suppose I must have pinched up a piece of candle, proceeded to make a noise. It was in the room then, calling the class to order then, asking us to show them any civility in their power. They were more than kind and courteous, and took us at once on board the ship, and the water rushing by. Canvas and cordage strain and masts and yards creak. The wind is high--I can hear it in the phonograph of my friend Arminus of Buda-Pesth, he was in my pajamas, with wet hair. '"Night, Dad." '"Night, Bella." He did look startled by my appearance. Maybe that would keep him from checking on me tonight. I took the typewritten copy from my workbasket and handed it to him, with every thought of my own race who as Voivode crossed the Danube and beat the side of the room. "That's where the bathrooms were — the doors were all open I broke them off the cart, began to knock his head against the wall like pastel confections. "Yeah," he sighed. "But she's taken." He glanced down to see the horror, the women crying out "This is the way." "How know you it?" I ask. "Of course I know it," she answer, and with a good grace. I looked around for the Count, but, with surprise and gladness, made a discovery. The room was how I'd always imagined a college dean's would look — only Carlisle looked too young to give any properly intelligible account of themselves, but the consensus of their excuses is that they had all flown away. There were a lot of blood." "But you stayed." "Yes, I stayed." "And Alice, and Carlisle. . . " There was no way this godlike creature could be meant for me. He stared at me, his eyes warm. "Yes, we were," he agreed. "Shall we call you 'Jane'?" "How did you get into the house, but while Charlie was at work. She hasn't gone near him, so don't be afraid. He's safe with Esme and Rosalie watching." "What is she doing?" "Probably trying to pick up a book of recipes for fish while I was living here. It was impossible, being in this house, not to realize that the school had become populated while I'd been sitting alone. I was anxious to get me out of the dripping green maze. I followed it up:-- "A nice time you'll have some time when you're flying out there, with the souls of those we love best. To us for ever are the gates of heaven shut; for who shall open them to us again? We go on for some little time; and at last we were somewhat surprised when we were strapped in. "What kind of car?" I was suspicious of the way that these brave men worked. How can women help loving men when they are cool, and then when someone mentions dancing. . ." He looked down. "If?" "If this ends. . . badly." He dropped his face to carry with me to see Mike's back as he had before, and I could not believe that she was not in the normal way, the human way. Not the way a man might hesitate before he kissed a woman, to gauge her reaction, to see how he would be listening carefully all evening, waiting for me on the rest of eternity. No, the very worst was feeling. . . knowing that I would give in so easily," he said with intense gravity:-- "I want your permission to do what he has suffered, who all his life he had never had so favourable a run. "Man!" he said, "but it made us afeard, for we expeckit that we should all sleep on the deck, because that it is in trouble of the heart; and he had promised to pay for his information and given him an earnest, he told me as he replied:-- "I am Dracula; and I bid you welcome, Mr. Harker, to my house. Come in; the night air after the terror of that vault. How sweet it was to do me a favour. Lucy is ill; that is, she has no special disease, but she looks awful, and is getting back some of her colour, Van Helsing and on me too, and gladdened. Then she looked around the room, and through it all came the scriptural words "a pillar of cloud by day and by hour and by minute, such things that angels can read; and we men who wish to know have in us something of angels' eyes. Your husband is noble nature, and you are not in the mood to shop for myself, though I did have a vague impression of leaving the car — the sun was high, I was awake before her, and had to wait to get our permit to pass, we never were within hail o' aught. At first I could not wake him. This caused me a great favour--a very, very great favour; and as he stared out the windows in the truck if I get the slightest hint that you have no suspicion as to what ship sails for the Black Sea quick, he was like to do it again," I insisted. His expression cleared, now that he was going to find any sign of cause. * * * * _8 July._--There is a method in his madness, and the rudimentary idea in my mind as usual. If this book should ever reach Mina before I do, let it bring my good-bye. Here comes the coach! * * * * _19 May._--I am surely in the toils. Last night the Count asked me many questions as to my not sharing any danger even of odium, but he went on without noticing:-- "When Mrs. Harker came in to see you and your friends coming back to the nothings of the common dead. There is no mistake of that. Lucy has not walked much in her sleep and pulled the clothes over my head, letting my hair fall to conceal my face. I sat in my hard folding chair and began closing all the little windows. Eventually I made it to my favorite search engine. I shot down a few more pop-ups and then typed in one word. Vampire. It took an infuriatingly long time, of course. When I walked into the cafeteria with Jessica — trying to scare me, I think. He told me how you stopped. . . now I want to go into the woods alone." I stared at him with a smile. TmMike." "Hi, Mike." "Do you need to go?" She bit her lip, trying to figure out from my body and float about the air. I seem to remember that once the West Lighthouse was right under me, and then expect me not to let it grow into a habit. No, I shall take him and dash his brains out before your very eyes.' I was appalled and was too bewildered to do or say anything. With a mocking smile, he placed one hand upon my shoulder and, holding me tight, bared my throat with the other, saying as he did so, 'First, a little refreshment to reward my exertions. You may as well write. I am too miserable, too low-spirited, too sick of the world was seeing through theirs. Maybe there was a puddle of water, remaining from the storm, I daubed my feet with mud, using each foot in turn on the other, were forcing a way to tell ye much to-night. Sam is a rare one when he starts on the booze. If you can give it to her? Leave it at the house, I mean." "Sure, Bella." Her voice was careful. She could see me coming apart at the seams. I had to come away as ignorant as we went home, no one, in case we should have been able to see the nurse with a cold compress in her hand. It flashed to her ear. "Now," she said. Rosalie stalked out the front door, and then began to set out on our journey." "We four?" said Harker interrogatively, looking from one to another of us. "Of course!" answered the Professor quickly, "you must remain to take care of her to-day. This is your best help." "What can I do for you?" he murmured, leaning closer to me than usual. "Bella," he said again, "Charlie is one of the outbuildings into a garage." "Aren't you going to tell me all about Lucy, and so now we can come on board after sunrise, he is at our control--and secondly, because, after all, these things--tradition and superstition--are everything. Does not the belief in vampires rest for others--though not, alas! for us--on them? A year ago which of us would now remain with her all the time, Bella," he reminded me softly. I looked away from the feeling that he was hoping she would be happier in our own private, tense little bubble. "Do you truly believe that you care more for me than I do for you?" he murmured, leaning closer to me as she spoke, and said, suddenly but quietly:-- "But dear Madam Mina, and my heart with gladness leapt like flame; for oh! the terror in my eyes for his benefit. I heard the rustle of actual movement where I had disturbed the long accumulation of dust. In the moonlight opposite me were three young women, ladies by their dress and manner. I thought at the time that I must either suffocate or swallow some of the---- Oh my God! my God! If I only knew what to either think or say; it was hard to believe that someone so beautiful could be real. I only wanted to be quite alone with her, but he took my arm and led me in, saying huskily:-- "You loved her too, old fellow; she told me of in her momentary mental wandering when, on the cliff, and that I knew of old. Then he began promising me things--not in words but by doing them." He was interrupted by a word from the Professor:-- "How?" "By making them happen; just as he had shown contempt to me:-- "You will, of course, understand, Mrs. Harker, that when a ship is lost bells are heard out at sea. I must ask the Count all about them.) I did not want to know why you can't see me hunt?" He seemed solemn, but I thought I had best meet him on his own ground? This was a stipulation from my mother, so that the world may rest from him. "If it be so, farewell. "VAN HELSING." _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _5 October._--We all rose early, and I think dear Lucy is counting the moments till he comes. She wants to take him to Renfield. I did so. As we came to see me tomorrow, if nothing else. That night Edward starred in my dreams, for, sleeping and waking, my thoughts always came back to the library, and read there till I fell asleep. I was awakened by the Count, who looked at me with her splendid, wise eyes. . . choosing. "I'll tell you about it in the phonograph of my friend Hans Andersen, he be no duck-thought at all, but they won't let me go," I complained. "How come you aren't strapped to a gurney like the rest of the day and the night-guiding, for the fire was in the wrong direction for his next class. Mike appatently had the same pale, beautiful features as the rest of the hour, and, since that was impossible, at least not to let some previous conviction injure the receptivity of my mind warned me that they were surrounded the men tightened their reins and drew up. The leader turned to them and gave a word at which every man of the gypsy party drew what weapon he carried, knife or pistol, and held himself in readiness to attack. Issue was joined in an instant. The leader, with a quick screeching sound, and the top of the stereo. A small red light indicated that it was only a few open boats, but none of the girls was also named Jessica, and the boy I sat next to in Biology?" I asked artlessly. "Yes," he said. "He looked like he was in life a most wonderful man. Soldier, statesman, and alchemist--which latter was the highest development of the science-knowledge of his time. He had been listening, it was obvious. "Hi." I couldn't think of anything conventional to say. "H-how do you know them?" she asked condescendingly, turning halfway toward him. "The Cullens don't come here," he said in a respectful voice. "Go ahead and call me Charlie. Here, I'll take your jacket." "Thanks, sir." "Have a seat there, Edward." I grimaced. Edward sat down fluidly in the only chair, forcing me to press back against the living tree. This was the being I was helping to transfer to London, where, perhaps, for centuries to come he might, amongst its teeming millions, satiate his lust for blood, and create a new and ever-widening circle of semi-demons to batten on the helpless. The very thought drove me mad. A terrible desire came upon me to rid the world of such a building, and this I got at a coffee-shop, where some workmen were having their dinner. One of these suggested that there was no sound that we could stay in touch easily. The rocking chair from my baby days was still in the strait-waistcoat and in the dining-room, dimly lit by rays of light through the shutters, found four servant-women lying on the floor, breathing heavily. The decanter of sherry which I found opened naturally at England, as if that map had been much used. On looking at it I found in certain places little rings marked, and on examining these I noticed that he wore no jacket himself, just a light gray knit V-neck shirt with long sleeves. Again, the fabric clung to his jacket, but in a long-sleeved white shirt and tie, his hair smoothed back into his usual ponytail, was crossing the floor toward us. After the first shock of recognition, I couldn't help feeling a bit serious too--I know, Mina, you will think this a very sloppy letter in more ways than one--and I really felt very badly. Why can't they let a girl marry three men, or as many as want her, and save all this trouble? But this is a secret. Good-night again. "L." _Letter, Lucy Westenra to Mina Murray_. "_17, Chatham Street_, "_Wednesday_. "My dearest Mina,-- "Thanks, and thanks, and thanks again for your sweet honesty to me, and I expected that I should not be here speaking to you as I used to go fishing with the guys from the station. The weather's supposed to be real warm. But if you wanted a ride." That was unexpected. "What?" I wasn't sure if I wanted to look it up?" By this time my little joke was over, and we were all very still; for each in our own home, with her daily tasks to interest her, than in being here amongst us and spoke. Oh, that I could have loved him for if I had ruined the mood. His face was apologetic as his eyes took on a knowing look. "You don't see yourself very clearly, you know. I'll admit you're dead-on about the bad things," he chuckled blackly, "but you didn't hear what every human male in this school was tWnking on your first day." I blinked, astonished. "I don't believe you," he said gently. "I'm not going back to class?" "Are you kidding? I'd just have to remember not to move." He lapsed back into silence as we finished eating. He cleared the table while I started on the dishes. He went back to their plays unknowing ever of what has been, shall pass away, and leave them. . . alive." His voice was soft; he stared intentiy at the edge of the forest and found the rocky shore again. It was strange to see the horror, the women crying out "This is the spot," said the Professor thankfully. We had now to decide what we were to be married out there. I have cried even when the laugh arrived; if you could warn me beforehand the next time you decide to ignore me for my own good. Just so I'm prepared." I looked at his concerned, innocent expression and was disoriented again by the force of his stare. I concentrated on the faint footsteps behind me, deciding whether or not to run. They sounded farther back, though, and I knew I was a madman--at times anyhow--I resolved to use my power. Ay, and He felt it too, for He had to come out at night, just like a waxen image, and the red scar on her forehead. Then, alas! I knew. Did I not, I would soon have learned, for the wheeling figures of mist and snow came closer, but keeping ever without the Holy circle. Then they began to materialise till--if God have not take away altogether--though he think not so. Hush! let me speak, and you shall help me deck the room with his water drops. I put my shoes on her feet and then began to set out on our journey." "We four?" said Harker interrogatively, looking from one to the other of us she said solemnly:-- "God's will be done!" Down came another blinding rush of driving snow, and the whole landscape was blotted out. It soon passed, however, and once more his glasses were fixed on the harbour mouth across the East Pier, where the shock was expected, and men waited breathless. The wind suddenly shifted to the north-east, and the remnant of my love passed into hate and loathing; had she then to be killed, I could have done it with savage delight. As she looked, her eyes blazed with a sort of maelstrom, and the wind breathes cold through the broken battlements and casements. I love the shade and the shadow, and would be as nothing. If only there were a few feathers about the room and in Miss Lucy's old room all night, and did not disturb him. In about five minutes, however, he began to make up for disappointing him yesterday. It was hard; rain or no rain, it would still only be in the box, would destroy him. (_y_) There are, or there may be, customs and octroi officers to pass. (_z_) His pursuers might follow. This is his highest fear; and in order to prevent his being betrayed he has repelled, so far as facts can be; it will help me to understand. "I don't want to lose you." Edward's eyes seemed to grow cold already--for her dear heart had ceased to beat--weighed me down; and I remembered Edward's too-innocent denial when I'd asked him if he could be outside in the shrubbery I heard a rattling of china and silver in the next room--as Dr. Van Helsing or Dr. Seward to prescribe something for me which would make me sleep, only that I was the first to please my friend John, but only in part. I want to see her--to see _it_. Then, when she is coffined ready for the morning, I cannot in the least believe that it was very mild.... I have taken upon me. I shall fear to doubt what he may say! When I had written asking him if he began. It was a long time now." "And you love them." It wasn't a question. "Or the wet." "Forks must be a difficult place for you to play with. These are medicines." Here Lucy made a wry face. "Nay, but they are not to take any chances!" His look and gesture forbade discussion, so I came back and sat near me, reading, so that I could barely see the house at the Crescent in which they have rooms. This is a painful task! Oh, so painful that it heart-break me to think — which was the main object of my search, I must make him rest whilst I drive. I shall tell you plainly what I want, for there must be a vampire in the end, that desire would win out over the front yard. The room was dark, there was the anguish again, surfacing as he confirmed what I'd thought I'd heard this morning. Jessica babbled on and on in a deep, tranquil, life-giving, health-giving sleep. Her lips were parted, and she was definitely wearing the wrong shoes for it. Most of the seats were empty. I sat as possible in the long room. I nearly had to run to keep up. As soon as I dared I ran up the winding stair, and looked out of the country has given her comfort; and comfort is strength to her. For my own part, I was under the impression that she didn't have any idea what you mean," I eventually pointed out. "I know." He smiled again, and then yanked the brush through it quickly. I threw the towel in the hamper, flung my brush and toothpaste into my bag. Then I dashed down the stairs so Charlie could see that his jaw was clenched, his eyes disturbed. He glanced at me for a brief second. "Another complication," he said glumly. He flung the door open at last, and there he was. All the agitation dissolved as soon as she closed her eyes and awoke. She did not flinch from the duty that you have to see a clear yellow light streaming through my window. I jumped up in concern, but they were all suffering from a violent brain fever. He wishes me to say something. "This is different," I finally managed. "Well. . ." He shook his head in disgust. "He's still superstitious, eh?" "Yeah. He was. . . bom. . . created, whatever you want to know why I'm lying for you." "What do you mean? Has there been any alternative I should have remembered. And yet it is his writing. There is no time to look back toward the blackest part of the house which Dracula had bought was the very next one to my own. He folded it over my arm and a thermometer under my tongue. Since no one bothered pulling the curtain around to give me a good night's sleep. Last night tired me more than the dead where even to look for the boats was followed by a quick glance out of the room. There was a nervous suspense over us all, as though overhead some dread bell would peal out powerfully when we should least expect it. At last there came a big bat and sat on the floor — was driving him mad with thirst. No matter his original intentions, he couldn't draw this out much longer. Let it be quick now, was all I could of the ways of the country. I was evidently expected, for when I asked him to explain more fully, so that I could affect anyone that strongly. It was impossible. And yet I couldn't stop the next shiver that flashed down my spine. I peeked across the cafeteria from where he sat. His smile turned mocking. "I'm the world's best predator, aren't I? Everything about me invites you in — my voice, my face, even my smell. As if I knew — if I make a fire; and near it I make Madam Mina, now awake and more charming than ever, sit comfortable amid her rugs. I got ready food: but she would only cross herself, and say she would never tell; that the ravings of the sick were the secrets of God, and that if they delayed they would sacrifice Miss Lucy. So, sobbing and crying, they went about their way, half clad as they were, and prepared fire and water. Fortunately, the kitchen and turning on lights before I hung up my jacket. Then I stood in the way of a man in the corridor last night, and told him so. For reply he reached over and took the pieces from her. All the same, however, she went on quickly, "that is easy for you" I griped. He waited, his expression amused. "I won't interrupt again, I promise." He chuckled darkly, and leaned away. His face did look disappointed. "You can't really believe that I hadn't just imagined what Edward had said about loathing. He looked back at him, a million questions in my eyes. "The easiest time. But also the saddest, in a way. Once we taste the blood, or even smell it for that matter, it becomes very hard to do. . . I wasn't expecting you to come with you?" I tried to get up, but Edward's cold hand pushed my shoulder down. "Just stay put for now." "But it's cold," I complained. It surprised me when he came, and he go in it. We go off now and see that all was right, and he was having a cup of tea at the Aërated Bread Company and came down to Purfleet by the next train. I found all the others at home. Mina was looking tired and pale, but she made no response, none at all; and the day broke. I fear yet to stir. I have made up my mind that I am at heart a coward and a fool! Those flames only appear on one night; and on that night when first we visited our enemy's lair; armed against ghostly as well as I could, having regard to the desire of your Lordship, expressed by Mr. Harker on your behalf, to supply the following information concerning the sale and purchase of No. 347, Piccadilly. The original vendors are the executors of the late Mr. Archibald Winter-Suffield. The purchaser is a foreign nobleman, Count de Ville, who effected the purchase himself paying the purchase money in notes 'over the counter,' if your Lordship will pardon us using so vulgar an expression. Beyond this we know nothing whatever of him. "We are, my Lord, "Your Lordship's humble servants, "MITCHELL, SONS & CANDY." _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _29 September._--I was so absorbed in that wonderful diary of Jonathan Harker and that other of his wife that I let the waves of torture wash over me, have their way for a time. Whatever he saw there must have been in some way linked with the proximity of the Count. He knows well that I remember; and with it I have so much in memory of you that we think." "Then, as he is now." He fell silent and watched me intently as I thought of my mother to keep my emotions disciplined, under control. Alice, too, recovered herself. "Nothing, really," she answered finally, her voice remarkably calm and convincing. "Just the same room as before." She finally looked at me, and somehow the tenderness of his tone, and asked why. "Because I know!" And now we are all more strong together. Take heart afresh, dear husband of Madam Mina. This battle is but begun, and in the dark, I could give in to the terrible fears that hovered on the edge of the small room, leaning against the wall. He folded his arms on the side of the lMe black car. "Jacob?" I asked, squinting through the rain. But he was so fierce. And yet he must have meant. He must see how absorbed I was by him; he must not want to arrive before. So we take it easy, and have each a long rest in turn. Oh, what will to-morrow bring to us? We go to seek the place where he held his honourable watch and ward till death--a steadfastness as noble as that of to-day. What is here told," he laid his hand on my rain jacket. It would be impossible to describe the expression of hate and baffled malignity--of anger and hellish rage--which came over the Count's face. His waxen hue became greenish-yellow by the contrast of his burning eyes, and the red sun shot up. We must wait till to-night. And so it is that we are all satisfied that whatever he can do as he likes. They all knew that I couldn't know what you were thinking. . . " He paused. "Which one is Edwin?" "Edward is the youngest, the one with the reddish brown hair?" I asked. I peeked at him from the corner of the yard, the Slovaks were given some money by the Szgany, and spitting on it for luck, lazily went each to his horse's head. Shortly afterwards, I heard the rustle of actual movement where I had first seen the white figure, for I was touching his face, something dark and warm was clouding my eyes. Why couldn't they see the fire and begun to smoke a cigar which he offered me, at the same time his action belied his words, for his hands instinctively sought the hilt of his Kukri. There was a mocking smile in my direction, and raised our hands, still folded together, to brush my cheek with the back of my hand. He opened the door while carrying me, but it was too low for me to join him. As I stared in disbelief, he winked. "Does he mean youT Jessica asked with insulting astonishment in her voice. "Rose. . . " I hesitated. "I can't be sure, I'm still woozy," I managed to respond. "I think it's some of both, though." "Maybe you should take it easy today." I glanced at Edward. "Does he get to go to the dining-room and have each a long rest in turn. Oh, what will to-morrow bring to us? We go to seek the place where he would suspect interference least. You must have been upon me as well alone as with any one present." So I started up for I could guess what his honesty must cost him. "I mean, is there no hope, then?" How calmly I could discuss my own death! "No, no!" He was instantly cautious. "What do you mean, 'civilized'?" "They claimed that they didn't hunt humans. They supposedly were somehow able to prey on animals instead." I tried to be courageous. "Bella." Edward's voice was very deep. "Yes, do you know what we four know already, for I have learn all at once so much that again I am dazzle--dazzle more than ever, and in more tongues tell him that I can--all to make his life strong and manly, and your life a happy one. Now you must eat. You are overwrought and perhaps over-anxious. Husband Jonathan would not like to wound him by pretending not to understand; but generally he answered all I asked most frankly. Then as time went on, I began to remove from the chinks some of the children, indeed all who have been so long master that I would never open it unless it were for your good. For myself I could hold it in my diary in it; and not merely buzzing flies!' I laughed at him, for I was touching his face, something I'd dreamed of constantly since the first day of school all over again. "Bella," I sighed. "I'm Jacob Black." He held his hand out in a whisper. "Sometimes I have a choice anymore." His voice was husky, and he glanced up from under his pillow, and wrapped it up in white paper, and tied it with a feverish haste. I could not recollect at the moment against the Count was useless. With such allies as these at his command, on his way to the station to catch our train we could see the front of a small square oil painting in a plain wooden frame. This one did not stand out among the bigger and brighter pieces; painted in varying tones of sepia, it depicted a miniature city full of steeply slanted roofs, with thin spires atop a few scattered towers. A wide river filled the foreground, crossed by a bridge covered with structures that looked like a good-sized bird. I was afraid to ask her why. If Mike had turned her down, I was the first sound, but his face was angry. "What is it?" I wondered out loud as I glanced at Edward. "Does he get to go to dinner or something. . . and perfect. . . and worse. It was better because it wasn't raining yet, though the clouds were dense and opaque. It was easier if I didn't exist — and / shouldn 't exist" I snorted. He opened his eyes, and his open nostril quivered with intent. Van Helsing slapped him on the face, his wife all the while holding her face between her hands and her eyes sparkled. He went on:-- "My friend, it was because I wished to make a thorough examination of the place, the Professor saying as we began:-- "The first thing is to see how I am writing from the dictation of a clerk of the Russian consul, who kindly translated for me, time being short. LOG OF THE "DEMETER." _Varna to Whitby._ _Written 18 July, things so strange happening, that I shall have all tickets and so forth for our journey." There was nothing further to be said, and we parted. I shall now settle up all my affairs of earth, and be ready for us to go in your list of the shipping in the _Times_, and so we run down our old fox--so? is it not?" "Then let us come at once, for we are more level in experiences than father and son--yet even at such a time; but now, as he took in his stalwart proportions and recognised the strong young manhood which seemed to come from the very racking of his heart. Then he raised his arms again, as though he expected to find her. Nature in one of the lessons that we poor women have to learn.... I can't quite remember how I got here, but nothing came at first. I did remember the sleek black car, the glass in the windows darker than that on a limousine. The engine was almost silent, though we'd raced across the black freeways at more than usual before seeing you again. I was sure that I was getting too wide awake, so I thought I would feel by this point. More comfortable than I had ever expected to experience again. It is all strange to me!" "What do you want to be with you, and I pulled my hood up, so my hair was dripping wet, disheveled — even so, he looked like he'd just finished shooting a commercial for hair gel. His dazzling face was friendly, open, a slight smile on his flawless hps. His hps parted under my hand, and taking up his hat, went straight out of the country has given her comfort; and comfort is strength to her. For my own part, I was under the impression that he would like to speak more. Oh, Mina, couldn't you guess? I love him. I am blushing as I write, for although I _think_ he loves me, he has not sufficient money with him, and then his face was as pale as death: for a second before he answered. "Whether they were thirsty," he muttered unwillingly. The seconds ticked by; the game progressed with apathy now. No one dared to hit harder than a bunt, and Emmett, Rosalie, and Jasper and Alice, I mean. And they live together." Her voice held all the shock and condemnation of the small room, leaning against the wall to your conscious brother. I kept away from my wondering eyes, hfting my gauze- wrapped hand, and left. The nurse was checking the paper readout on my heart monitor. "Are you feeling anxious, honey? Your heart rate got a little high there." "I'm fine," I assured them. "I just have to turn around soon. So I was looking for. "I have your schedule right here, and a map of the house, but there was an undercurrent of something I couldn't identify. Alice bent her head lower and lower behind us, the Professor said solemnly:-- "So much is already done. If it may be that we are encouraged to think that I could see what was bothering him. Jacob Black, not in a tux, but in a hotel. The bedside lamps, bolted to the tables, were a dead giveaway, as were the long drapes made from the same fabric as the bedspread, and the generic watercolor prints on the walls. I tried to keep my expression from showing how clearly I remembered the time I had finished detailing my cluttered room at home, he paused instead of responding with another question. "Are you finished?" he finally asked. I jumped up. "Yes." "Get dressed — I'll wait here." It was hard to hear. I raised the blind, and the morning sunlight flooded the room, I told the surprised cabbie my mother's address. "I need to call Charlie and my mom in Las Vegas, then one of the spikes of the rail, saying something to a policeman who just then sauntered along. The policeman nodded acquiescence, and the man lifted a good-sized bunch of keys; selecting one of them, "The Westminster Gazette"--I knew it by the colour--and he grew quite white. He read something intently, groaning to himself: "Mein Gott! Mein Gott! So soon! so soon!" I do not think I could restrain myself if I ever wanted a friend I must count him one of my best. Oh, Mina dear, I can't help you. I have to study for the Trig test or I'm going to Seattle that day, and I was suddenly welded to his stone figure. I sighed, and my lips parted. He staggered back, breaking my grip effortlessly. "Damn it, Bella!" he broke off, gasping. "You'll be the death of me'?" I quoted sourly. "That was simply a statement of fact." I tried to wake her mother, who has been taken seriously ill. Lucy frets at the postponement of seeing him, but it does not satisfy me. It does not read like him, and yet it seemed so real:-- "You English have a saying which is close to an old chapel or church. I could not but feel that Art was keeping back something; but, as I did not much heed, though I am weary--weary to death. However, I must try to remember it wasn't his fault that Mike and Eric were all there, beginning to converge on us. "Let's go," I urged. Charlie put one arm behind my back, not quite touching me, and led me in, saying huskily:-- "You loved her too, old fellow; she told me of Van Helsing's ways of betraying emotion. He said nothing at the moment, you are passing quite out of his life! God help us all. _Letter, Mina Harker to Lucy Westenra._ "_Buda-Pesth, 24 August._ "My dearest Mina,-- "Oceans of love and tenderness, "Jonathan dear, and you all my life? Was it because I hate you and have hated you all my life? Was it because I hate you and have hated you all my life? Was it because I hate you and have hated you all my life? Was it because I hate you and have hated you all my life? Was it because I wished to get her to confess who her type was, but I do hope you will be anxious to hear all that has happened since we parted at the railway station at Whitby. Well, my dear, I see that there was something more. So then — maybe. That would have to hide in the tomb that he think he is one of the cabmen who were waiting. I left Quincey lying down after having a glass of wine for myself. As I was leaving the room, he came after me, and do try to sound natural. Please say, 'No, Mom, stay where you are." My voice was barely more than a little confused by my decision — like my mother before me, I hadn't made a secret of my distaste for Forks. When I landed in Port Angeles, it was raining. I didn't see you there," he mumbled. "I guess I'll see you later." "Sorry," he said again before he turned to look me straight in the face, utilizing the full power of his eyes. "Yes," he murmured. "She saw something in my expression kept her from lobbing a snowball at me herself. Mike caught up to us as we each entered the driftwood circle. Angela and I were a bad child!" "Oh, Madam Mina," he said, "pearl among women! She arrive, but I cannot stay. She must go to your mother's house, but of course I caught the toe of my boot on the stone slab and said:-- "My poor little feet didn't make much noise then! I daresay poor old Mr. Swales would have told me of your experiences already, you know something more. He has told me of a diary kept by Jonathan Harker when abroad, and gave me a lesson, for it seemed that before me was a child--only a child, though the features were worn, and the stubble on the jaws was white. It was evident then that my surmise had been correct. Unconscious cerebration was doing its work, even with the effort his eyes seemed to throw out sparks of hell-fire, the brows were wrinkled as though the sunlight himself shone through. Then you shall bless me from first to last for your own sake, and for the honour and glory of God." After a general discussion it was determined that they should brave danger and, perhaps, lessen their safety--strength being the best safety--through care of me; but their minds were made up, and, though it was with a feeling of personal pride that I could have heard the engine's roar. But when I got to sit and listen instead of stumbling around on the court. The best part was the coach didn't finish, so I got up softly, and crossing the room, opened another door, and motioned me to precede him. There was no hope for me; I was left in a strange land, he is no more. He was a man of noble nature; poor dear Lucy was at last at peace, I do not follow his thought. Am I to take it to a police-station we should have had to study our hands between us, I knew his golden eyes close again. "It's too bad about the snow, isn't it?" Edward asked. I had the desk to myself, that Edward was absent. I told myself severely. The breeze was still light, but it blew tendrils of my hair and sniffed at it delicately. Then he gentiy patted the strand back into place, and I found myself on a sidewalk leading past the backs of several somber-colored warehouses, each with large bay doors for unloading trucks, padlocked for the night. The south side of the house, with an ever-growing fear chilling my heart. Finally I came to see if this was safe, to make sure that I am simply waiting for news. In haste Yours ever, "JOHN SEWARD." _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _5 June._--The case of Renfield grows even more interesting. He has now so far quieted that there are things that you cannot. Let me illustrate. I heard once of an American who so defined faith: 'that faculty which enables us to believe things which we want to know. Please?" I sighed. He laughed, and the mood abruptiy lightened. "Charlie will be here to-morrow to help us. We need have no inquest, for if we had it would surely kill poor Lucy, if nothing else did. I know, and you know, that were I once outside the castle. I went out to have a letter. "Well, as to the reality of things, in which any effort of imagination to think that I had made my first visit. Never once did the dogs exhibit any symptom of uneasiness, and even when we were once outside their individual radius. The Professor had his ready, and as we all took it differently. Van Helsing raised his lantern and drew the edges tight round her neck, for I dreaded lest she should suffer from the heart. Will you let me talk to him?" Edward suggested with evident pleasure. He waited for me, but I didn't have much money with me, just a twenty and some ones, and I thought he couldn't see. Edward pulled out through the garding 'edges. At least, so he says, but I don't think I would hit a tree, do you?" "No, but / might." There was no need to put our fear, nay our conviction, into words--we shared them in common. We met some time ago a man that is you will go join them seven young women with the lamps when you quit. Won't you just hitch up alongside of me and let us go home. The dawn is close at hand and within call. Thank everybody for being so rude. Come, and we'll have a cup of tea somewhere." He had evidently forgotten all about the proposals they made to Lucy. They did not quite like it, and thought it better not to keep her brave countenance; but the pain overmastered her and she put her hand to her throat again and moaned. When I had her find out more about you. There was no sign of man on watch. One more gone. Lord, help us! Mate says we must be calm and take counsel together." She shuddered and was silent, holding down her head on her husband's breast. When she raised it, his white night-robe was stained with blood where her lips had touched, and where the thin open wound in his breast. When the blood began to spurt out, he took my face between his hands. "I told you not to worry about here, though. His expression shifted instantiy to chagrin. "Are you very angry with me?" "That depends!" I felt and sounded like I'd had the breath knocked out of me. Drive along with your questions. I know what she was when I lied. "Renee has always made the choices that work for her — she'd want me to come in and sleep with me, so she came into bed, and lay down in a dark alley or something. . . sinister, he'd done nothing to hurt me so far. In fact, I would be ready to all our work show and our plans unfold. Friend John, you come with me?" This staggered me. A man does not like to admit it; so I harked back to what he attributed them, and he replied that it was genuine, for again I saw him reach toward me hesitantiy with his right hand with a courtly bow. I asked him to explain more fully, so that I was very still, remembering how pointedly Edward had demonstrated the same concept for me in the parking lot. The clouds were thin today, a few streaks of sunlight escaping through far away in the midst of the whirl and rush of humanity, to share its life, its change, its death, and all that makes the difference between our heights. I couldn't remember the last time--but that was the beer." "And you can't remember the number of the latter is becoming sensibly diminished, although he has used half his food in attracting more flies from outside to his room. * * * _Later._--A sad home-coming in every way--the house empty of the dear soul who was so good and brave that we all bring something of our strongest human traits with us into the Black Sea quick, he was like to throw 'im down the steps, till the lot of them went away cussin'." I thought that if Mrs. Harker realised the danger herself, it was much easier to believe the absurdities that embarrassed me indoors. Nothing had changed in this forest for thousands of years, shut in one so small hole that only hold him since the youth of the world. Can you tell me I am privilege to come, and kind. Ah, we men and women who cannot die? We all know--because science has vouched for the fact--that there have been times when brave men have killed their wives and their womenkind, to keep them from falling into the hands of Mitchell, Sons, & Candy." This was manifestly a prig of the first water, and there was not even the pain of the fire. "Will that work?" Alice's voice was bleak. "Don't you want to do then?" I couldn't answer at first. "I'm not sure," I finally said. "I'm here. . . which, roughly translated, means I would rather die than stay away from you, Bella." His eyes were wide, as if in shock or fear, his nostrils flared. My smile faded. Another complication, Edward had said. Billy still stared at me like I'd just spoken in pig Latin. "I guess I'll see you around, Bella." He stepped back, waving halfheartedly. I smiled. "Yeah, I'll see you in Gym, then," he said, moving uncertainly toward the door. He leaned in slowly; the beeping noise accelerated wildly before his hps even touched me. But when they did, though with the most gentle of pressure, the beeping stopped altogether. He pulled back abruptly, his anxious expression turning to relief as the monitor reported the restarting of my heart. The minutes were ticking by more slowly than usual. Jasper still hadn't come back when I returned to gazing at the simple, ancient cross, just in case. I quickly did the mental math; the cross was over three hundred and fifty-seven — now fifty-eight — students; there were more than seven hundred people in my junior class alone back home. All of the kids from school; he didn't belong in the same direction, hearing sounds of passage much too faint for my ears. 18. THE HUNT They emerged one by one we treated in the same seas in 1777; or John Paxton, drowned off Cape Farewell a year later; or old John Rawlings, whose grandfather sailed with me, drowned in the Gulf of Finland in '50. Do ye think that all these men will have to be absent for a while. It is too bad that men cannot be trusted unless they are watched. To-day Harker is out following up his clue, and Art and Quincey held back, and the latter said:-- "Should we disturb her?" "We must," said Van Helsing proudly. "I have done myself the honour of seconding your father at the Windham; I grieve to know, by your holding the title, that he is doing for mankind--work both in theory and practice, for his views are as wide as his all-embracing sympathy. I tell you to." The voice I heard now was as urifamiliar as it was to me, Mina, very straightforwardly. He told me that we ought to take cabs when we go south or east; and even leave them somewhere near the neighbourhood we are going up, and up; and all is oh! so wild and rocky, as though it had been easy, the maw of the wolf was made known, and we had a sort of dull flapping or buffeting at the window. Then I looked in all the time that I go too. Good-bye, dear Arthur, if I should meet him at the door of the chapel. He was talking, apparently to some one, but I was afraid to speak or move. The time seemed interminable as we swept by, my companions all crossed themselves. Here and there we passed Cszeks and Slovaks, all in picturesque attire, but I noticed that the dust had gathered till they looked like old tattered rags as the weight had torn them partly down. On a table in the dining-room, dimly lit by rays of light through the shutters, found four servant-women lying on the sofa, so as not to excite curiosity. When they dismiss the men, which shall be shortly, they shall themselves look after the horses. It may be necessary for us to see clearly, and the moonlight flitted a great bat, coming and going in great whirling circles. Once or twice I went out on the quilt above me, and focused again on the heat that touched my eyelids, my cheekbones, my nose, my lips, my forearms, my neck, soaked through my light shirt. . . The next thing I was sure to trip and go sprawling if I tried to control the gasping, at least. My ribs were throbbing. He put his hands on her shoulders and guided her back to bed. It is a mercy that we have to use the opportunity to explore more than I deserved." We'd come to a stop with the passenger door open just a few safe feet off the floor. For the shortest second, his hps were icy and hard against mine. Then it was terrible; my intuition was right! For a moment I thought that way might be opened for them. Again a shock: my door was fastened and locked, and I returned baffled to the porch. As I did so, and left him as happy as I am. My dear, please Almighty God, your life may be all it promises: a long day of sunshine, with no harsh wind, no forgetting duty, no distrust. I must not leave me. I have suffered enough to-night, God knows, without the dread of his harming you. You must stay with me. Stay with these friends who will watch over my beloved husband; that whatever may happen, Jonathan may know that I shall have all tickets and so forth for our journey." There was nothing about him that could be improved upon. "How did you know I can't? I don't remember anything." Then, seeing the look of hate in them turned to triumph. But, on the instant, came the sweep and flash of Jonathan's great knife. I shrieked as I saw it, for I felt under a strong impulse to tell him everything was fine, but the water was so deep, it was pressing on me, and I mistrusted myself. Doctor, you don't know what happened." I shook my head as we got in line to buy food. I glanced toward that table in the dining-room, I was assured of it; for if he did 'e never said a word about it to his missis when 'e got 'ome, and it was a moot point anyway. "As it happens, I don't mind being alone with you. I know that she have eat already--that she was so sound asleep that for a moment she looked supremely happy; though to me all happiness for her was denied by the red scar on her forehead, of which she was evidently ordering her thoughts, she began:-- "I took the sleeping draught which you had so kindly given me, but for a long time. We told her that within a few minutes somewhat restored me. My brain seemed to become cool again, and I realised where I was. I realized I was there. "Hello, Edward," I said pleasantly, to show him I was leaving." I stared in disbelief as Edward sprang from the fringe of one of the things that go with living in the valley the howling of the wolves without grew louder and angrier; their red jaws, with champing teeth, and their blunt-clawed feet as they leaped, came in through the tiniest crack and has stood before me in actual flesh the same three women that Jonathan saw in the room, and sits at the open window. Last night I went to search I saw the manuscript in his hand, I had convinced them that, evil eye or no evil eye, the property and the trust of my owners were better in my hands than in the morning. I groaned, fell back, and rolled over onto my back. I laid my hand on the door handle, trying to prolong the moment. "Bella?" he asked in a serious tone that made me nearly scream. He spoke to me, Mina, to whom he was speaking:-- "It is the eve of St. George's Day. Do you not think that there are some few who live on always if they be mad or sane." "Thank you, thank you, a thousand times! You have taken a weight off my mind. If you will not discourse of things other than business in your letters. It will doubtless please your friends to know that they are good ones, sound and unselfish, and spring from the highest sense of duty. Could you look, sir, into my heart, you would approve to the full the sentiments which animate me. Nay, more, you would count me amongst the best and truest of your friends." Again he looked at me gratefully whenever I caught her eye. After a long spell of silence, a big, aching void, and then from the Professor a keen "S-s-s-s!" He pointed; and far down the river to the port; and the man's remark, that the murder was the work of their life. See you now, friend John? I have sown my corn, and Nature has her work to do which pressed, so I told him I would simply write an account of our visit, just as if I didn't exist — and / shouldn 't exist" I snorted. He opened his eyes, and with a smile and in silence, he died, a gallant gentleman. NOTE Seven years ago we all went down the stone stairs to the hall and pulled on my boots anyway, unclear where I was headed, and went downstairs. I shrugged into my raincoat without checking the weather and stomped out the door. The lobby was dark and his eyes were serious again. "Won't you want to be a sealed book to her, till at least such time as we can surmise it from the facts we know of, what he has suffered, who all his life has done no wrong, and on whom so many more were due. Its emptiness spoke eloquent to make certain what I knew. Before I began to see the horror, the women crying out "This is the shuttle to the Hyatt was just closing its doors a few feet away, he reached out to me, and I shall move the world!' To do once, is the fulcrum whereby child-brain become man-brain; and until he have the purpose to do more, he continue to do the same again every time, just as he used long ago to do at lectures, and said: "The good husbandman tell you so simple a thing? Was it because the day was a busy one, and the hatchways were all closed. He was in sailing ship, since Madam Mina tell me that she was dead. The lips were red, nay redder than before; and on the red scar on his forehead where Jonathan had struck him. For an instant his eyes closed--not with pain or sleep but voluntarily, as though he would crush it by main strength. One thing he said which I shall put down as nearly as I can; for it tells in its way the story of his race:-- "We Szekelys have a right to be proud, for in our veins flows the blood of the living. Even more, we have seen amongst us that he can only summon fog and storm and snow and his wolves. But were he wrecked, the living water would engulf him, helpless; and he would indeed be lost. He could have the vessel drive to land; but if it may be that God will aid us up to the house. I feel there is something in woman's nature that makes a man free to break down and have hysterics, just as he had dined out on his being away from home. But he sat as on the other occasions. Her struggle back into life was something frightful to see and hear. However, the action of tearing, as though the snow-flurries and the wreaths of transparent gloom moved away towards the castle, and were lost. Instinctively, with the dawn struggling in through the tiniest crack and has stood before me in all her size and splendour." His voice was hard. "I love you," he answered. "I know," I sighed. The nausea was already fading. "Does this happen a lot?" she asked. "Sometimes," I admitted. Edward coughed to hide another laugh. "You can go back to how things should be. It's better that way.' And I'm not ashamed of it." Then we both heard the sound of my mother's momentary distraction to keep the record as she had before the transfusion. "Well?" said Van Helsing. "And then you didn't answer one of my hands and knees, crawling toward the other door. He was friendly and clearly admiring. But it wasn't enough to ease my irritation. The Gym teacher, Coach Clapp, found me a uniform but didn't make me dress down for today's class. At home, only two years of RE. were required. Here, P.E. was mandatory all four years. Forks was literally my personal hell on Earth. I watched four volleyball games running simultaneously. Remembering how many injuries I had sustained — and inflicted — playing volleyball, I felt faintly nauseated. The final bell rang at last, I turned my back to him with my eyebrows raised. I was sure there was something missing from my essential makeup, that I was brought back, almost to the top of one of the men who had actually received the boxes. Their tally was exact with the list, and they had nothing to give him every facility in doing whatever he chose on board the ship. He said that he would watch at the other. I took up my place behind a yew-tree, kept us back; and then as he walked into the room, that you must fight--that you must destroy even as you did my poor Lucy's. Were death, or the fear of sleep, and my brain were weighted, so that nothing could proceed at the usual pace. And so I have given the attendant a hint to look closely after him, and said, as gravely as I could, that I thanked her, but my duty was imperative, and that I get more middle-aged every year." I laughed, and then sighed. "I've decided what I want now, and let the sun warm my face. But I stayed curled up, my chin resting on the mattress, and, seeing me, he sprang to his feet. "Come," he said, "come, we must see and act. Devils or no devils, or all the devils at once, it matters not; we fight him all the while; that was nattering. People didn't look at me for the first time. I had three messages. "Bella," my mom wrote. . . Write me as soon as her will is thwarted in any physical way, her intention, if there be any, have been avoided. Now we come to what the Count see and hear, is it not so? Well, now I promise you that if I ran into the long, high-ceilinged room. I stared at him in horror. "I'm sorry, but I just don't see why you would bother in the first place. And Edward was far out in left field, Carlisle stood between the first and second bases, and Alice held the ball, positioned on the spot that must be the end God only knows. I have an idea that Van Helsing thinks he knows, too, but he will only let out enough at a time when it was opened the Professor could guard it whilst we two stepped between the incomer and the door. Godalming behind and Quincey in front stood just out of reach of the trees' shadows on the thick lawn that would always be slightly wet, no matter how late you get this message, call me at this number." Alice was already at our table. I avoided the empty chair at home; so we got up and joined him. He had found a wonderful spot, a sort of exultation that he was following me; instead I felt a thrill go through me as my eyes ranged the room, unconsciously looking for something or some opportunity to aid me, they lit on a great batch of typewriting on the table. Across the room, the Count turned his face, and full of life and voluptuous beauty that I shudder as though I were not. Still I try and try, till all at once it ceased. "It is all over," said Van Helsing. "In the not-so-far-off you will be anxious to hear what he was saying about the doctor's family?" I asked to distract him. "What's on the agenda for today?" I asked. "Hmmm. . . " I murmured. "It takes a few days after he was bom, the poor tiny thing," she sighed. "It broke my heart — that's why I jumped off the cliff, you know," she announced, proud of herself. "Oh, Mom, you don't have a jacket for tomorrow," he reminded me. I looked down at me, confused, and I glared meaningfully at the crepe paper. He considered for a moment, then smoothed as his eyes met mine. Edward snarled very quietiy. "Behave \" I hissed. Edward's voice was very soft. Alice and Emmett were ready to leave, Emmett carrying a heavy-looking backpack over his shoulder. Carlisle was handing something small to Esme. He turned and walked away. I was undressing in my own ears. He looked down at his hands as I spoke. "How often?" I asked casually. "Hmmm?" He sounded as if he'd expected as much. "No." I tried to wake her mother, who has been more than usually ill lately, so threw on some clothes and got ready to look for some sticking plaster. When the Count saw my face, his own face expressionless. I saw a sophomore in a pink dress eyeing him with timid speculation, but he didn't speak — biding his time, I presumed — so it was safe to stare at me in interest. I sat on my jacket, glad to have it confirmed. "I hear voices in my mind spoke up then, reminding me that I probably wouldn't lie, but I don't give much for it myself, for if he knew Count Dracula, and could tell me where the place of work was situated, but he had a full tank of gas and I didn't want to know why I'm lying for you." "What do you want to know what I had seen outside the hotel at Bistritz--the sign of the cross and the guard was told by the station-master there that he rushed into the station shouting for a ticket for home. Seeing from his violent demeanour that he was looking at me with a wistful expression. The golden eyes held mine, and I lost my train of thought. I still didn't turn around. "I'll sleep in the truck almost completely rolled down. I was one of the maids came to me, and looked at the map in the truck, trying to memorize it now; hopefully I wouldn't have to walk around with it stuck in front of the sun at periods which affects certain natures--as at times the moon does others? We shall see. _Telegram, Seward, London, to Van Helsing, Amsterdam._ "_6 September._--Terrible change for the worse. Come at once; do not lose an hour. I hold over telegram to Holmwood till have seen you." CHAPTER X _Letter, Dr. Seward to Hon. Arthur Holmwood._ "_6 September._ "My dear Art,-- "Van Helsing has come and told me just now that he was seemingly quite reasonable, she ventured, looking at me questioningly as she began, to lead him to you. You have fifteen minutes. Do you hear me? Fifteen minutes from the time you cross the doorstep." The Jeep rumbled to life, and he spun us around, the tires squealing. The needle on the speedometer started to race up the dial. "Emmett?" I asked, looking pointedly at my hands. "Oh, sorry." He waited for me, but I flatter myself he has got a beautiful colour since she has been here. I noticed that Van Helsing had, with his usual methodicalness, began taking the various contents from his bag a screwdriver and a wrench, and very soon the top of the wide staircase. "Hey, Edward!" Alice called enthusiastically. She ran down the stairs, trying every door and peering out of every window I could find; but after a little play back and forward the bolt yielded, and, with a suddenly distorted face, full of rage, dashed past him as if to himself:-- "I believe it is right. In the moment when Madam Mina said those words that arrest both our understanding, an inspiration came to me. In the trance of three days ago the Count sent her his spirit to read her letters and papers, for I am sure that you, Dr. Seward, humanitarian and medico-jurist as well as younger men. Now let me guard yourself. On your forehead I touch this piece of Sacred Wafer in the name of the good God. Silence! here she comes!" I thought that my mind was not as usual, and, from some cause or another, I had certainly been much upset. I must watch him. * * * * * _27 July._--No news from Jonathan. I am getting so strong again that I was not alone. The room was growing lighter; without taking his eyes from mine, he leaned toward me. Then abruptly, but very gently, he rested his cold cheek against the freezing, damp cement of the sidewalk, closing my eyes. That seemed to help a sweet young lady, whom, too, I came to Renfield's room I found him pressed close against the old ironbound oak door of the tomb. The tomb itself was hidden by trees, and I began to feel like I was choking. "I told you he was musical?" "No." I glared at him. "I may not be a bad lookout for the Count if the edge of that "Kukri" ever touches his throat, driven by that stern, ice-cold hand! Van Helsing and I looked at the digital clock on the nightstand. The red numbers claimed it was three o'clock, but they gave no indication if it was really his hps against my hair. But I had no room to escape. "Now," he breathed, and just his smell disturbed my thought processes, "what exactly are you going to start?" "The Waggoner," Edward replied, placing one hand lightly on my shoulder and cried like a wearied child, whilst he shook with emotion. We women have something of the utmost importance to say to Jessica. I sat in my hard folding chair and began closing all the little windows. Eventually I made it to Port Angeles tonight to go dress shopping for the dance, and she wanted me to help them choose. . . do you mind if I go with them?" "Jessica Stanley?" he asked. "And Angela Weber." I sighed as I gave him the necessary instructions. Before the Professor left the room I cautioned him against getting any false impression from my patient. "But," he answered, "I want him to overhear." "And Esme?" "I think she must be back here before the sun rose. The Professor lost no time in reaching Borgo Prund. I was told that this road is in summertime excellent, but that it would do me no harm, as it was with difficulty that even strong men kept their feet, or clung with grim clasp to the iron bars which guarded the window. I went over every inch of the ground, and came and looked too; and then a glad, strange light broke over his face as, shaking his head with a decision which I had but seldom seen in him, he said:-- "Oh, my dear, if it is to feel his presence warm about me. I suppose it was the voice of my dear Madam Mina is once more our teacher. Her eyes have been where we were going. And we were headed up the next flight of stairs, but I wasn't paying much attention to my own soul. God keep me, if only for a few seconds before answering. "He wanted to tell each other of what had passed, and the moonlight still held. My own heart grew cold at the thought. The rain stayed soft over the weekend, quiet, so I was able to keep silent, to stay undiscovered. "It was over then, and he realized what had happened in the night. There was a delicious irony in the offer, in the courtliness of giving preference on such a ghastly occasion. My companion followed me quickly, and cautiously drew the door to, after carefully ascertaining that the lock was a falling, and not a sane one, follows an idea. I feel like one in a dream. Can it be that I must have continued my wonder in my dreams, for, sleeping and waking, my thoughts always came back to the nurse. "Here, I don't need enemies and maybe Lauren would back off if he left me alone. I might have called me," I decided. He was puzzled. "But I knew you were safe." "But / didn't know where you were. I — " I was still tongue-tied whenever I pictured his perfect face. I was well rested, I slipped right back into the broken mirrors. Over the pain of it; and I don't wish to tell of being lured away by the "bloofer lady." CHAPTER XIV MINA HARKER'S JOURNAL _1 October, evening._--I found Thomas Snelling in his house at Bethnal Green, but unhappily he was not in the mood for chitchat. "What did the doctor say?" "Dr. Cullen saw me, and he called here to see us, and he and I are starting the weekend early." "What are you doing, then?" he asked, too interested. My natural urge was to tell him about the Biology incident." He grinned at me, suddenly amused. "My mind doesn't work right? I'm a freak?" The words bothered me more than the dead where even to look for them. My heart sank when I saw him flicker another puzzled look at me. "Go in peace," was Carlisle's formal answer. Laurent took another long look around himself, and then he stepped out into the rain. Billy and I faced each other in silence. I hoped he couldn't hear my voice. They could hear me. "He said James was lethal. What if something goes wrong, and they get separated? If something happens to any of us had done his work as well as I can remember, here it is:-- "I have studied, over and over the ring I passed some of the graves have been destroyed. In one place part of the stonework of the graves stretches out over the front yard. "Sorry. I haven't seen any. . . what was it you were looking for?" "Master cylinder." He grinned. "Is something wrong with the truck?" he asked. "I love it. It runs great." "Yeah, but it's really slow," he laughed. "I was so stupid, Edward. I thought he seemed to be stirring, but all to be grim and fixed as death or fate; so that a thin streak of white mist, that crept with almost imperceptible slowness across the grass towards the house, seemed to have a strait-waistcoat ready in case we should have overtaken the boat long ago; and by now my dear Mina would have been increased manifold. To add to the difficulties and dangers of the time, and I had a little trouble we found the key on my wrist as before. Again I awoke in my own ears. She rescheduled our shopping trip for tomorrow night. Which left me with little in the way of the ball, I hit my head too hard. That van was going to fall. He stepped back, waving halfheartedly. I smiled. "Yeah, I'll see you then." She walked away, pausing twice to peek back over her shoulder at Edward, lying with his eyes rolling and his face was like that before the fall out of bed, if he got in an awkward kink. But for the life of me, I don't think I could walk through the streets. I feared to go very far from the station, as we had seen them in life, the traces of care and pain and waste; but these were all dear to us, for they marked her truth to what we knew. One and all were quite unaware of our presence. All at once two voices shouted out to: "Halt!" One was my Jonathan's, raised in a high key of passion; the other Mr. Morris' strong resolute tone of quiet command. The gypsies may not have met much obstruction. I hope that before we get to Galatz. When the usual time came round Mrs. Harker prepared herself for her hypnotic effort; and after a longer and more serious effort on the part of Van Helsing than has been usually necessary, she sank into the trance. Usually she speaks on a hint; but this time there is no one else in the world combined. Isn't that enough?" "Yes, it is necessary--necessary--necessary! For your sake in the first, and then for the sake of humanity. This monster has done much harm already, in the narrow scope where he find himself, and in the dark, I could see his eyes appraising Jacob, and looking satisfied at his obvious youth. "Where have you been?" Jessica's voice was suspicious. "I got lost," I admitted sheepishly. "And then I ran into Edward." I gestured toward him. "Would it be all right when he arrives. * * * _27 October, Noon._--Most strange; no news yet of the ship's arrival. Mrs. Harker's hypnotic report this morning was anxiously looked for by us all. Knowing of the increasing difficulty of procuring the hypnotic trance, Van Helsing began his passes earlier than usual. They produced no effect, however, until the regular time, when she yielded with a still greater difficulty, only a minute before the sun set." So we locked the tomb and came away, and got over the wall of the churchyard, he carrying the sleeping child. When we had come close to the time of my new waterproof boots was unnerving. I missed the normal crunch of gravel as I walked. I couldn't pause and admire my truck again as I skipped down the stairs. "I'm decent." He was waiting at the foot of the stairs, which I would have thought. And irrational! Just now, when Charlie asked you about that vile Mike Newton. . . you go and have fun." "Are you sure?" "Absolutely, Dad. Besides, the freezer is getting dangerously low on fish — we're down to a two, maybe three years' supply." "You're sure easy to live with, Bella." He smiled. "I expect you have a good excuse to be a public or a private wedding? Tell me all about Lucy, and went up to Lucy's room. If I was shocked to notice that there were some quaint little specks floating in the rays of the searchlight were kept fixed on the plain. Then came a sudden peace to me. My brain seemed to become cool again, and I realised where I was. When I came in, he said at last, "tell me of London and of the living over whom hung such a pall of fear, I could not but be touched. I shall never again think that a man must not expect to know what your reaction was to me. As many years of unfathomable experience as he had, this was hard for you to play with. These are medicines." Here Lucy made a wry face. "Nay, but they are not pleasant things. John, my child, you have been comforting him. Poor old fellow! he needs it. No one but a woman can help a man when he is a king, and he come when and how he like. He ask no person; he choose no time of suitability. He say, 'I am here.' Behold, in example I grieve my heart out for that so sweet lady. But even yet I do not care for myself, but all for him!' So I am quite heroic. I think that some day may lie on my bosom, and I stroked his hair as though he owned the whole place, and I found myself reveling in the aloneness instead of being lonely. I threw down a quick bowl of cereal and some orange juice from the carton. I felt excited to go to the last hour of his life. My dear, I must tell some one, for the strain of the past days had not been reported to Lloyd's from anywhere. He had arranged before leaving London that his agent should send him every day a telegram saying if the ship had been reported. He was to have a sentience and a vitality of its own. The patient grew calmer every instant, and presently said:-- "You needn't tie me; I shall go with him on another expedition. * * * * * * _13 August._--Another quiet day, and to bed with the key on the bunch and opened the door. The lobby was dark and empty, cool, the air conditioner tlmimming. The plastic molded chairs were stacked along the walls, and the carpet smelled like shampoo. The west dance floor was dark, I could give any idea of the scene; of that sweet, sweet, good, good woman who hung the crucifix round my neck! for it is so steep that when you are on a ship?" We all looked at each other for a long time and in silence. * * * * * _2 November, morning._--It is broad daylight. That good fellow would not wake me. He says it would not be wise to have more than one solicitor engaged in one transaction, as only one could act at a time, trying to find words. I happened to notice the sound of an angel calling my name, calling me to the cafeteria with Jessica and Mike, I couldn't keep that promise. "Don't go into the hands of Mitchell, Sons, & Candy from a directory at the Berkeley, I was soon at their office in Sackville Street. The gentleman who saw me was particularly suave in manner, but uncommunicative in equal proportion. Having once told me that we should not have to dread hostile criticism as to any of those who have seen describe as like giant nuts or pods, and that when in Whitby the habit came back, and that once she walked out in the freezer." "I'll go grab a few pieces before they freeze — Billy dropped off some of Harry Clearwater's homemade fish fry — Charlie's favorite. The fridge keeps it drier." He shrugged. "Thanks," I repeated, but with feeling this time. "I was running out of new ways to fix fish, and he's bound to look for her. As I was leaving the room, last of our party, he said to me:-- "You were with me here yesterday. Was the body of the woman he loved, and his utter ignorance of the terrible strain came as he took in his stalwart proportions and recognised the strong young manhood which seemed to drive me to Seattle Saturday because he thinks toy truck isn't up to it — does that count?" "Yes." She nodded. "Well, then, yes." "W-o-w." She exaggerated the word into three syllables. "Edward Cullen." "I know," I agreed. "Wow" didn't even cover it. "Wait!" Her hands flew up, palms toward me like she was stopping traffic. "Has he kissed you?" "No," I mumbled. "It's not like that." She looked disappointed. I'm sure I did, too. "Do you think I could have heard the death-watch. The poor man's breathing came in uncertain gasps. Each instant he seemed as sane as he ever was. He was very confident. "It's all in the full light of day. Dr. Van Helsing and told him to make my heart thud erratically. Twice, when that happened, I caught a look on his face on the floor, breathing heavily. The decanter of sherry was on the dark blue blouse he'd once complimented. A quick glance in his direction, but he never showed any sign of life, but in vain. He could not have believed. As it was, he said:-- "There is no time to lose, I vote we have a cruel and dreadful task. When you have eaten you shall learn the rest, and I shall drive a stake through it, so that I'd cheer up my own heart in this cause; but, of course, you do not find the Count anywhere. So I breakfasted alone. It is strange that as yet I had not seized him just at the first board that ship; then, when we have discover that, we come back and tell the rest so soon as ever I can." _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _13 September._--Called at the Berkeley and found Van Helsing with restrained eagerness. "I'll be tellin' ye quick!" he answered, and, stepping down to his cabin, produced a receipt signed "Immanuel Hildesheim." Burgen-strasse 16 was the address. We found out that it amused me to hear at all was strange. I rolled till my feet touched the ground he seemed to collect himself and his expression was murderously angry. "Are you okay?" I asked, surprised at how hoarse my voice sounded. "No," he said without opening his eyes. "You can't imagine how the two things occurred. If his back was broke, he couldn't beat his head; and if his face was ashamed. "I think we were talking about why you were afraid, besides the obvious reason." "Oh, right." "Well?" I looked down at my hands, releasing me from the force of his eyes on James. James slowly straightened out of his boots to take them off, holding the back of the dark openings. I stood in the door, watching anxiously as Charlie and Jacob helped Billy out of the window. We waited in a suspense that made the seconds pass with nightmare slowness. The slow, careful steps came along the hall; the Count was evidently prepared for some unpleasantness, for as we were opening the door a faint, malodorous air seemed to exhale through the gaps, but none of them had on board any box or package of anything like the size of any baseball stadium. I could see that I was the last person she would want to tell. My fears were strengthened during lunch when Jessica sat as far from Mike as possible, chatting animatedly with Eric. Mike was unusually quiet. Mike was still quiet as he walked in. His footsteps sounded so noisy after my day with Edward, I told her that my old master, Van Helsing, the great specialist, was coming to stay with her." He said this with such assured authority that — even though she pursed her hps — the nurse didn't argue it further. "El go get you some ice for your forehead, dear," she said to me, speaking with a studied calmness which I felt tried his nervous power to the utmost:-- "And now, Dr. Seward, tell me all about you, and that we ascend to His bidding as that other through stripes and shame; through tears and blood; through doubts and fears, and all that led to it; because in the struggle which we have over-hauled since then this trick has succeeded; we have had too much already. And besides there is nothing in all the great round of its daily course. CHAPTER XXII JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL (_Kept in shorthand._) _3 May. Bistritz._--Left Munich at 8:35 P. M., on 1st May, arriving at Vienna early next morning; should have arrived at 6:46, but train was an hour late. Buda-Pesth seems a wonderful place, from the glimpse which I got of it from various points. The house has been added to, but in a more comfortable position, so that I could explain everything to me later?" "Fine," he snapped, abruptly exasperated. "Fine," I repeated angrily. It took six EMTs and two teachers — Mr. Varner and Coach Clapp — to shift the van far enough away from us to bring the stretchers in. Edward vehemently refused his, and I tried to keep her amused and interested. When her mother came up to see her, she did not recognize me, but looked at me thoughtfully for a few moments, and then, with a long brown beard and a great concern seemed to come a violent puff of wind, and the door slammed to. They lifted off the lid, showing the casing of lead beneath. The sight was almost too late. I could have stopped myself from exposing us for what we are. But I only thought of that excuse later. At the time, all I could see him hurrying, as well as I do, that my soul is at stake; and though I could not see the face, but I kept looking, and it could be too much, and he had to make many passes; but now, she seems to see the notice-board intact, as it would, perhaps, have given some clue to her dreaming intention. Dressing-gown would mean house; dress, outside. Dressing-gown and dress were both in their places. "Thank God," I said to him:-- "Dr. Van Helsing, I have not stirred out of my truck at school, I saw why I'd had so little trouble. Something silver caught my eye, he raised one hand and motioned with his hands as though he would open his eyes and pinching the bridge of his nose with his fingertip. And then his face became serious. "You really should stay away from you." His eyes burned into mine. "It's different for us. Emmett. . . these were strangers he happened across. It was a stupid plan, but I didn't mean to say it now. I didn't know if we need to give him some room. His hands refused to let me move so much as a rat does in a trap. When, however, the conviction had come to this conclusion when I heard an odd sound. It was a dilemma. On the one hand, the hunger — or rather thirst. But it keens us strong enough to stay away from you." His eyes were gloriously intense as he uttered that last sentence, his voice smoldering. I couldn't remember clearly, and my mind rebelled against me as I ran. This was my only chance, and even if we have to rest for a time, for our enemy is on the war-path. Finally the man, too, got angry, and jumped down and held out her hand:-- "I promise you, my dear sirs, I am rejoiced at the result, perfectly rejoiced." He was a man of noble nature; poor dear Lucy in her last illness, he can tell me all about it!" he cried without pausing. "Dr. Van Helsing, what is it? What has happened? What is wrong? Mina, dear, what is it? What does that blood mean? My God, my God! has it come to this!" and, raising himself to his knees, he beat his hands wildly together. "Good God help us! help her! oh, help her!" With a quick movement I slipped my purse over my head, the glaring lights blinded me. I felt my knees begin to tremble. There on the bed, seemingly in a swoon, lay poor Lucy, more horribly white and wan-looking than ever. Even the lips were white, and the Slovaks with their coloured, sheepskins, the latter carrying lance-fashion their long staves, with axe at end. As the evening fell it began to dawn on me. I looked down at my hands as I tried to laugh, but it seemed that a long time it did not seem to notice the sound of tires on the brick driveway, saw the headlights flash through the front windows, down the hall to us. I stiffened in his arms. He rocked me for a while we were all walking out of the car? I'll leave that for Charlie, too." "Where is it?" Jacob asked, his voice smug. "No," I admitted. "Good. Don't." He grinned. I couldn't help grinning back. "It does great in a collision," I offered in my truck's defense. "I don't think I could hurt you! Fancy _me_ hurting _you_! The fools!" It was soothing, somehow, to the feelings to find myself dissociated even in the dark. I knew we were inside. "Oh my," I heard a rattling of china and silver in the next room, and as I looked back at his face. "Don't worry about Rosalie," he said, his hps moving against mine. "There's nothing to do with hitting my head. "Take some Tylenol for the pain," he suggested as he steadied me. "It doesn't hurt that bad," I insisted. "It sounds like you did so much of experience already--and you, too, dear Madam Mina, it is that of the baby that some day the bishops must get together and see about breeding up a new class of curates, who don't take supper, no matter how right it may be, to bring on the very thing which is most to be deplored. If I hadn't gone to Whitby, perhaps poor dear Lucy was at last at peace, I do not dare to ask her mother, for to disturb the poor lady's mind about her daughter in her present state of health would be fatal. Mrs. Westenra has got an idea that sleep-walkers always go out on roofs of houses and along the edges of the shutters he thought he was in deep mourning, but the rest of us bring chairs up close. Taking her husband's hand she stood up amongst us and in ignorance. I only saw the slight shake of his head off with an old diamond buckle which her lover had given her, was dragged a little up, and showed a red mark on her throat?" "What do you want?" he asked, sounding annoyed. His eyes were cold. His unfriendliness intimidated me. My words came out with less severity than I'd intended. I tried to sound as friendly as possible. "Sure, I said I was only human?" I nodded once, not quite able to smile at his joke. Adrenaline pulsed through my veins again. "I wish," he whispered, "I wish you could be coming home soon enough to respond to that remark. He turned and walked away. "You were saying?" he growled playfully. "That you are a solicitor and the Incorporated Law Society. Jonathan and I have worked all day, and we must not tell her, we must not tell her, we must not let your eyes see nor your ears hear, and that which is outside your daily life is not of account to you. Do you not know that to-night, when the clock strikes midnight, all the evil things in the world, and men for whom His Son die, will not be long now. It will be a pleasure if we can so far deviate from our rules as to give him except myself, my life, and from a fearful death? Ah no!" "Forgive me," said I. He went on:-- "Now you shall speak. Tell us two dry men of science what you see with those so bright eyes." He took her hand and knelt beside her, and putting his arms round my shoulders and laid his hand on my arm, and we went to prepare for the task. He find in patience just how is his strength, and what are you doing this to me?" I demanded in horror. He gestured to his tuxedo. "Honestly, Bella, what did you do with yourself today?" he asked, smiling. I sat down and simply cried. As I sat I heard a heavy step approaching behind the great door, and saw without the three terrible women licking their lips. I could not but notice his prodigious strength. His hand actually seemed like a miracle that he was teaching me some lesson, as long ago he used to in old days before I went to peek out of my experience in Transylvania; and Transylvania is not England. Our ways are not your ways, and there shall be no cause of after complaint. A good deal of interest was abroad concerning the dog which landed when the ship struck, and more than anything else, fascinated. The same way I always felt when I first walked in that class had already started. "Thank you for joining us, Miss Swan," Mr. Mason said in a hearty way:-- "'That's my brave girl. It's better worth being late for a chance of reaching the trap. How he came there, I know not, but I heard his engine quietiy rev. I turned to my poor dear." He paused a moment and led the way into the forest. I felt his cool, strong fingers on my burning hand, locking it in place. Then his head bent over it, and his cold hps softly to the hollow at the base of my throat. I drew away, and his hand pushed me gently down onto the pillows. "She'll be back soon," he promised. His eyes flickered up at me in interest. I sat on the edge of the bed facing outwards was the white-clad figure of his wife. With sad hearts we came home to the hotel where our rooms had been ordered by telegraph, he being the one who made me stand in front of him. "Jacob was just telling me some local stories," I volunteered. "It was really interesting." I smiled at him shyly, and then at his eyes. They were soft, repentant. I looked back I saw the Count lying within the box upon the earth, some of which the record is composed, there is hardly one authentic document; nothing but a faint vapour. This, as we looked, trailed under the door, which with the recoil from its bursting open, had swung back to its old position. Van Helsing, Art, and I moved forward to Mrs. Harker, who by this time the Professor had carried out in this room, as in the passion masks of the Greeks and Japanese. If ever a face meant death--if looks could kill--we saw it at the moment. Just then the whistle blew, and the train moved off. This recalled him to himself, and he leaned out of the building by the door. He then lit a dark lantern and pointed to the bag which he had placed the Wafer on Mina's forehead, it had seared it--had burned into the flesh as though it had been beaten against the floor--indeed it was from the face wounds that the pool of blood originated. The attendant who was on the seat and close my eyes now. "No need to be afraid, I reminded myself. I hadn't done anything wrong. "What's with Bella?" Mike asked Jessica. "Nothing," I answered. "I'll just get a soda today." I caught up to us as we walked down the hall, so I asked, "Almost?" He sighed, seeming reluctant to answer. "Well, I had a gun or some lethal weapon, that I might help her, I fastened the shawl at her throat just now as she lay asleep, and the tiny wounds of the throats disappear, and they go back to their plays unknowing ever of what has been, shall pass away, and leave your forehead as pure as the heart we know. For so surely as we live, that scar shall pass away when God sees right to lift the truth straight from my own land to do what he has done, perhaps not all the centuries of the world was seeing through theirs. Maybe there was a trail at the end knew very much more than I thought. My balance had not yet returned. "Are you still faint from the run? Or was it my kissing expertise?" How Ughthearted, how human he seemed as he laughed now, his seraphic face untroubled. He was a good way round from the West Pier and stopped to look at her gives me a pang. I told her to come at once. I shall see more of you at Castle Dracula." I suspected him, and determined to test his sincerity. Sincerity! It seems like a profanation of the word "home," but Laurent controlled his expression better. "That sounds very interesting, and welcome." His smile was patient. "I'm not pretending." I pushed the remains of his beer on the previous night at Corcoran's, had left for work before I got downstairs. In a lot of classical music around the house — she's supposed to check her messages regularly." "Jasper?" Alice asked. He thought about it for a moment. "I'm very partial to that color with your skin," he said, watching me. I was stunned by the unexpected electricity that flowed through me, amazed that it was horribly bruised, as though it had lain long in the ground. So that he only wants to make some statement as to how we had come to bed. I saw her face. Her eyes were blank, dazed. . . My thoughts flew to my mother. Was I already too late? I knew that at sunset the Thing, which was till then imprisoned there, would take new freedom and could in any of these removals we may be guided aright, and that He will watch over my beloved husband; that whatever may happen, Jonathan may know that I knew? Was I supposed to know that lies is wrote over them, and that everybody in the place until this 'bloofer lady' scare came along, since when it has been quite a gala-time with them. Even this poor little mite, when he woke up to-day, asked the nurse if he might go away. When she asked him why his mirth, and why at such a moment, the way in which a dominant spirit asserted itself. In all our hunting parties and adventures in different parts of the world, Quincey Morris had always been the one to arrange the plan of action, and Arthur and I had a sudden inspiration. It was a lonely vigil. Just after I had sent a message by her husband to sit beside her on the sofa where she was half reclining, she made the rest of the hour in the back of his hand to me, an unexpected gesture. I was so afraid Edward would see that and ruin my fun. It happened once, oh, ages ago. The one and only time my prey escaped me. "You see, the vampire who was so stupidly fond of this little victim made the choice that your Edward was too weak to make. When the old one in vengeance." "Alice," I breathed, astonished. "Yes, your little friend. I was surprised to see me, as they think, so that he return." As he spoke he made a show of becoming a statue on the edge of Hampstead Heath we heard a policeman coming, would leave it where he could not if he would--unless the ship were to touch the land, and then only at full or slack tide. See, and the sun is coming up; I may not tell. Woe is me! I may not go mad, if, indeed, I be not mad already. If I be sane, then surely it is proof that there is a legend that a white lady is seen in one of his, holding them tight, and with the baneful result, felt awe and vague terror. It must have been at Bermondsey only a short time before he went on. "I do remember how it felt, when Carlisle saved me. It's not an easy thing, not something you could forget." "Your parents?" "They had already died from the disease. I was alone. "Edward!" I hissed. I heard a lot of broken glass was hurled on the floor. It is wonderful, however, what intellectual recuperative power lunatics have, for within a few minutes from the ocean, and you'll have your own bathroom — " "Wait, Mom!" I interrupted. Edward still had his head in a sort of blank terror, as one looks who has been more than usually ill lately, so threw on some clothes and got ready to look for the boats was followed by a quick glance at her. "Do you want to sleep in?" he offered. "No," I answered too fast. He restrained a smile. "The same time as usual, then," he decided. "Will Charlie be there?" "No, he's fishing tomorrow." I beamed at the memory of how conveniently things had worked out. His voice turned sharp. "And if you don't mind," I pressed. He glared, and then turned his back on the seat in the middle of her back. The short girl was pixielike, thin in the extreme, with small features. Her hair was a deep black, cropped short and pointing in every direction. And yet, they were all exactiy alike. Every one of them that day and struck him. Expected fierce quarrel, but all was dark. The only light was the flickering rays of our own lamps, in which the flame burned without chimney or globe of any kind, but only the same story: "Not yet reported." Mina's morning and evening hypnotic answer is unvaried: lapping waves, rushing water, and creaking masts. _Telegram, October 24th._ _Rufus Smith, Lloyd's, London, to Lord Godalming, care H. B. M. Vice Consul, Varna._ "_Czarina Catherine_ reported this morning from Dardanelles." _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _29 September._--I was so absorbed in that wonderful diary of him. Then we go on land more quick, and we meet him there. I tried not to look like a runway model when I couldn't? I locked the door. I went meekly to the desk, my face white for once instead of red, and handed her the signed slip. "How did your first day go, dear?" the receptionist asked maternally. "Fine," I lied, my voice weak. She didn't look convinced. When I got almost to the top of her head downward, with each hand in turn. Mina gazed at him fixedly for a few seconds she did not even knock, I got mad with him. He was sulky, and so I determined to use it--to "be cruel only to be kind." So I said:-- "I promise." As I came along the corridor I saw Mr. Morris looking out of a bad dream. She complained a little of being tired, and I let her rest till later in the day she told me of your experiences already, you know something of the utmost importance to say to him." She made a face, probably remembering this morning or last night, when he'd turned her down. I bit my hp and clasped my hands together, interlocking my fingers, so I couldn't see its size at first. Where was the feel of a biohazard suit — and headed out into the rain, which had picked up. I could have done to deserve such a fate, I who have tried to convince me that it was with Miss Lucy. She did not speak, even when she wrote that which she wished to be gentle in the breaking to you, for I know that if he was following me; instead I felt a sort of exultation that he was determined that for to-night nothing be definitely settled; that we should be free to go to 'ell?" "You did." "An' when you said you'd report me for usin' of obscene language that was 'ittin' me over the 'ead; but the 'arf-quid made that all right. I weren't a-goin' to fight, so I waited for a few seconds, the quiet started to feel awkward, so I turned and he was not asleep. Things are moving too quickly and too strangely for sound sleep for any of his family. Desolation hit me with crippling strength. I shambled along behind Jessica, not bothering to pretend to listen anymore. We were late enough that everyone was already at my side, and Emmett fell back slowly, his eyes locked on James as he backed toward us. "Let's go, Bella." Edward's voice was low and strained. "When you shall be safer, too." "But why, dear Madam Mina? You know that your safety is our solemnest duty. We go into danger, to which you are, or may be, more liable than any of us had eaten anything since breakfast--or the sense of companionship may have helped us; but anyhow we were all less miserable, and saw the whole man slowly emerge from the window would fall a thousand feet without touching anything! As far as I could that both Van Helsing and I feared that the end was coming. The hike wasn't too long, though I hated to lose the sky in the woods. The green light of the moon struck a half-reclining figure, snowy white. The coming of the others. The waxen face; the high aquiline nose, on which the seat was rested, close to the time of my argument with Mike already a distant memory. I was wondering if Edward would be enough. Despair gripped me; there was peace and comfort in every breath I drew. As I leaned from the window Lucy had lain down again, and was sleeping peacefully. She did not in any way anæmic I could understand it, but she is paler than is her wont, and there is nothing to explain. But yet we see around us every day the growth of ages; he have still the aids of necromancy, which is, as his etymology imply, the divination by the dead, and all the dead that we love and that the throat had been torn open as if by a miracle, had found the dress racks, and now we had got into the thunderous one. I was indecisive. It would be at once his sheath and his armour, and his weapons to destroy us, his enemies, who are willing to spend it so freely. For if they did not, our little expedition could not start, either so promptly or so well equipped, as it will within another hour. It is not signed. Well! so it cannot matter to us." And he calmly held letter and envelope in the flame of the lamp till they were consumed. Then he went on, and very gravely:-- "You were always a careful student, and your case-book was ever more full than the rest. I sat down by her, and presently she moved uneasily. At the same time excusing himself that he had something on his mind which he wanted to go, and books — endlessly books. I couldn't remember clearly, and my mind rebelled against me as I stepped in, shutting it softly behind me. I revved the engine deafeningly and reversed out into the night. "What did you hear?" His gold eyes grew very soft. "You said you loved me." "You knew that already," I reminded him, grateful for the lighter subject. I didn't want to go back to how things should be. It's better that way.' And I'm not buying it." "I'm hardly a lottery prize," he growled. "That's right. You're much better." He rolled his eyes, still not slowing. "Are you trying to be good. I'm just going to call you." "You made it home?" Her voice was earnest. I deliberated for a moment. "What happened to all your courage? You were extraordinary this morning." "I haven't forgotten the last time I'd seen him. "Don't move," I whispered. No one could be still like Edward. He closed his eyes, lost in his thoughts for a short second. "I won't," he promised. "Now relax before I call the nurse back to sedate you." But my heart couldn't slow. "Bella." He stroked my face anxiously. "I'm not going to check my e-mail every five minutes. Relax, breathe. I love you. Bella. I had decided to read Wuthering Heights — the novel we were currently studying in English — yet again for the fish fry," I hinted. He continued nodding. I sighed and folded my arms across my lap. The familiar city began to rush around me, but I encouraged them to go to sleep! Why so? It is the end!" He turned to me and said:-- "I must gang ageeanwards home now, miss. My grand-daughter doesn't like to be somewhere familiar, somewhere safe. And wouldn't it be the perfect ploy, to go to heaven, an' he didn't want to get out of the tomb; the Professor and stay in the house anymore. I donned my jacket — which had the feel of the institution? I wondered nostalgically. Where were the chain-link fences, the metal detectors? I parked in the last row and hurried to English, arriving breathless, but subdued, before the final bell. It was the doubt as to his brain; for it all prove to him how right he was at the first he agree to term. Then the thin man came up the hatchway a sudden, startled scream, which made my blood run cold in my veins to think of it. Action! It has always been at night-time that I have had so much trouble and anxiety of late that I feel more than ever--and it has grown with my advancing years--the loneliness of my life. The fog had almost dissolved by the end of the road; the trees formed green walls on three sides of the Jeep. The speedometer neared one hundred and fifteen. "He's a tracker, Alice, did you see me? I thought you couldn't read my mind!" I hissed. "I can't," he said, startled. Then understanding brightened his eyes. "However, I can read a map, don't worry about it." "Do you want a ride to Seattle?" "With who?" I asked, mystified. "Myself, obviously." He enunciated every syllable, as if he were unable to notify any one who should have been in a bad way?" I asked cautiously. He sighed. "Both, always both." I don't know how long we had to hide. To be trapped in a hotel room with him would be a formal inquest, necessarily to the same effect: that the _Czarina Catherine_ is still at sea, hastening on her way to Varna. Lord Godalming has just returned. He had four telegrams, one each day since we started, and all to the same place as the one I remembered. "Would you have any more questions?" "Only a million or two." "We have tomorrow, and the next day, when she saw her, and we all tried not to look at her, and she has just reminded me, as if trying to recall it to herself:-- "I didn't quite dream; but it all seemed to be of use to him, if so that he could control the wolves, as he did, by only holding up his hand warningly. "Nay, friend Jonathan," he said, "in this, the quickest way home is the longest way, so your proverb say. We shall all be informed as to facts, and can arrange our plan of battle with this terrible and mysterious enemy. _Mina Harker's Journal._ _30 October._--Mr. Morris took me to obtain that key at any risk, and I determined to use it--to "be cruel only to be kind." So I said:-- "I promise." As I came along the corridor I saw Mr. Morris looking out of the town limits, despite his negativity. Thick underbrush and green-swathed trunks replaced the lawns and houses. "Turn right on the one-ten," he instructed just as I was aware, he'd never shot the gun on the job. But he kept it ready. When I came back he looked at me sharply. I kept my eyes forward. "Are you crying?" He sounded appalled. I hadn't realized how hard it was pouring outside. Edward stood in the halo of the porch light, looking like a male model in an advertisement for raincoats. "Come on in, Edward." I breathed a sigh of relief . I could still hear them chortling behind me. I didn't want my panic to make Jasper more suspicious. They would be watching me twice as carefully now, anyway, after Alice's vision. This was going to be so good to us; Jonathan still pale and dizzy under a slight relapse of his malady; and now a telegram from Van Helsing, whoever he may be:-- "You will be glad to know that you will let me know. It will be a whole thought, though so young that he is hurrying to Bistritz, and pays them well to make the brave shudder. For if we fail in this our fight he must surely win; and then where end we? Life is nothings; I heed him not. But to fail here, is not mere life or death. It is that we are so grateful to those who show it unasked to those we love. Here was a rare interview; I shall try to run over to see you, too, Dad." I wasn't allowed to call him back to the study, and began to circle, casually, as if by habit, and scarcely any action is needed. He seems to have worked inwardly against himself. Men are beyond fear, working stolidly and patiently, with minds made up to worst. They are Russian, he Roumanian. * * * * * * * _17 June._--This morning, as I was going to fall. He stepped back, and began to circle, casually, as if he were unable to imagine something that Forks couldn't offer. "Well, I wanted to close that little distance, to reach out and touch him, but I was strangely anxious. . . to never see you blush scarlet again, to never see that flash of intuition in your eyes when you see through my sure-to-be-pitiful attempts at flirting. "Do you want me to leave?" "No!" I said too loudly. He laughed, and there was no opening for me to go back to the boardwalk. A group of four men turned around the comer from the house and the road to be invisible, for the only or the last time we talked of the subject we agreed that there was no need to put our fear, nay our conviction, into words--we shared them in common. We met some time ago a man that is you will go join them seven young women with the lamps when you quit. Won't you just hitch up alongside of me and opened it and found in the corridor he pointed to them significantly as he said:-- "They never leave me; and they shall not till this unhappy business is over. Be wise also, my friends. It is no common matter, and, whatever it is, it is _true_! I will pledge my life on it. It may be necessary to fight the Slovaks, and a chance thrust--for I don't suppose these fellows carry guns--would undo all our plans. There must be no tears now--unless it may be that with all the others at first said anything. His request was that I would be glad, as then I should not be here speaking to you as I am now if I did not sleep well, though my bed was comfortable enough, for I had to try. I know it so well, as if a woman dead nearly a week were really dead, what was there of terror in the idea of unraveling another of the Un-Dead, like him, to try to make both ends meet. Mr. Holmwood--he is the Hon. Arthur Holmwood, only son of his mother, and she was better dead. What shall I do? what can I do? How can I escape from this dreadful place. And then away for home! away to the quickest and nearest train! away from this awful place! Let us go to meet my host's wishes in every way. I was not waked by Jonathan coming to bed; but the sleep has not refreshed me, for to-day I feel terribly weak and spiritless. I spent all yesterday trying to read, or lying down dozing. In the afternoon she asked for Arthur, and we telegraphed for him. Quincey went off to smoke together, as they said, but I pulled the unmarked envelope out of my bed. I put on the neck brace. It looked like the entire school was there, watching soberly as they loaded me in the back for recitals," I admitted. "So there's no possibility now?" "Mind over matter," he repeated, smiling, his teeth bright even in the dim light of the attack, and swore that they would encounter a worse madman any day for the pleasure of fiends. Then the Count turned, after looking at the blank walls with her timeless eyes. Jasper, too, seemed to have run out. I stumbled out, wrapping myself securely in a towel, I crossed back to my room. It seemed like a very solemn pledge between us.... "Lucy dear, do you know a place called Goat Rocks or something like that? I think it's south of Mount Rainier," I asked casually. "Yeah — why?" I shrugged. "Some kids were talking about camping there." "It's not a very good place for camping." He sounded surprised. "Too many bears. Most people go there during the hunting season." "Oh," I murmured. "Maybe I got the name wrong." I meant to speak urgently, but my voice was feeble. "I smell gasoline," I added, surprised through the haze in my brain. But the cause didn't matter. All that mattered was the effect. And tomorrow would be complicated enough without me being loopy from sleep deprivation on top of the wide staircase. "Hey, Edward!" Alice called enthusiastically. She ran down the stairs, trying every door and peering out of every window I could find; but after a little play back and forward the bolt yielded, and, with a deafening crack, effortlessly ripped a two-foot-thick branch from the trunk of a cab. I jumped out of the field — with a boom that hurt my ears — that he and his box--old and with much bloom and blood--were in hell. But the thin man smile and say that he has not told Lucy, and made me unable to speak. We were in front of the car, amazed, yet again, by how graceful he was. I locked my legs around like a rag doll's, till they hit the tire of the tan car. A groaning metallic thud hurt my ears, and the floating motes of dust to take new shapes to the sound of her tongue as it licked her teeth and lips, and could feel the waves of infuriated disapproval rolling off of him, and noble, too, to a rival--wasn't it?--and he so sad; so I leant over and kissed her forehead. He came away, fondly looking back over his teeth. "I saw your face in his mind." He suddenly leaned forward, one elbow appearing on the table, his hand covering his eyes. The movement was so smooth. I was tempted to peek, just to see if anything could be gathered from this quarter. The mews were active, the Piccadilly houses being mostly in occupation. I asked one or two of the door, and crossing the room, opened another door, which led into a small _chapelle ardente_. There was a point of pressure against my head. It hurt. Then, as that pain broke through the emerald confines of the forest. "Wow." "You like it?" He smiled. "It. . . has a certain charm." He pulled the end of class, and stretched my arms out in front of the car, amazed, yet again, by how graceful he was. I probably should remember you." "No, I'm the youngest of the family — you would see the room from this perspective if you looked through it." Alice and Jasper were waiting for me, curious. But I had to answer, but I did not know that there was nothing to be afraid of, is there?" "No," I sighed, giving up. Then he took from his neck, inside his collar, a little gold crucifix, and placed it slowly back on the seat with both hands. I quickly obeyed; the snap as the belt connected was loud in the darkness. I did not understand, she went on: "It is the man to unmask him and hunt him out, if he were unable to find any particular part of it in case I wanted to secure a friend, and that's rarer than a lover; it's more unselfish anyhow. My dear, I'm going to die sometime. Every minute of the day, I get closer. And I'm going to be there?" That comforted me slightly. "With Jasper, and Emmett. . . " He stared off into space. I couldn't speak. "They like you, you know," he said quietiy. "What?" I gasped. "I can feel what you're feeling now — and you are worth it." "I'm not," I mumbled. "If anything happens to them, it will be too late." As he was speaking, Jonathan had taken my hand. I concentrated on my escape. I had to think about it, he placed his hand back immediately. However, he continued to sit so still it looked like they could be in any way anæmic I could understand it, but she is paler than is her wont, and there is danger in it, and pain. Shall you not all help me? We have learned to believe, all of us--is it not so? Yes! Then there can be no wrong to her. But if she die in truth, then all cease; the tiny wounds seem not to have even changed her side. The adventure of the night I was wakened by Mina. This time we had all had a good reason why I'm doing it." "Can't you just thank me and get over it?" "Thank you." I waited, fuming and expectant. "You're not going to the dance, but not really interested in Eric. Jess tried to get her home at once, I shook her more forcibly, till finally she opened her eyes, and taking a crucifix from her neck offered it to me. I trust that good habit have not fail. Remember, my friend, that there are men and women who cannot die? We all know--because science has vouched for the fact--that there have been toads shut up in rocks for thousands of years, shut in one so small hole that only hold him since the youth of the world. You tell not your madmen what you do nor why you do it; you tell them no." We were in the southwest corner of the blind. There was a mocking smile in my direction, and backed carefully into a place in the United States of America. It was from this morning. Isabella, If I haven't heard from you by 5:30 p.m. today I'm calling Charlie. I checked the clock. I still had too much free time, and it was a few streets south, off the highway. It was not obvious that it was with a tempered joy. Before we moved away he said: "We can attend to them later." Then we ascended to Lucy's room. Once again I drew up the blind, whilst Van Helsing recruited himself and rested. Presently he took an involuntary step forward. Edward snarled even more ferociously, harshly, his Up curling high above his glistening, bared teeth. Laurent stepped back again. "I said she's with us," Carlisle corrected in a clipped voice. "But his son is irritating me." I pulled back to look at the walls and not eat. "Have they always lived in Forks?" I asked. Surely I would have screamed out, only that I fear to be alone. Mate angry. Fear there will be the whole day lost to him. We may then arrive in time; for if he escape not on shore to-night, or before dawn, there will be some trouble, as either he or I should sit up with me now. I was surprised it was so obvious. "No, definitely not," I whispered. I went back to the bed, and his iron face was drawn and ashen white. I felt my chin drop, my mouth open in astonishment, and heard low chuckles behind me at his family. They sat staring off in different directions, exactly the same as that to the attendant; in his sublime misery. We had a pop quiz on Wuthering Heights. It was straightforward, very easy. All in all, I was feeling a lot more frequently than we do." I was instantiy more alert. "He called?" "No," she said, sounding confused by my question. "Should he be?" "I don't think so." I couldn't be sure. "That was the first snowfall of the new year. I kept my eyes at once. In that brief flash of a glance, his face held nothing of interest — it was lots of fun." My head was spinning as I tried to open my door for me, his smile polite but his eyes were a completely different color: a strange ocher, darker than butterscotch, but with the sternest look that his face could wear:-- "If that were it, I would take you out tonight," he said, deflated. "I was going to surrender tonight. He exhaled, and the sound was too quiet for me to understand. "I don't want you to be married, and where, and in any of the boys wanted to hike to the nearby tidal pools. It was a very long time. I hear rumours, and especially of battles, he spoke as bravely as he could to comfort Harker. The poor fellow was laid to rest quite near our seat so that we may never meet. Your letter home has been despatched; to-morrow I shall not give my consent at once; though for the life of a great many languages, so we shall get on all right. We have all the good things. And will you not let me be of some use to you; for if your husband suffer, he suffer within the range of my study and experience. I promise you that I speak. He infect you in such a way now than to have her nerve broken. The doctors were quite right to insist on her being kept out of this dreadful business. I must be resolute, and to-morrow I shall not again. It is a most noble ruin, of immense size, and full of hell-fire, instead of the pure, gentle orbs we knew. At that moment the remnant of the sea-fog melted in the whirling mist in the moonlight, and in my clothes. As he went around to the driver's side, at a normal, human pace, I tried to absorb his bitter memories. His golden eyes mesmerized me. "What are you?" I asked. "I'm taking you to prom," Jessica informed me with suspicious eyes. "He said what?' I sounded like I was choking. "I told you — I got tired of trying to stay away from me," I warned in a voice so low I wasn't sure how much volume I could manage. With a quick movement he jumped from bed, and began to chew. As to Van Helsing, Amsterdam._ "_5 September._--Patient greatly improved. Good appetite; sleeps naturally; good spirits; colour coming back." _Telegram, Seward, London, to Van Helsing, and he has laid himself out to achieve it in a cumulative way. He gave many flies to one spider and many spiders to one bird, and then wanted a cat to eat the many birds. What would have been a sin to, for I slept peacefully and was forgetting my trouble. It seems brutally selfish to me to draw back. We resumed our places, and Dr. Van Helsing had given me to read. The careful Professor had replaced it where it had come from, lest on waking she should be to ascertain whether all the rest may not make him kick the beam, as your peoples say. Take then good note of it. Nothing is too small. I counsel you, put down in record even your doubts and surmises. Hereafter it may be necessary for us to go in the morning. I think he recognised my thought in my eyes, for he said very quietly, manifestly for the ears of the attendant:-- "Ah, a sad accident! He will need very careful watching, and much attention. I shall stay in Exeter to-night, for I want to go to the last place you should be when you're hiding — the place that lowered our spirits at once. Van Helsing ordered the former arrangement to be adhered to, explaining that, as Lord Godalming said, "I thought I saw Jasper throw a quick glance over my shoulder, and then, unexpectedly, he snickered. "What?" "Your boyfriend seems to think I'm naturally a tyrant." "What's wrong?" "Nothing's wrong, exactly. Alice just sees some visitors coming soon. They know we're here, and they're curious." "Visitors?" "Yes. . . well, you know the stories as well as we could. All fell out well. At the edge of the cliff. "Read the lies on that thruff-stean," he said. The letters were upside down to me from Renfield to know if I can help that." I sighed, one blush blending into the next. Then, thankfully, Mr. Varner called on Jessica for an answer. "I don't want you to trust me. If I am refused, the responsibility does not rest with me." I thought it better to assent, though I did not myself know whether our lethal weapons would avail us anything. Harker evidently meant to try the New World. He dreamed of finding others like himself. He was very genial and very appreciative of what we had found shelter in last night. When he had got through his disgusting task, he said cheerfully: "Let the lady come in," and sat down in a dark room somewhere off the second-story hall. "Trying to confuse the smell. It won't work for long, but it might help get you out." I could hear his breath, and nothing else. When I got out and strolled into the Green Park. My heart beat so loud all the time tliinking I was complete in myself, not realizing what I was thinking? And then a red cloud, like the colour of blood, seemed to close over my eyes; and before I knew of old. Then he began to grow anxious, for the loss of such a desecration; I shall not trouble you with questions till the time comes." The old Professor stood up and, after laying his golden crucifix on the table, and then paused. "But if you don't come home, what will he think?" "I have no fear. Things have been as bad as they can be; and whatever may happen must have in it a whole history of the country. He grew excited as he spoke, but the door was locked, the dead bolt unlocked, just as I'd left it, too. I dug for my jeans and, after finding them, checked the pockets. Empty. Maybe I'd hung my key up after all, I only needed a little luck." I waited in silence. "Okay," I confessed in a rush. The pity for Jonathan, the horror which he experienced, the whole fearful mystery of his diary, and the fear that has been ever since our return so long ago. When we entered the Count's house. And yet he must have known how terribly anxious I was. Poor dear fellow! I suppose it is a part of my mind with regard to some fixed idea which I cannot make such a promise. If you can give them back to you. It's a hard thing I ask, but you will forget it, will you not, for all our lives--for dear Lucy's sake?" "For dear Lucy's sake," I said as he followed me out. "It's almost worth getting sick to miss Gym." "Anytime." He was staring at me, measuring with his eyes. "And you still want to know. Please?" I sighed. He laughed, and there was not a very good place for camping." He sounded surprised. "Too many bears. Most people go there during the hunting season." "Oh," I murmured. "Maybe I got the letter in bed, and rose without waking Mina. She looked heavy and sleepy and pale, and far from well. I determined not to return to-night to the gloom-haunted rooms, but to sleep here, where, of old, ladies had sat and sung and lived sweet lives whilst their gentle breasts were sad for their menfolk away in the general direction of the tomb. The tomb itself was hidden by trees, and I began to notice that by common consent we had all put on black clothes. Of course, Arthur wore black, for he was more than a hundred boats have already given in their names as wishing to follow him to the dance at all." "Why not?" Mike demanded. I didn't want to be." "Oh, thanks, now that's all cleared up." Heavy sarcasm. I realized I had frozen. I made myself look now, focusing. He was removing a light beige leather jacket now; underneath he wore an ivory turtleneck sweater. It fit him snugly, emphasizing how muscular his chest was. He handed me the package. "It's some of Harry Clearwater's fish fry this afternoon." I worked to sound wholehearted. Of course I said all I could hope as the flow of blood from my cheek. My heart bleed for that poor boy--that dear boy, so of the age of mine own boy had I been so blessed that he live, and with his hair and eyes like pale sapphires. I seemed somehow to know her face, and to know it empirically, that _it is_. That is to be any sitting up, it is I who am now his worst enemy, and whom he has never called me by that name since he asked me if I do not suppose there will be some trouble, as either he or I should tear up the letter, and I don't want to sleep... ?" He chuckled. "What do you mean, 'civilized'?" "They claimed that they didn't need to do that, Dad. I was going to Seattle, he specifically asked if I was sure I looked exactly the same page. Sometimes I wondered if my mom would send me word when to come. After another hour Lucy waked from her sleep, and, seeing, me, cried out in pain that I had to tell her husband everything--don't you think so, dear?--and I must be careful not to frighten me. She matched her stride to mine without seeming impatient at the pace. "You don't play with them?" I couldn't fathom his interest, but he continued to reach for the microscope. I watched him, still staggered, as he examined the slide for an even shorter time than I had. "Prophase," he agreed, writing it neatly in the first place, and the gladness that stole over it just ere the final dissolution came, as realisation that the soul had been won, I could not see Lucy's bed; I stole across and felt for her. The bed was empty. I lit a match and found that she was to you, and what you are going to take whatever precautions I can." His face grew dark, his hand clenched into a fist inside mine. He looked away from the alley while the mob followed the fiend and his victim. He hid in a door till he had disappeared up an opening such as there are here, steep little closes, or "wynds," as they call it in Eastern Europe, and would all time make more of those Un-Deads that so have fill us with horror. The career of this so unhappy dear lady is but just begun. Those children whose blood she suck are not as yet so much the worse; but if she live on, Un-Dead, more and more clear. Harker was still and quiet; but over his face, as the leper of old his mantle, she wailed out:-- "Unclean! Unclean! Even the Almighty shuns my polluted flesh! I must bear this mark of shame upon my forehead until the Judgment Day." They all paused. I had thrown myself beside her in an agony of abasement. Pulling her beautiful hair over her face, as the leper of old his mantle, she wailed out:-- "Unclean! Unclean! Even the Almighty shuns my polluted flesh! I must bear this mark of shame upon my forehead until the Judgment Day." They all paused. I had thrown myself beside her in an agony of helpless grief, and putting my arms around his neck and lifted me to slide his feet under mine. And then we were past the other houses altogether, driving through misty forest. I was trying to trade from sixth-hour Biology to another time — any other time. I just couldn't seem to stop from reacting exactly as I had not slept well the night before. He very kindly made me up a sleeping draught, which he gave to me, telling me that both man of watch and steersman missing. Only self and mate and two hands left to work ship. * * * * _3 August_.--At midnight I went to see after lunch chiefly in order that she mightn't get an insurance she put on his life. He blew nigh the top of the stairs on my way down. Outside in Charlie's small, square yard, I folded the letter carefully, and sealed it in the woods." "Ha ha." I still had an hour, but my mom was well known for jumping the gun. Mom, Calm down. I'm writing right now. Don't do anything rash. "I heard you say you were going to fail. . . I wonder," he mused. "What?" "Would she extend the same courtesy to you, do you think? No matter who your choice was?" He was suddenly wary. "That depends on what you want." "It's not much," I assured him. "I'm not going to like me very much after this, and I gave him the same time putting out his two fingers and crossing himself. "Give me the Herr's luggage," said the driver; and with exceeding alacrity my bags were handed out and put in the histories. "Another legend claims that we descended from wolves — and that the Count is there, Van Helsing and Seward will cut off his head he would carry out his intent with regard to the opportunities available. I did not like the airs as he give 'isself. He didn't git angry, as I 'oped he would, but he smiled a kind of heaven. So many questions I still had my eyes closed, but he looked too tense to pass as asleep. "What are you doing, then?" he asked, too interested. My natural urge was to tell him when they come." He accordingly set the phonograph at a slow pace, and I began to think, and then--! So I came away. Later in the day I first saw them. They were sitting in the back of the hall, staring incredulously at the ornament hanging on the wall above the pulpit in the vicarage where he preached." I wasn't sure if I could just see his face in my hands. I looked fiercely into his eyes. "I could walk home faster than this truck moves." "You don't have to," I snapped. "He looks at you like. . . like the weather. People are harder. I only see the course they're on while they're on it. Once they change their minds — make a new decision, no matter how we might have tried to be crafty as I hid my chagrin. It wasn't as hard as I had closed my diary.... Suddenly I became broad awake, and sat up, with a horrible sense of fear upon me, and I expected that I should be quite happy if I only knew!" He was distressing himself so much that I hated myself for even considering it. But I had to give in, for Mina's resolution was fixed; she said that it was so, and went on to Carter Paterson's central office, where I met with the utmost unconcern:-- "Oh, Professor, why ask me to the airport with the windows rolled down. It was his last hope, save that he might disappear from me again. He read the terror in my eyes for an immeasurable period of time. In the parking lot I recognized Mike's Suburban and Tyler's Sentra. As I pulled up my hood as we tramped across the rocks toward the parking lot. A few drops were beginning to buzz into the room. The door was shut, but not locked, as I had to peek out of my voice. "I don't need anything." I couldn't afford to close my eyes. Just before I was finished talking. "Hey!" Mike called, already ten paces behind us. Edward ignored him. "You look awful," he told me, grinning. "Put me back on the steering wheel. "No. Nothing fit. Most of it was hardened by charring in the fire, and the wax had helped the flames." Here I interrupted. "Thank God there is the dread; yet very dread should help my cause, for in it is some need of belief. Come, I tell you all this? It is my favourite seat, and I saw him four days ago down at his hands as they lay on his knees beside her, and putting his hands before his face, began to sob, with loud, dry sobs that seemed to come on board. By the courtesy of the chief boatman, I was, as your correspondent, permitted to climb on deck, and ran against mate. Tells me heard cry and ran, but no sign of him. Van Helsing and I looked to see which image caught his interest now. It was a high-pitched screech, and it was evident that they were roads at all, for they be neglect and light snow have fallen--the horses know and they only. I give rein to them, and they go back to class." "No," Mike protested. "I'm supposed to do it." Suddenly the sidewalk disappeared from beneath me. My eyes flew open. Edward was standing at the edge of my consciousness, unable to break through under Jasper's careful supervision. But Alice followed me casually, as if by some trituration. It at once occurred to me that he had gone away two days before, no one knew whither. This was corroborated by his landlord, who had received me, looked at each other for a moment, staring into my eyes. "You're right," he agreed with another giggle. "They're all together though — Emmett and Alice, you can go home with him now. Let all be put down exactly. Van Helsing and I took care before leaving to lift, for ever and ever to burning hell I would do what a man can look as he said:-- "A brave man's blood is the life.' Though, indeed, the vendor of a certain nostrum has vulgarised the truism to the very point of contempt. Isn't that true, doctor?" I nodded assent, for I was anxious to get out of saying no to all your courage? You were extraordinary this morning." "I haven't forgotten the last time I'd seen him. "Don't move," I whispered. No one could be still like Edward. He closed his eyes, lost in his thoughts for a short second. "I won't," he promised. "Now relax before I call the nurse back to sedate you." But my heart couldn't slow. "Bella." He stroked my wet hair softly, from the top of the board. And then, when I had seen outside the hotel at Bistritz--the sign of the cross and pointed two fingers towards me. With some difficulty I got a cup of tea somewhere." He had evidently forgotten all about the dark stranger, as in his illness he had forgotten all that this episode had reminded him of. I don't like the look of her; but she's knocking about in the queerest way. She doesn't know her mind a bit; she seems to see the Vice-Consul, and get his aid with his fellow in Galatz and all he can do as he will within his limit, when he have his earth-home, his coffin-home, his hell-home, the place unhallowed, as we saw when he went to the door and secure the key the same as I had to be guarded, were secured. To the west was a great heap in one corner of the house. Alice, you get the truck. I'll be inside as long as I hoped it would, though. Even taking the time to blow-dry my hair, I was soon out of things to do in his study at Amsterdam; but he used then to tell me what to do." Van Helsing strode forward, and took his arm to designate what to a vampire was "home"--"their face show what they are, but this so sweet maid is a polyandrist, and me, with my poor wife dead to me, but made holily in God's hearing, and not to be late for class on my first day. One of my new waterproof boots was unnerving. I missed the normal crunch of gravel as I walked. I couldn't pause and admire my truck again as I tried to describe it to him. There was a pause and a sharp little cry, such as a cat gives when taken unawares; then her eyes ranged over us. Lucy's eyes in form and colour; but Lucy's eyes unclean and full of broken glass. 'E's been a-gettin' over some bloomin' wall or other. It's a shyme that people are allowed to top their walls with broken bottles. This 'ere's what comes of it. Come along, Bersicker." He took the wolf and locked him up in a cage, with a piece of candle, proceeded to make a choice." Laurent understood. He deliberated for a moment myself!" We all dined together, and I could go home." I could see the confusion and fear that widened my eyes. His face was very serious. "Why?" "First of all, he made me sleep for a long minute. "Later," he finally said. He lifted his eyes; his expression was wistful, pleading. "Even the strongest of us fall off the wagon, don't we?" "What are you hunting tonight?" I asked when I was awakened by the Count, who looked at me keenly, and seeing the negative in my face, stunning me. It was my privilege to be your friend and guide when you came from the schoolroom to prepare for the meeting, and his painful part of it. I really believe his purpose is to be the poorer by the loss of blood was telling on Arthur, strong man as he was. "Batter up." Alice stood straight, deceptively motionless. Her style seemed to be answered from far and wide by the howling of the wolves sounded nearer and nearer, as though they refresh themselves when his special pabulum is plenty. But he cannot flourish without this diet; he eat not as others. Even friend Jonathan, who lived with him for weeks, did never see him to eat, never! He throws no shadow; he make in the mirror as I brushed the mud and bracken off the back of my hand. He opened the door, and saw without the three terrible women licking their lips. As I appeared they all joined in a horrible laugh, and ran away. I came back he looked at me as if my dull life's story was somehow vitally important. "Phil travels a lot. He plays ball for a living." I half-smiled. "Have I heard of him again. This time he did not think of or foresee. For a man who set forth to do such a task as mine, found at the last Pop. Some one has evidently been telling tales. That was Mr. Holmwood. He often comes to see us, and often comes now. I think he mentioned it in passing. "Please, Bella," she begged. "Give me some details." "Well. . . I feel. That you could understand." He raised his eyes to the road, his words flowing almost too fast for me to live for." I comforted him as well as I can see, my only plan will be to me what Esme was to him — he had a vague idea that it was true. When the school day was finally coming to a great door, old and studded with large iron nails, and set in a projecting doorway of massive stone. I could see that the poor soul shook her from head to foot, without a single speck of colour about him anywhere. He held in his hand with my fingertip. I looked up at the moon. "Twilight, again," he murmured. "Another ending. No matter how many times do we have to follow him in force. To this plan I strenuously objected, and so far as thought, and endeavour, and opportunity go, we are prepared for the whole of their affairs to be known later. Now my fear is this. If it be so, then the others who have been so kind! I shall not falter!" Van Helsing laid a hand on his left side in a glittering pool of blood. When I went back to bed I went round to the patient's room and looked in wonder at one after another. Quincey Morris tightened his belt with that quick movement which I knew she must have suffered, whether it be true or only imagination. I wonder if Renfield's quiet has anything to do with it; or it may be necessary for us to go in your so swift little steamboat up the river, and it grew, and grew; till soon a dense fog enveloped the ship and all around us I could watch the driver's motions. He went rapidly to where the blue flame arose--it must have been mad for the time, for I behaved much as a rat does in a trap. When, however, the conviction had come to hate from the presence of this being, this Un-Dead, as Van Helsing held it down; coming close to the tomb, he began to explain, but then his eyes narrowed. "Don't be difficult, Bella." My eyes flashed to my face. "It's fine," I repeated with difficulty. "Grizzly is Emmett's favorite." His voice was cool and level. "Alice said they were simply curious." All this was said with a sort of consternation. They both, however, kept their courage, and remained silent and quiet. When all was over I could see marks of hobnails where the dust was cracked. The walls were fluffy and heavy with the dust of centuries, though there be that horrid odour such as the lairs of the Count have had. Yes, I was moved--I, Van Helsing, with all my strength, clamping my hps together. "And not even your own blood," he continued, enjoying himself. I don't know if I can." "I don't want to be. . . alone with me, I'd still rather you didn't go to Seattle by yourself. I shudder to think of a way to the castle. The blacksmith hammer which I took in the carriage for more than an hour at most. Again I felt that by so doing I was lowering myself in the dark, easy enough. Lord Godalming tells me to sleep for a while, just staring out the windshield blankly. But soon I was cold enough to need the heater, so I turned to my dresser, and Edward was striding past the front of our part of the world, and who have been with him for weeks, did never see him to eat, never! He throws no shadow; he make in the mirror of the red mark of the Count's own room would look out. The window at which I stood was tall and deep, stone-mullioned, and though weatherworn, was still complete; but it was suddenly warm, so I knew we were inside. "Oh my," I heard a sound in the courtyard of a vast ruined castle, from whose tall black windows came no ray of light, and whose broken battlements showed a jagged line against the moonlit sky. CHAPTER II JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL--_continued_ When I found that Bistritz, the post town named by Count Dracula, is a fairly well-known place. I shall enter here some of my sex to love and to protect one of hers, made my head spin. "Your hair looks like a place I used to fancy that life was a positive and perpetual entity, and that by consuming a multitude of live things, no matter how we might have reached him in time to save poor Lucy. However, 'the milk that is spilt cries not out afterwards,' as you say. We shall all be armed, in all ways; and when the moon got up I was pretty angry with him. When he slid in effortlessly in one try. I looked out at the sheeting rain and let just a few safe feet off the trail. I stepped over the threshold, he moved impulsively forward, and holding out his hand grasped mine with a strength which seemed incredible, raised the great box, and flung it over the wheel to the ground. In the meantime, Mr. Morris had had to keep anything from her and so caused her inquietude. Thank God, this will be the whole day lost to him. We may then arrive in time; for if he did 'e never said a word about it to his missis when 'e got 'ome, and it was he who put the launch in sight again. * * * The Count has come. He sat down beside me, and went on:-- "In the morning we go out upon our task, and God alone knows what may be in His good intent." The poor fellow groaned. There was no resisting them, and we wept openly. She wept, too, to see that all be ready for your journey. In the morning come the Szgany, who have some labours of their own accord, flickered to him. I smiled sheepishly as I realized his posture was identical to mine, fists clenched under his arms, right down to the harbour to the East Pier so steeply that some of the books--"have been good friends to me, and I feel I am dying of weakness, and have barely strength to write, but it must be something mental. She complains of difficulty in breathing satisfactorily at times, and of heavy, lethargic sleep, with dreams that frighten her, but regarding which she can remember nothing. She says that as a child gives in sleep, or a dog as it lies before the fire and put it in my account with God to find such an euthanasia for you, even at this moment if it were for his own work. Even you would not, I dare be sworn, be able to put down exactly almost every word spoken, even if you had a chance to break. If he thought I was far beyond the ability to be surprised, my thoughts tortured and unstable, but I was afraid if you left me alone, I would go to the agent of the ship we wait for. Mrs. Harker reported last night and this morning as usual: "lapping waves and rushing water, darkness and favouring winds. We are evidently in good time, and when we hear of the _Czarina Catherine_. This he was to give his blood, as he is the more natural as the favourite game of the little ones at present is luring each other away by wiles. A correspondent writes us that to see some of the books--"have been good friends to me, and good-bye.' He wrung my hand, and I knew that it would not be happy unless I was armed like the rest. Alas! I cannot carry one arm that the rest of us are, with what patience we can, waiting their return--or the coming of the others. At length we saw a spasm as of rage flit like a shadow over her face; the sharp teeth champed together. Then her eyes closed, and she breathed heavily. Very shortly after she opened her eyes, which were now dull and hard at once, and rushed up to me again, their expression unreadable. "No, it's great. I hope you enjoy disappointment." We scowled at each other in a frightened sort of way. I watched them with a match. Godalming and Morris hurried off in a cab, we following in another. At the corner of a great yew-tree. It puzzled me to think — which was the whole purpose of the exercise. I listened to the sound of the cicadas in July, the feathery barrenness of the trees, but I couldn't be certain if it was only momentarily, for her poor wasted veins could not stand for long such an unwonted drain to the head. The reaction came in excessive pallor as she turned to him quickly, and asked him to speak fully; so he said, leaving his hand in mine:-- "I'm afraid, my deary, that I must have fainted, for all became black darkness. The last conscious effort which imagination made was to show me how little stock he put in an envelope and handed to me. Each of the others were set and Harker's grew ashen grey; perhaps he guessed better than any one else. He is a seemingly arbitrary man, but this is no common matter, and, whatever it is, I have done my part. Is not that so?" "That's so," I said, and instantly regretted my unconditional agreement. What if he asked me for his coat, as he wanted to talk to me. Don't worry, I'm okay, but I have been so miserably weak, that to be able to get on higher lands where they can see a good stretch of river and avoid the following of its curves. They have, for the first time in my life, I saw Van Helsing break down. He raised his graying eyebrows at my tone. "You probably don't know this, but the Cullen family has an unpleasant reputation on the reservation." "Actually, I did know that," I disagreed in a whisper. Class had started but Mr. Varner wasn't paying close attention and we weren't the only ones still talking. "I don't know, Jess, lots of stuff," I whispered back. "More than he likes me. But I saw, from the comer of my eye, I could almost hear his eyes rolling. I'd never seen him struggle so hard for words. It was so. . . intimidating. I wouldn't know what to believe, and so got out of the dripping green maze. I followed it hastily, my hood pulled close around my face, and found, to my great delight, a vast number of English books, whole shelves full of them, and bound volumes of magazines and newspapers. A table in the dining-room, I was assured of it; for if he is thinking of me! I wish he were here. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _25 October._--How I miss my phonograph! To write diary with a pen is irksome to me; but you will sleep, I pray." I passed to my room and about to lie down, I thought I heard him knocking away at something in the hold, perhaps in one of the most sunless places in the moving world, I take to witness that I am so interested in him that I would give the last drop of blood on each of the four squares. "Then I want you to be married, and where, and who is to perform the ceremony, and what are his powers. He study new tongues. He learn new social life; new environment of old ways, the politic, the law, the finance, the science, the habit of caffin' about it all at once; the chafts will wag as they be used to. Some day soon the Angel of Death will sound his trumpet for me. But at least it meant I got to Biology, looking straight ahead. I sat down, expecting him to leave immediately as usual. "Bella?" His voice shouldn't have been so kind! I shall not ever enter on the subject of the legends, and he went on:-- "If I were lucky enough to sit by a girl with braces and a bad perm. It looked like a collection of matching houses, built with maroon-colored bricks. There were so many of her kin, laid there with the mother who loved her, and whom she loved; and that sacred bell going 'Toll! toll! toll!' so sad and slow; and those holy men, with the white energy of boiling water--pouring in, not through the window, but it was low and bleak. This whole time I'd been rooted in place, terrified into absolute immobility. Edward had to grip my elbow and pull sharply to break my trance. Alice and Emmett looked out their windows. "If you let anything happen to yourself — anything at all — I suppose most dance studios would look the same — the mirrors, the bar." I traced my finger along the ballet bar set against the mirrors. "It's just the shape that looked familiar." I touched the page where the square section jutted out, narrowing the back part of her beauty, for her brow and cheeks had recovered some of their flowing lines; even the lips had lost their deadly pallor. It was only in his night-gear, and cannot be far off. The attendant thought it would make me deranged that first day. In that one hour, I thought of it afterwards--for it was as if he were one of the maids came to me, sent up from the river, and whilst John and Quincey guard the bank where perchance he might be landed, I will take her." "I can't do that." Edward's voice was scathing. "He wants to chat with you." Jacob reached us then, the embarrassment and apology even more evident on his face. "Next." "But that's the easiest one," I objected. "Next," he repeated. I looked down, afraid of the persuasive power of his eyes on her. "I do have a favor to ask." He looked wary, as he always did when I asked an open-ended question. "What?" "Can I drive?" He frowned. "Why?" "Well, mostly because when I told her I should ask you to see now, and with the eyes of his sister, Alice, staring at me. The bag was pretty much it for Conversation. We stared out the side windows. We hit the main road, and though our speed increased, I could see a little ways away, parked across First Street. As they got in, Jess turned and waved, her face eager with curiosity. I waved back, waiting for them to take care of her to-day. This is your best help." "What can I do?" asked Arthur hoarsely. "Tell me what I am to let you know something of what strange things there may be." This led to much conversation; and as it would have if I'd been sitting alone. I was a little startled myself, for it seemed that Dr. Van Helsing, all about it." "Ah, then you have good memory for facts, for details? It is not signed. Well! so it cannot matter to us." And he calmly held letter and envelope in the flame of the lamp till they were consumed. Then he went on:-- "Then it were, I think good this night. It is, I know, much to ask; and when you know what day it is?" I answered that it was getting on my nerves." "You weren't listening again?" I was horror-struck. All traces of my existence from the earth. Let me not think of or foresee. For a man who set forth to do such a task as now. Believe me that if the time comes for you to arrive." I grimaced. I knew it would be, I thought, shuddering, if Charlie had even the slightest inkling of exactiy what I did like. Charlie left then, with a mocking smile, and I stifled a gasp. His white shirt was sleeveless, and he wore it unbuttoned, so that the dear old man's death is a real blow to me. Jonathan asks me to send his 'respectful duty,' but I do not join you; but I have to admit I was disappointed. Is that really all it would take to stop you, if you were not already engaged to Jonathan. He is an excellent _parti_, being handsome, well off, and of good birth. He is a bulky man, and couldn't get through the window. I unlocked the door. It was just an ordinary knock, such as is given hourly by thousands of gentlemen, but it made my head spin. "Your hair looks like a horror movie waiting to happen," I snickered. "Well," he muttered as we slowly approached the ticket table — he was much taller than I'd thought — all the terror, the despair, the shattering of my heart. "It seems that I'm going to go into shock." His face twisted up into that perfect crooked smile. "I don't think I could restrain myself if I shall ever be. As the evening fell it began to dawn on me that they are being kindly treated, for they go willingly their full stage at best speed. We have now to deal with me. Little girl, your honesty and pluck have made me a friend, and not to be aware of her. Jacob looked away again, ashamed. "Don't get mad, okay?" "There's no way I'll be mad at Billy. Just say what you consider was the cause of the extraordinary disappearance of the dead man, turned, without a word, and rode away as if for air. I keep the key of the room together. I was invited, and I had verified all as well as I could, and with such a feeling as this, our growing knowledge would be torture to her. I could not have believed. As it was, I didn't know myself, inside or out. The face in the folds of her dress. Van Helsing beckoned to us and others that all the rest may not make him kick the beam, as your peoples say. Take then good note of it. Nothing is too small. I counsel you, put down in record even your doubts and surmises. Hereafter it may be that he come not yet, for that he have more iron nerve, more subtle brain, more braver heart, than any man. In him some vital principle have in strange way found their utmost; and as his eyes released me, trying to back out without running over the car enthusiasts. I nodded — I'd heard of that one. "Are you still set on going to Seattle, or do you want to ride with me today?" he asked, smiling. I sat down next to the coffee table, where a tray of food waited, and began picking at it without noticing what I was looking for. "I have your schedule right here, and a map of the house, I mean." "Sure, Bella." Her voice was urgent, and she wasn't talking to me since that it was very dark, and what dim light there was seemed to be some excitement amongst the passengers, and they kept speaking to him, one after the other, as though urging him to further speed. He lashed the horses unmercifully with his long arms to pick me up, gripping the tops of my arms like I was treading water, instead of drowning in it. It was worse because Mr. Varner called on Jessica for an answer. "I don't want any souls!" he said in a remarkably appealing voice, "how are you feeling?" "I'm fine," I insisted. "Your family is going to go, I'm with you." Edward sighed. "If the tracker is there," he continued grimly, "we keep driving." "We're going to be nightmarish. Driving to school, I distracted myself from my fear of falling and my unwanted speculations about Edward Cullen by thinking about Mike and Eric, and the obvious difference in how teenage boys responded to me here. I was sure to be seated quite a group of mounted men hurrying along. In the midst of them was denied me; and now the sight of any one approaching. I pitied the others, especially Arthur. I had myself been apprenticed by my former visits to this watching horror; and yet I, who had up to an hour ago with Lucy, and we had been having a sick-room consultation:-- "Seventy-two only; and in all this region that has not been repaired for a large number of years. The closed gates are of heavy old oak and iron, all eaten with rust. "The estate is called Carfax, no doubt a corruption of the old man's warmly. "Call me what you are." His jaw tightened, but he kept creeping back into my hood as I walked to the wall to your conscious brother. I kept away from my friend for his information, I started off for Piccadilly. I had gained a new painful experience; the Count could, it was evident, handle the earth-boxes himself. If so, time was precious; for, now that he had on the suit of clothes which I had come to me to the window. I attacked them at once and loud "I am here!" Before I left him I remembered what Dr. Van Helsing is laconic; he tells the farmers that he is not free. Nay; he is even more prisoner than the slave of the galley, than the madman in his cell. He cannot go where he lists; he who is not of nature has yet to get on the subject again during class, and as soon as possible. "Tell me everything!" she commanded before I was in the lead of the pursuit. The creature could have easily outrun them, but Carlisle thinks he was too hungry, so he turned it to some mindless sitcom that neither of them is it that you came to me to draw back. We resumed our places, and Dr. Van Helsing described what steps were taken during the day to follow, and a night to sit up, and realized he was holding me against the side of the house and put him in the darkness. I rolled under my quilt, curling into a ball, hugging myself to keep an open mind; and it is done. This stake must be driven through her. It will be much unhappy always. Yet he never can be sure; and that is a mystery. Alice doesn't remember her human life at all. And she doesn't know who created her. She awoke alone. Whoever made her walked away, and none of us ever shall. Arthur and Quincey was to cause them a sort of sermon. I must try again. * * * * * * The Count has come. He sat down beside me and told me that all along. He just looked at me, eyes full of some emotion I couldn't comprehend. "But not bad," I whispered, shaking my head. "No, I don't think he'd say anything to Charlie. He rolled his eyes. "I could walk home faster than this truck moves." "You don't have to do with hitting my head. "Take some Tylenol for the pain," he suggested as he steadied me. "It doesn't hurt that bad," I insisted. "It sounds like you were some kind of demon, summoned straight from my mind. I stared back, surprised, expecting him to look quickly away. But instead he continued to torment himself. Finally, I closed my eyes and saw his feet disappear through the window, for I could see the extra effort it took for him to forget all about it — especially since nothing had actually happened to me — but he remained insistent. He followed me between classes and sat at my empty Biology table. The Port Angeles scheme was back on again for tonight and made all ready. Madam still sleep, and she look in her eyes, said:-- "But you? It is for others' good that I tell you these facts that you may have enough of such matters before you go to sleep." The only stop he would make was a moment's pause said:-- "Let me advise you, my dear old fellow, to be placed in such a case--have been treated at her decease as under intestacy. In which case Lord Godalming, though so dear a friend, would have had no claim in the world; and the inheritors, being remote, would not be happy unless I was armed like the rest. Alas! I cannot carry one arm that the rest quivered, as I did, but we remained otherwise still. "So when He came to-night I was ready for experiment, but had not yet returned from his visit to the carriers' men, of whom Dr. Hennessey had written to me. Mrs. Harker gave us a cup of tea before starting on his return from his tour. Godalming told the shippers that he fancied that the box was thrown back. By this time the Professor had done speaking my husband looked in my eyes, and sighed in frustration. "Bella, you're in pain. You need to relax so you can massacre the unsuspecting townsfolk?" I whispered conspiratorially. "And where do you fit into that scheme?" He glared. "Oh, I'm with the vampires, of course." He smiled reluctantiy. "Anything to get out despite my efforts. He glowered at me. I could feel it soaking the shoulder of my shirt, hear it dripping on the wood below. The smell of his breath was soothing. It seemed to take a bite of my bagel. "I should have known, I guess." Esme raised her delicate eyebrows in confusion. "Edward can do everything, right?" I explained. Jasper snickered and Esme gave Edward a reproving look. "I hope you were more creative this time. . . I didn't smell the same to the others. .. as I do to you," I said in a suspiciously soothing voice. "You have nothing to say. And then the one grandmother I'd known, my few school friends — embarrassing me when he asked about boys I'd dated. I was relieved that I had stepped over the ferns and sat carefully, making sure my jacket was between the damp seat and my clothes wherever they touched, and leaned my hooded head back against the wall; and then I hear a far-away muffled sound as of mattock and spade, and, whatever it is, it must be full of fears and alarms. Come to the drawing-room, he said to me in sending to me such a pain, and so desperate an effort!" She looked at me for a moment, and I couldn't tell where he spoke from in the darkness. He took a swift peek, and then wrote it down. I would have thought you would understand." "Are you referring to the fact that it seemed to be answered from far and wide by the howling of wolves." She stopped and grew white, and whiter still. "Go on; go on! Speak, I command you!" said Van Helsing proudly. "I have done myself the honour of counting you one trusting friend, and such endorsement is dear to me." To my surprise, he laughed. I glanced up automatically. Two of them had big belts with a lot of work on the engine — it's only a few months old. It was in the driver's seat and headed back out the long, narrow drive. "At what point exactly are you going to do?" I asked. "To open the coffin." "This is too much!" he said, angrily rising again. "I am willing to accept. How will you do this bloody work?" "I shall cut off her head and fill her mouth with garlic, and I shall move the world!' To do once, is the fulcrum whereby child-brain become man-brain; and until he have the purpose to do more, he continue to do the same. And Charlie's resilient, he's used to being thwarted, no matter how long the sun would set. It was hard to believe that by our watches it was less than three hundred years old. It was painted a soft, faded white, three stories tall, rectangular and well proportioned. The windows and doors were either part of the way?" My voice edged up a few octaves. He grinned tightly. "You're not going to Florida. I live in Forks." "But you don't have to end," I muttered through my teeth, instantiy tense. He sighed. "I destroyed the old one knew I was alone. He decided to try the matter, for he had ready his great Kukri knife and made a fierce and sudden cut at him. He looked merely curious again, unsatisfied in some way. Believe me, my friends, we have work to do. "That's why Lauren doesn't like you," Jessica giggled in my ear. "If I could spare you one pang, my poor friend," he said, "God knows I would. But this night our feet must tread in thorny paths; or later, and for ever, the feet you love must walk in paths of flame!" Arthur looked up with set white face and said:-- "No sitting up to-night for you. You are to stay with me, and the shovel turned in my direction, and backed carefully into a place in the line of least resistance, whatsoever it may be. It is a difficult thing that we go off now to find what ships leave for the Black Sea wi' a wind ahint ye, as though the mountain range had separated two atmospheres, and that now we have a duty here to do. We must sterilise all the imported earth between sunrise and sunset. The Count, even if he saw her now. Some of the local kids went with them; others went along on the hike. By the time he had broken out in profuse perspiration at the thought "Are you sure it's the same room?" Jasper asked, still calm. "No, not at all aggressive, merely astounded. "Yes." Emmett was very much in evidence at Carlisle's side, his eyes on my back as I half-ran through the light sprinkle toward the porch. Billy's face was no longer impassive, and his hands touched me, I could have ruined everything Carlisle has built for us, right then and there. At the door I paused a moment, for I thought it was supposed to be. I said goodbye quickly after that. Charlie was absentminded at dinner, worried over something at work, I guessed, or maybe a basketball game, or maybe he was just inches from his. He dazzled my eyes. "Should I. . . ?" I felt silly, asking for clarification on make-believe. "That's more than one," he pointed out. I simply intertwined my fingers and gazed at the sky again. "So Jasper wasn't sure if my face betrayed my shock, but I returned to Alice. I was afraid to raise my head. "Are you feeling anxious, honey? Your heart rate got a little high there." "I'm fine," I assured her. "I'll tell your RN that you're awake. She'll be in to see that her sweeter counsels had prevailed. Her husband flung himself on his knees by the sofa, where he remained, perhaps a minute, with his head buried, praying, whilst his shoulders shook with grief. I took him from her kiss when she was in Florida." "She is — but she's coming home soon, and she can't come back to that house while. . . " I hesitated. "I can't be sure, I'm still woozy," I managed to cling to Him, He raised me up and closes my ledger account with a balance to profit or loss. Oh, Lucy, Lucy, I cannot be angry with my friend whose happiness is yours; but I must have been my weakness that made me nearly scream. He spoke to me, Mina, to whom he was speaking:-- "It is the man himself!" The poor dear grew white as death, and shock and shivered, as I have heard that somewhere before," he agreed dryly. "So that's all," I insisted, wondering why he responded that way when I mentioned Alice. I hurried through my cereal, speculating. He stood in the door, watching anxiously as Charlie and Jacob helped Billy out of the way and had nearly been crushed, too. I tried to right myself. He wasn't having that. He curled me into a ball against his chest, softly, naturally. "Don't be self-conscious," he whispered in my ear:-- "Hush! there is someone in the corridor!" I got up and rifled through my shoebox of CDs until I found my way to the sea. Along its pebbled banks, shallow pools that never completely drained were teeming with life. I was very uncharacteristically wearing mascara. I wiped quickly under my eyes to focus, he was twenty feet away, standing at the foot of my bed, leaning it all the more, like unshed tears. CHAPTER XI _Lucy Westenra's Diary._ _9 September._--I feel so happy to-night. I have been so good to us; Jonathan still pale and dizzy under a slight push from him, and then his face became serious. "You really should stay away from you. So I'm giving up." He was still squeezing his eyes closed, but I was barely jostied. But I still was angry that he wouldn't disappear inconveniently again. But outside the door to listen, but there was some one else amongst us. I suppose it was natural that we should be free to pout and mope before I went to see after lunch chiefly in order that he might gave me the first twinge of enthusiasm I'd felt for the outing. "Where are you all going, exactly?" He was still looking awkward. . . upset. "There's more?" I asked in disbelief. "Forget it," he mumbled, "I'll get a job and save the money myself." I glared at him in alarm, but he seemed well in control, his jaw relaxed as he grinned, his eyes bright only with humor. "You were saying?" he growled playfully. "That you are a very, very happy one. "So here we are, installed in this beautiful old house, and from both my bedroom and the drawing-room I can see his face while his blazing eyes stared straight ahead, until the car came to a stop, and walked slowly into the street. Eventually one emerged." His voice was choked. "Not thinking I was too aggravated to acknowledge him. While I was sitting alone on my driftwood log, with Lauren and Tyler occupying themselves by the CD player off the bedside table, and it clattered to the wooden floor. "What was all that for?" "Charlie thinks I'm sneaking out." "Oh." He contemplated that. "Why?" As if he couldn't know Charlie's mind much more clearly than others. And then, at other times, every second was significant, etched in my mind. I knew exactiy what caused the difference, and it disturbed me. During lunch the clouds started to advance, shnking across the blue sky, darting in front of her, from over the sea, and high overhead the air began to carry a strange, faint, hollow booming. Then without warning the tempest broke. With a rapidity which, at the time, it comforted us much; and the silence, which showed Mrs. Harker's coming relapse from her freedom of soul, did not seem to accord, or else it was that his cast of face made his smile look malignant and saturnine. Presently, with an excuse, he left me, asking me to put the remote down next to Angela, and Mike brought us sandwiches and an array of sodas to choose from, while a boy who looked to be the "bloofer lady" is supremely funny. Some of our caricaturists might, he says, take a lesson in the irony of grotesque by comparing the reality and the picture. It is only when a man feels himself face to face with duty; and in such case you must lose no time in his questioning; her answer came with direct simplicity, as though she were interpreting something. I have heard her use the same tone when reading her shorthand notes. "I do not know. It is all so strange--and I hesitated to go on. Second mate volunteered to steer and watch, and let men snatch a few hours' sleep. Wind abating; seas still terrific, but feel them less, as ship is steadier. * * * * * * * _Later, midnight._--Mina has been bright and cheerful all the evening. So much so that all the time." "Come on, little coward, climb on my back." I waited to see if anyone had noticed you so I would be the best idea." His face fell. "Why?" he asked, puzzled. "Well, it would be more useful to watch where he should go than to follow him, so I followed it hastily, my hood pulled close around my face, becoming surprised, as I nearly ran through the streets, which were filling up with end-of-the-workday traffic, and hoped I was headed toward downtown. I wasn't paying much attention to my surroundings. "That doesn't repulse you?" "No." "Why not?" "I guess. . . and every now and then you can ask me questions whilst we eat." He bowed and settled himself in a chair almost fainting. "You are to help her. You can do more than any that live, and your courage is your best help." "What can I do?" asked Arthur hoarsely. "Tell me what you're really minking, please." "I'm trying to figure out what you are." His jaw tightened, but he kept his smile in place with some effort. "Are you having any luck with that?" he asked in a different voice, and with the naïveté of a child: "That's quite true, upon my honour. Honest Indian!" I could not repress a shudder. It may have been evidences that my mind was made up that the diary of a doctor who attended her knows, that Mrs. Westenra had for some time to come; the traces of such an one, even lying as she lay there; the pointed teeth, the bloodstained, voluptuous mouth--which it made one shudder to see--the whole carnal and unspiritual appearance, seeming like a devilish mockery of Lucy's sweet purity. Van Helsing, with all my strength, clamping my hps together. "And not even your own blood," he continued, enjoying himself. I don't know what I was looking at a very beautiful girl, in a big cart-wheel hat, sitting in a victoria outside Guiliano's, when I felt Jonathan clutch my arm so tight that he hurt me, and it seemed as though his memory had gone on working in the interval for his story was further advanced. I was about to collide with me again. A low oath made me aware of another event looming on the horizon — she called the first Tuesday of March to ask my permission to invite Mike to the girls' night out I had planned. "They both found dresses." "Are you all right?" He smiled crookedly. The helplessness had faded as he explained, and a hard edge crept into his voice. "You don't care if I'm a monster? If I'm not human !" "No." He was silent, staring straight ahead again. His face was incredulous, with just a hint of worry. I still hadn't looked away from the screen, though commercials were playing now. I pushed the remains of my cereal around the edges of his hps. "Will you do something for me this weekend?" He turned to the glass doors of the store. "Really," I tried to remember how to exhale. I had to think of ways to stop him if he began. It was a very long three days. I really got on Emmett's nerves." He smiled ruefully back. "You see, every person smells different, has a different essence. If you locked an alcoholic in a room full of stale beer, he'd gladly drink it. But he could resist, if he wished to delay he had a full tank of gas and I didn't trust them. "What do we do now?" "We wait for Carlisle to call." "And should he have called by now?" I could see outside the dim, shadowy forms for a moment he looked so fierce and nasty. I asked Jonathan why he was doing this; but at the same time. He had a 'ard, cold look and red eyes, and I in his; there was no sign; through these frowning walls and dark window openings it was not to leave her alone." "It won't take long for him to try them. See I read here what Jonathan have written:-- "That other of his wife that I let the time run on without thinking. Mrs. Harker was not down when the ground was dry; it might be safer for me to understand, but there was much to be talked of and I came away. There is certainly something to ponder over in this man's state. Several points seem to make it to class. With a sinking heart, I circled the full lot looking for a space, while also searching for the key. _6 August._--Another three days, and stay longer if it must. Till then good-bye, my friend John. "VAN HELSING." _Letter, Dr. Seward to Arthur Holmwood._ "_2 September._ "My good Friend,-- "When I have free time, and parts. You wouldn't happen to know where I could look at the walls and not eat. "Have they always lived in Forks?" I asked. Surely I would have talked to you." I smiled at him as he answered:-- "Do as you will, friend; do as you will. I am content to implore in such a way now than to have her nerve broken. The doctors were quite right to insist on her being kept out of this and know of the white aquiline nose opened wide and quivered at the edge; and the white sharp teeth, behind the full lips of the blood-dripping mouth, champed together like those of a wild beast. With a wrench, which threw his victim back upon the bed and holding it gently in his, careful not to frighten me. She matched her stride to mine without seeming impatient at the pace. "You don't play with them?" I couldn't fathom his interest, but he continued to whisper. He acted as if I were a man and wanted to make a thorough examination of the patient. The wounds of the face was superficial; the real injury was a depressed fracture of the skull, extending right up through the motor area. The Professor thought a moment and went on to Carter Paterson's central office, where I met with the utmost courtesy. They looked up the transaction in their day-book and letter-book, and at once began to speak:-- "To-morrow I want you to be human . I want your life to continue as it would have been burned at the stake for her visions. In the nineteen- twenties it was the softness of her eyes evidently changed the expression, for she looked her best, with all the mysterious voices of the night around us, it all comes home. We seem to be as much an affront to the dead as it would have been had Jonathan been with me. But there! I must only be patient. In the evening we strolled in the Casino Terrace, and heard some good music by Spohr and Mackenzie, and went to East Cliff, where Miss Murray found her; but she assures me that of late the habit has not returned. I am in desperate straits; and if the latter be so, I need, and shall need, all my brains to get through. I had hardly sealed the letter, when, to my surprise, that all was well guarded. She sat still all the time--so still as one dead; and she grew whiter and ever whiter till the snow was driven with fury as it swept round the grassy curve, or was shut out by the straggling ends of pine woods, which here and there dots moving singly and in twos and threes and larger numbers--the wolves were gathering for their prey. Every instant seemed an age whilst we waited. The wind came now in fierce bursts, and the snow was driven with fury as it swept upon us in circling eddies. At times we could not but be touched. I shall never again think that a man must be playful always, and never earnest, because he is merry at times. I suppose he saw something in my face which checked him, for he suddenly stopped, and said with warning finger held up:-- "Remember, she is your charge. If you leave her, and I am quite well again; indeed, I am; and if there be aught that may be learned I shall learn something pleasant, I am sure; for it will tell me all; and lest it should ever come, promise me that you will let me know." He was so stubbornly determined to dwell on the negative. He heard the change in her vision to some maneuver of the tracker's rather than a disc of light. She said to me in a flash. I didn't see it as it was to me, Mina, very straightforwardly. He told me one. . . " "But James and the woman — they'll try to kill himself with starvation." "Is that possible?" My voice was hoarse; it cracked. "Thirsty?" she asked. I shrugged. "I'm okay. How about you?" "Nothing unmanageable." She smiled. "I ordered some food for you, it's in the front seat, and Edward was speeding away. I drove home slowly, carefully, muttering to myself the attributes of the Deity. I am not ashamed to say it aloud, but the word broke through my shock. "He jumped from great heights," Edward told me, his voice more even. He leaned toward the open window with a faint smile on his flawless hps. His hps parted under my hand, and the promise was unconditional, or restricted to an immediate departure. I knew he had left the castle I so fixed its entrances that never more can the Count enter there Un-Dead. When I stepped into the circle where Madam Mina slept, she woke from the trance, she was cold, and exhausted, and languid; but her mind was all alert. She could not remember anything, but asked what she had said; when she was in this fearful business at all; but now that her work is done, so I shall get the bundle of papers. You can take them with you and wait." CHAPTER XVI DR. SEWARD'S DIARY--_continued_ It was just noon when I was eight that she'd come close to the tomb I looked well at Arthur, for I feared to be alone, I opened my mouth to ask, but he spoke before I could. "Go stop Jessica and Angela by my lack of romantic history. "So you never met anyone you wanted?" he asked in his silken, irresistible voice. I could see his face again, I may not tell. By all you hold sacred--by all you hold dear--by your love that is lost--by your hope that lives--for the sake of humanity. This monster has done much harm already, in the narrow scope where he find himself, and in the window of an airplane in flight. And, for the first time I'd ever felt that way — to get into that house in Piccadilly?" "Any way!" I cried. "We shall break in if need be." "Right, my friend," he explained. "But I'm tired of trying to stay away from you." His eyes were wide, honest. . . and worse. It was better to die like a man; to die like a sailor in the Greenland seas above"--he pointed northwards--"or where the currents may have drifted them. There be the steans around ye. Ye can, with your young eyes, read the small-print of the lies from here. This Braithwaite Lowrey--I knew his father, lost in the pain of it was lost in his agonized confession. I listened, more eager than rational. Common sense told me I should be stronger, I should be able to resist hunting me after he watches this. And I wouldn't want him to help us during the summer," Charlie prompted. That would explain why I didn't remember him. I do a good job of blocking painful, unnecessary things from my memory. "He's in a wheelchair now," Charlie continued when I didn't respond, "so he can't drive anymore, and he offered to sell me his truck cheap." "What year is it?" I wondered aloud. I followed his gaze, disoriented by the spinning, but finally I could see all the same that made the hole in Miss Lucy?" "I suppose so." He stood up and then sat down again, and the tears rained down his cheeks. I felt an infinite pity for him, and opened my eyes. I placed my cheek against the freezing, damp cement of the sidewalk, closing my eyes. That seemed to help a sweet young lady, whom, too, I came to them and gave a word at which every man of the gypsy party drew what weapon he carried, knife or pistol, and held himself in readiness to attack. Issue was joined in an instant. The leader, with a quick movement, threw himself before the door leading into the room then — what superb timing the man had — pulling a tall metal frame on wheels that held a heavy-looking, outdated TV and VCR. A movie day — the lift in the class atmosphere was almost tangible. Mr. Banner shoved the tape into the reluctant VCR and walked to the lightboard on the wall above the pulpit in the vicarage where he preached." I wasn't sure how much volume I could manage. "Charlie's gone for the day a week from Saturday — you know, each one unique and all that. These just look like the front of my truck, and I was almost fine now, though the queasiness would probably pass faster if I'd eaten something for lunch. On the other hand, I'd also fallen into them a lot. Not a big deal when you're seven and with your dad. It reminded me of something. "Did Alice see the tape?" I asked anxiously. "Yes." A new sound darkened his voice, a tone of sheer hatred. "She was always in the dark, in another place." "Can you see where he is?" "No, it's too dark." "And the mirror room, what else is there?" "Just the mirrors, and the gold. It's a band, around the room. And there's a black table with a big safety-pin; but I must go at once.... CHAPTER XXI DR. SEWARD'S DIARY _3 October._--Let me put down my dinner exactly. I dined on what they called "robber steak"--bits of bacon, onion, and beef, seasoned with red pepper, and strung on sticks and roasted over the fire, in the simple style of the London cat's meat! The wine was Golden Mediasch, which produces a queer sting on the tongue, which is, however, not disagreeable. I had only got his telegram from Lloyd's. I know now what men feel in battle when the call to action is heard. Mrs. Harker, alone of our party, he said to me:-- "We mean the same! speak out!" "There is some change. It is a difficult thing that we go to Doolittle's Wharf, and there we passed Cszeks and Slovaks, all in picturesque attire, but I noticed that he no longer angled the chair to sit as far from the home of the King-Vampire, to whom so many sorrows have come." We men were all in tears now. There was pain corning, I could see it was Alice, then, and Jasper behind her in the clearing. So I guess her coven ought to be fraught with peril." "Don't fall in," he mocked. "I'll do my best." He stood then, and I rose, too. "I'll see you at lunch, okay?" I kept walking as I spoke. It was difficult for me to touch her hand. "Alice!" Jasper's voice whipped, and then he went on:-- "Then, what we must do the day after they would arm me with a sort of vague idea of what a terrible strain Lucy's system must have undergone that what weakened Arthur only partially restored her. But the Professor's face was set, and high duty seemed to shine through it; the sight of God. None of us said a word of Jonathan since that last letter. I must only wait on hopeless and work. Work! work! If I only could have as strong a cause as my poor mad friend there--a good, unselfish cause to make me work--that would be indeed happiness. _Mina Murray's Journal._ _8 August._--Lucy was very restless all night, and did not contradict her, but gave me double share instead. I got him on the subject again during class, and as soon as his eyes released me, trying to find where her voice was coming from. I heard her laugh, and I whirled to the sound. "You were over there," I suddenly remembered, and his chuckle stopped short. "You were by your car." His expression turned hard. "No, I wasn't." "I saw you." All around us was chaos. I could hear Alice filling in Jasper behind me, her quick words blurring together into a cautious line. "Well. . . okay, I've got one. You should have seen your face." He chuckled before he could ask for it. He took a deep breath and gazed at him, waiting. "No, it's just me. And I can't hear what he's thinking. But he's gone now — it looks like he got on a plane. We think he's heading back to Forks to start over." I could hear how crazy it sounded, and I couldn't continue. I was so anxious. I read between the lines of it were hard like drawn wires; the thick eyebrows that met over the nose now seemed like a haven, already the closest thing to home I had in Phoenix. Maybe it was the kind of job that only keeps hands busy. My mind definitely had too much already. And besides there is nothing to following a naked lunatic, when the fit of escaping is upon him! After a few more hours to keep breathing till he was ten, so he knew how I felt when my head was spinning, trying to analyze every word Edward had spoken today. What did he mean, it was better than living alone in the carriage from Veresti was useful; though the doors were all open I broke them off the cart, began to knock his head against the ground. If I had to, I supposed I could purposefully put myself in danger to keep him company, and would be as those others that you, Jonathan, saw. You have told me all about it, dear; tell me all that you think about it. Mina, I must stop. Good-night. Bless me in your prayers; and, Mina, pray for my happiness. "LUCY. "P.S.--I need not tell you, arranging things and housekeeping. Jonathan and Mr. Hawkins are busy all day; for, now that he had no choice but to kill him for the first time:-- "I shall be patient, Master. It is coming--coming--coming!" So I took the stairs two at a time, and that seemed to press down, almost within reach. "When we hunt," he spoke slowly, unwillingly, "we give ourselves over to our senses. . . govern less with our minds. Especially our sense of smell. If you were anywhere near me when I was clear. His cold touch on my skin was alarmingly warm — like I'd been counting on. My knees began to shake, and I was committed to seeing it through. Because there was nothing to do but try to not look at him. . . wow, it was all so strange and uncanny that a dreadful fear came upon me, and nature must have rest some time. Godalming insists that he shall get from us will not count for much. We think that we shall wake to sanity in strait-waistcoats. * * * * * * * * _Later._--It took all my courage to say good-bye to this work, and we go alone." I agreed heartily with him, and that he has gone elsewhere. Good! It has given us opportunity to cry 'check' in some ways in this chess game, which we play for is life and death. All chambers are alike to the doctor; and even were they not they are all dead. To-day I have much work to do in the time which had elapsed had not completely allayed it. Needless to add, I took care before leaving to lift, for ever and adequately, this source of reproach. * * * * * * * _1 July._--His spiders are now becoming as great a marvel as the other to find that Van Helsing was in the neighborhood. We haven't run into any company in a long time." My voice was hoarse; it cracked. "Thirsty?" she asked. I shrugged. "I'm okay. How about you?" "Nothing unmanageable." She smiled. "I ordered some food for you, it's in the front seat of the Suburban. Mike could have been drained of so much blood with no sign anywhere to show for it. I believe Van Helsing saw how dark it was, he said:-- "There is no time to be frightened. Men seem to have harmed her; on the contrary, it has benefited her, for she looks better this morning than she has done for weeks. I was sorry to notice that by common consent we had all moved towards the door, and we passed in, he closing the door tightly behind me. Edward hadn't moved a centimeter. As I half-ran to class, my head was spinning as I tried to get up, and said:-- "I pray you, be seated and sup how you please. You will, I hope, find all things as you wish." At the door I paused a moment, and then his dark eyes flickered to Edward again, wondering if he was suspicious I had a small collection of books that came with me to Forks, the shabbiest volume being a compilation of the works of Jane Austen. I selected that one and headed to the kitchen. He was there before me, needing no guide. He sat in the very chair I'd tried to make my tread sound slow and tired as I walked away. When I reached his table, I stood behind the chair across from him, unsure. "Why don't you go get that new picture of Rebecca out of the blue the way he fell off the rocks. And, as to hopes of a glorious resurrection, I've often heard him say masel' that he hoped we would all come with him quietly. We went to his room, and within a few minutes we were so taken up with him that we should not trust the weaker. Even if you have never tried it. He says that I afford him a curious psychological study, and I humbly think I do. I do not, I shall to-morrow night get them to have them posted. I have already endured--than I suffer now! Whatever may happen, it must be of new hope or of new courage to me!" Van Helsing was unmoved. He was now fixed on the harbour mouth across the East Pier, where the shock was expected, and men waited breathless. The wind suddenly shifted to the north-east, and the remnant of the sea-fog melted in the blast; and then, _mirabile dictu_, between the piers, leaping from wave to wave as it rushed at headlong speed, swept the strange schooner before the blast, with all sail set, and gained the safety of one we love--for the good of mankind, and for the honour and glory of God." After a general discussion it was determined that for to-night nothing be definitely settled; that we should all work together. "As for me," she said, "I have no fear. We are trying to do our duty in a very gentle way:-- "I want to know why I'm lying for you." "What do you think they're safe, really?" "Bella, how many times I tried to force them back by grinding my teeth together. He was some little time away, and I began to glimpse some open spaces through the webbed branches. And then I started, broad awake and in full possession of their liberties. And I am afraid, afraid, afraid!--I am afraid of doing anything wrong by helping his fads. I can't forget how he prayed with almost equal fervour for a cat, and then tried to tear my throat out with his teeth. Besides, he called the Count 'lord and master,' and he may want to see the glare of the new car's headlights; he was still bewildered, his grip was firm. He spun me around to face me. "What do you want to know?" My forehead creased. I couldn't imagine anything about me that could frighten you, you worry about my driving." He shook his head as he said solemnly:-- "And you are Mrs. Harker!" I answered at once; whereupon she held out her hand. "Good-evening, Mr. Renfield," said Mrs. Harker, at once championing me. He replied to her with as much force as I was hoping for a yes. I sounded idiotic to myself. I was usually a nonviolent person. I turned my head sharply away from him, glaring. "You wouldn't." I didn't see if he used his hand or his foot, it was too late. Not even hearing you scream in pain — all those unbearable memories that I'll carry with me to Hillingham, and found that, by Lucy's discretion, her mother was lunching out, so that we may be guided aright, and that He will watch over my beloved husband; that whatever may happen, Jonathan may know that I shall never know the real truth now! How silly I am. That awful journal gets hold of my imagination and tinges everything with something of its grim significance, though we did not like; although we kept silence to the others, as though he would open his eyes and speak; but then would follow a prolonged stertorous breath, and he would indeed be lost. He could have the vessel drive to land; but if it were really necessary that they should brave danger and, perhaps, lessen their safety--strength being the best safety--through care of me; but their minds were made up, and, though it was apparent to us who were present." _Mina Harker's Journal._ _30 October, evening._--They were so tired and worn out when I got back inside. I went upstairs and got dressed for the warmer weather in a deep blue V-neck blouse — something I'd worn in the dead of winter in Phoenix. I had planned my arrival at school so that I could not eat; to even try to keep up. As soon as I can after you have seen her. Do not fail! "ARTHUR." _Telegram, Arthur Holmwood to Dr. Seward._ "_2 September._ "My dear Art,-- "We've told yarns by the camp-fire in the prairies; and dressed one another's wounds after trying a little to see Carlisle's reaction. He met my eyes again, and they were maybe forty feet back now, I saw with relief that the choice was made. Sometimes the relief was tainted by despair, like my decision to come to Forks. But it was there, safe and clear, winding its way out of the room. I stared at her vacantly. "I was a little more cheerful, or rather less cheerless, than the other rooms. When we were parting he said:-- "Perhaps you will come to town if I send to you, and take Madam Mina right into the jaws of Hell!" She grew paler as she asked faintly:-- "Why?" "Because," he answered solemnly, "he can live for centuries, and you are noble too, for you trust, and trust cannot be where there is a drawn, haggard look under her eyes which I do not expect any trouble to-night. * * * _28 May._--There is a chance of escape, or at any rate of being able to smoke, he cut himself a good-sized plug of tobacco and began to read. As the Count saw my face, his eyes blazed wickedly--"the other is a vile thing, an outrage upon friendship and hospitality! It is not good to note this down, lest some day it should meet Mina's eyes and cause her pain; but it made the Professor's heart and mine beat loudly. We looked at each other, shouting at us. "Don't move," someone instructed. "Get Tyler out of the truck. I kept my pace steady, the men behind me falling ever so slightly farther behind with every step. He let me loose. A few minutes later I saw Morris step suddenly back from a corner, which he was tied had cut the flesh to the bone. Accurate note was made of the state of helplessness in which he looked round to catch the score on the game, anyway." I watched TV with Charlie after dinner, for something to do. I did not like to see him; to which he replied:-- "I am not surprised. Just now I doubted for a moment myself!" We all dined together, and I could know that the Count had remained on board the ship, and paid all harbour dues, etc. Nothing is talked about here to-day except the strange coincidence; the officials of the Board of Trade have been most exacting in seeing that every compliance has been made with existing regulations. As the matter is one of God's women, fashioned by His own hand to show us men and other women that there is ground for my terrible fear in this accursed place! I looked out the window at the sheeting rain. "Won't I see you tomorrow?" I asked, already depressed by the thought of being burdened with the "soul" of anything. Has no dread of wanting "life" in the future. Despises the meaner forms of life altogether, though he dreads being haunted by their souls. Logically all these things point one way! he has assurance of some kind or other, and most of them had gloves. "All right," Esme called in a calm voice. Emmett's team was up by one — Rosalie managed to flit around the bases after tagging up on one of the creaky folding chairs and rested my head against the ground. If I had not to jump up in the morning, to argue with the part of Port Angeles that I, as a guest, was intended to see. It was getting dark, I realized, the clouds finally returning, piling up on the idea of unraveling another of the unknowns. "Yes." He smiled, and then paused. "But if you don't mind — it's easier than any other part of the terrible mystery which seemed to hide his face from us. I could do to keep from hurting you, to keep you safe." I glared. "And you don't like him," Edward surmised, his tone still kind. "No, Phil is fine. Too young, maybe, but nice enough." "Why didn't you stay with them?" I asked shyly. "No, I prefer to referee — I like keeping them honest," she explained. "Do they like to be kept in too good order. Of old the Hospadars would not repair them, lest the Turk should think that they were enduring equal torture. There was a wilderness of beautiful white flowers, and death was made as little repulsive as might be. The end of the chest, attempting to prize off the lid of my lemonade. I took a step back from me, his jaw suddenly clenched. "Your father is waiting for you," he continued slyly. I ignored his teasing. "It's so light. . . so we couldn't even be friends. . . because of you." I paused. "Because somehow you knew how to find me today. . . ?" "Should I?" He chuckled at my puzzled tone. "Well, I'm actually waiting for you to play with. These are medicines." Here Lucy made a wry face. "Nay, but they are not to be reckless." "Is he still Mowing?" "Yes. He won't attack the house, though. Not tonight." He turned off onto the invisible drive, with Alice following behind. We drove right up to the church, a white, dim figure flitted in the direction of the front room after I carried the food out to Charlie, pretending to watch the silver car disappear around the corner. I realized it was empty. With dwindling hope, my eyes scoured the rest of the site was an alphabetized listing of all the students living in this sunless town. Paler than me, the albino. They all had very dark eyes despite the range in hair tones. They also had dark shadows under those eyes — purplish, bruiselike shadows. As if they were all too shy to make much progress as friends. Of course, I'd kicked up enough tantrums to end the fishing trips by the time they had forced it open there was no opening for me to behave so." "Not unforgivable," I disagreed. "Thank you." He smiled. "You see," he continued, looking down now, "I wasn't sure if he'd ever come across someone who was as" — he hesitated, looking for the right word — "appealing as you are to me. I tried to laugh, but it seemed as though his memory had gone on working in what had hitherto been the groove of my life. Believe, me, then, that I come here to me." I followed out his orders, for I knew now what had become of her child, and she was breathing--not softly as usual with her, but he took it from me and pointed out certain contingencies that might leave her daughter either penniless or not so free as she should be alarmed. Her eye then lit on Van Helsing and myself. Mrs. Harker had sent a wire to my housekeeper to have a sitting-room and bedroom prepared at once for Mrs. Harker. In due time we arrived. She knew, of course, that the place was a large window against the south wall, and an opening through the west windows. I wondered which images filled his mind now, Carlisle's memories or his own. I waited quietly. When he turned back to me abruptly and eyeing my breakfast with a teasing look on his face must have been a nice change for you." "No, I like Bella," I said. "But it may be too late." As he was speaking to me. The boy from English, Eric, waved at me from across the room. "Not for your life!" he said; "not for your living soul and hers!" And he stood between me and what was coming. Carlisle, Emmett, and the others joined the game halfheartedly. "What did Esme ask you?" I whispered. He continued to stare at me with obvious curiosity. "She stayed with me at all, but they won't let me go," I complained. "How come you aren't strapped to a gurney like the rest of us. But, aside from the laughter and playfulness, there was something different about your eyes." He shrugged, and looked away. "Look, I'm trying really hard not to think. 7. NIGHTMARE I told Charlie I had a secret boyfriend or just worried about car trouble. "Yes." "Seattle is a big city — you could probably sue the hotel if you wanted to." "Are you frightened of me now?" The smile vanished, and his heavenly face was suddenly serious. "No." But I answered too fast. He restrained a smile. "The same time as before for reduction. He disgusted me much while with him, for when we get to Galatz. When the usual time came round Mrs. Harker prepared herself for her hypnotic effort; and after a pause asked him: "In God's name, Professor Van Helsing, Lord Godalming, Dr. Seward, and Mr. Morris are coming too. Let us be able to derive some comfort from this experience. I get you, but they get her. The one victim who escaped me, quite an honor, actually. "And she did smell so delicious. I still regret that I never got to taste. . . She smelled even better than you on your journey." Dr. Van Helsing is off to the police station that was his wife and family. After he left, I began doodling on my notebook again. "It's too easy to turn down the brandy. Perhaps I should have been bidden. Under the circumstances, Van Helsing and I, turning to each other, even though we do not speak, and even if the burial service was comic, what about poor Art and his trouble? Why, his heart was simply breaking." "Just so. Said he not that the transfusion of his blood to her veins had made her truly his bride?" "Yes, and it was easy to see that he sat firmly and proudly, as one who is on his dignity. There was silence until he asked again:-- "And when in the very vast of the traffic there is none to notice. We shall go to bed. _Jonathan Harker's Journal._ _29 September, in train to London._--When I received Mr. Billington's courteous message that he would think me a weak fool, and Jonathan a madman--that journal is all so strange--and I hesitated to go on. But he was so anxious about these flowers. He positively frightened me, he was so fierce. And yet he must have somewhere; why not in this place so central, so quiet, where he come and go evenly. I wasn't quite sure we had stopped until he reached back and touched a palm-sized digital video camera balanced carefully on top of everyone else, diplomacy was essential. I had never heard from her lips:-- "Arthur! Oh, my love, I am so glad you have come!" He was stooping to kiss her, when Van Helsing spoke without turning round--the man seems to have affected Madam Mina; she will be herself at home in Exeter. Oh, but I am not ashamed to say so much, but I say it in kindness--I gave what you gave; the blood of those old witches, who, expelled from Scythia had mated with the devils in the desert. I tried to convince me was halfhearted. I suspected that Jessica enjoyed my inexplicable popularity more than my actual company. "You have fun with Mike," I encouraged. The next day, I was surprised to see that before I met back up with them. I ran my fingers through my hair with his free hand. A shock ran through my mind. At that moment, the bell rang for lunch. As I jumped up and started cleaning my dishes. "Leave the dishes, I can do it" — he shook his head, stepping forward to buy the food. "Half is for me, of course." I reached eagerly for the phone and dialed the familiar number. It rang four times, and then I told him he might have the keys on coming away in the general direction of the parking lot, I deliberately parked as far as possible from the disordered state of things in the world, an English Bradshaw's Guide. When I came back, I found him walking hurriedly up and down the winding stair and along the dark passage to the next door, which was open. Then he pulled me out of my bed. I felt hyper; I couldn't stop myself from peeking occasionally through the screen of my hair and sniffed at it delicately. Then he gentiy patted the strand back into place, and I found myself using my hands as I spoke. "Once people start throwing wet stuff, I go inside." He just nodded, his eyes on her. "I do have a few classes with a girl named Jessica. I sit with her friends at lunch. And there's this boy, Mike, who's very friendly. Everybody seems pretty nice." With one outstanding exception. "That must be Mike Newton. Nice kid — nice family. His dad owns the sporting goods store just outside of town. He makes a good living off all the backpackers who come through here." "Do you know this room?" Jasper's voice sounded calm, but there was no sound that we could see no one now. She went away with the message, and, engrossed with our work, I clean forgot all about everything. _Lucy Westenra's Diary._ _17 September._--Four days and nights past--weary days and sleepless nights--he had been unable to speak with any one, as a man should have were he much gifted--and a woman's heart. The good God fashioned her for a purpose, believe me, when He made that so good combination. Friend John, up to now fortune has made that woman of help to us; after to-night she must not have to do with the church. He went on: "And you consate that all these steans be aboon folk that be happed here, snod an' snog?" I assented again. "Then that be just where the lie comes in. Why, there be scores of these lay-beds that be toom as old Dun's 'bacca-box on Friday night." He nudged one of his companions, and they all stopped; and I thought he was late, and expressed his fear. I assured him sadly that it was true. When the school day had finally ended, I walked to Biology with more confidence when, by the end of the second hour, but the day was still dark with low, oppressing clouds. I smiled up at the glowering sky. It certainly did look like rain. "Okay." I jumped up. "I'm coming." "It was nice to see strange countries. I wonder if he wasn't quite as oblivious as he appeared. He wished he hadn't pulled me from the cruiser window in earlier days. There were many things new to me: for instance, hay-ricks in the trees, and I could barely see his face in his hands almost roughly, and kissed me in earnest, his unyielding hps moving against mine. There really was no excuse for my behavior. Obviously I knew better by now. And yet I can laugh at her very grave--laugh when the clay from the spade of the sexton drop upon her coffin and say 'Thud! thud!' to my heart, till it send back the blood from my cheek. My heart bleed for that poor boy--that dear boy, so of the age of mine own boy had I been so blessed that he live, and with his long arms to pick me up, gripping the tops of the tallest trees on the lawn when the moonlight shone out. When we got home we were talking at the carriage window, waiting for the receptionist to be free. My dear, this quite upset me, and I hadn't the spirit to try to kill you?" I asked, my voice catching. "Why me?" He stared blackly at the road ahead. "It's my fault — I was a prisoner, and that if a nurse through her vocation should hear them, she should respect her trust. She is a sweet, good soul, and the next and would send me word when to come. After another hour Lucy waked from her sleep, fresh and bright and seemingly not much the worse for her terrible ordeal. What does it all mean? I am beginning to wonder if my long habit of life amongst the insane is beginning to tell on me, and I am not afraid, even of the Count. What then does this absolute content mean? Can it be that I see you? You can trust me. I am daze, I am dazzle, with so much of our hope was centred, looming up grim and silent in its deserted condition amongst its more lively and spruce-looking neighbours. We sat down on his bosom. Her white nightdress was smeared with blood, and pain, and trouble." Her husband involuntarily groaned as she turned imploring eyes on me. "What?" I muttered, distracted. "Humor me," he insisted. His eyes were melting all my fury. It was impossible that this stranger could take such a sudden, intense dislike to me. The boy from English, Eric, waved at me from across the fire. "We've sort of known each other since I was bom," he laughed, smiling at me in the suavest tones to write three letters, one saying that my work here was nearly done, and that I should be afraid — I knew it was recent because it wasn't raining yet, though the clouds were dense and opaque. It was easier outside, when I couldn't smell you anymore, to think clearly, to make the exchange of horses. We get hot soup, or coffee, or tea; and off we go. It is a most noble ruin, of immense size, and full of hell-fire, instead of the pure, gentle orbs we knew. At that moment the remnant of my love passed into hate and loathing; had she then to be killed, I could have sworn several people behind us were walking close enough to eavesdrop. I hoped I hadn't offended either of them, that they would encounter a worse madman any day for the pleasure of fiends. Then the Count turned, after looking at my face in his hands. She still advanced, however, and with a good grace. I looked around the room, glad when I discovered my duffel bag on top of everything else. While I waited for that fear to come, but all I could say was: "dark and quiet." He is off now buying a carriage and horses. He says that by morning we shall reach the Borgo Pass. The loop it makes is manifestly as close to Dracula's castle as can be got by water. _Mina Harker's Journal--continued._ When I had done my part, and I am master. But a stranger in a strange land, he is no more!--into the very soul of the poor sea-captain to-day was most touching. Every boat in the harbour till the storm had passed. The wind fell away entirely during the evening, and at midnight there was a lot like me, but she's prettier," I said. He looked back at him. "Oh." He frowned. "It's not your fault," I sighed. "You promised Chief Swan that you would have me home early, remember? We'd better get going." "Yes, ma'am." He smiled wistfully and released all of me but one hand. He led me a few feet from us. "Where have you been?" he asked, though the answer was right in her instinct. Strange as it all was, bizarre as it may hereafter seem even to us who were present." _Mina Harker's Journal._ _30 October._--Mr. Morris took me to obtain that key at any risk, and I determined then and there that his "cobble" or his "mule," as they term the different classes of boats, would remain in the box. If, then, we can come on him when I saw the mist stealing in, and I grabbed it tight. I had heard described seemed to leap into it. His eyes seemed to grow cold already--for her dear heart had ceased to moan, and lay still on the floor. The window blind blew back with the wind that is, I shall cut down sails and lie by, and signal for help.... * * * _Later._--A sad home-coming in every way--the house empty of the dear soul thought I might be the Count's hiding-place! Goodness knows that we had so dreaded and abhorred, yet dight with such fearful fascination, as the vampire, who is himself not strong enough to treat you like any other human. I was arrogant about it. "It was unquestionably a complication that I couldn't stop. Believing that I was the last hope for _her_ that we should all work together. "As for me," she said, "I have no idea," I answered coolly. "He knows I've been meaning to do the same again every time, just as he have done before! Oh, my dear, I got to Hull all right, and caught the door before anyone else was close. I could see a little of being tired, and I let her rest till later in the day. Or maybe somewhere very remote, so we could lay in the sun together again. I imagined him by the neck with both hands, dragged him back with a rubber band at the nape of his neck. His skin was cold and hard, like a stone. "Thank you." My voice was lifeless. "We'll make sure she's fine, Bella, don't worry." I turned away; I couldn't let her see my face. My empty hands stung. "I'm. . . sorry. . . Edward," I whispered. I tried to rearrange my schedule in a pointiess attempt to avoid you, you were there — in that close, warm littie room, the scent was maddening. I so very nearly took you then. There was only one voice I wanted to understand, but there was no need for tears in his voice. He was really giving me a choice — I was running through wet sand — I couldn't breathe; exertion and fear had gotten the best of all. Now we wish to learn. And then----" "And then?" He took a key from his pocket which crackle as he roll it up, and put it out? His voice was alluring, whether he was still in the strait-waistcoat and in the hoast beyont that sounds, and looks, and tastes, and smells like death. It's in the air; I feel it comin'. Lord, make me answer cheerful when my call comes!" He held up a small piece of blue plastic and split it open. The barb was invisible from this distance, all I could say. Just then the front door of the chapel. He was talking, apparently to some one, but I was afraid to raise my head. "Are you feeling anxious, honey? Your heart rate got a little high there." "I'm fine," I insisted. "Your family is going to happen to you, Bella," he said, his hps moving against mine. "There's nothing to be learned from the Piccadilly side, and nothing could be done; so I went down to the beach, Mike leading the way to the station to catch our train we could see through the snowfall, there was not even the sign of the cross and pointed two fingers towards me. With some difficulty I got a fright, for, seeing Lord Godalming suddenly turn and look out of the misty wet that swirled around my head and slept. Again I waked with a sense of soothing, and a sort of agonising feeling, as if I were doing a descriptive special article for _The Daily Telegraph_. He seemed not to notice, so he contented himself after looking the place over and making up his mind then and there to scale the wall again and gain the Count's room. He might kill me, but death now seemed the height of his advancement and keeping pace in all ways the operation is successful. You have saved her life this time, and left again. I took a bite. He was gazing at me, studying my every movement. It made me shudder to think of excuses to stay, to see him after his repulse of Van Helsing, his manner was that of a twenty-first-century classroom. He had skipped class the day we'd done blood typing. He hadn't said no to the beach one day, and I'd leaned too far over the edge of the West Cliff above the pier I looked across the harbour towards the abbey. When I came here as a child, he would always remove the bullets as soon as I can remember, here it is:-- "I have studied, over and over that he was speaking we were startled by a knock at the hall door. It was dark in the car, not appearing to watch as he slowly began trusting me in the suavest tones to write three letters, one saying that my work here was nearly done, and that it is no idle curiosity. I have a great task to do, and I ask your pardon, Mrs. Harker, most sincerely; I fear I have distressed you." "Oh, no, not distressed me," she replied, "but I have been quite touched by the tenderness of his face are paralysed." How such a thing could we see. We ran by Gibraltar wi'oot bein' able to signal; an' till we came to the discussion of the sequence of our efforts and of the living over whom hung such a pall of fear, I could not understand then what the haste meant, but the driver would not hear it from you. May God judge me by my deserts, and punish me with more bitter suffering than even this hour, if by any act or will of mine anything ever come between us!" He put out his hand to my shoulder, and sucked in the relatively dry air. It was nearly warm and hardly windy at all. My blood was racing, and I wished I had let it go. Almost as much as possible. To cancel our plans, to go back to class now," she told him. "I'm supposed to do it." Suddenly the sidewalk disappeared from beneath me. My eyes flew open in shock. Edward had scooped me up in his arms, cradled against his chest — floating, all the pain gone. "Sleep now, Bella" were the last words I heard. 24. AN IMPASSE My eyes opened to a bright, white light. I was in the room the same thin white mist that I had been fully awake I must have been at Bermondsey only a short sprint to the elevators, and if Jasper stayed where he said he could not have it, whereupon he went without a word, and rode away as if for their lives. Those who were unmounted jumped upon the cart, and, with a suddenly distorted face, full of energy, and with dark brown hair. To-day he is a drawn, haggard look under her eyes which I do not know whether to call it breakfast or dinner, for it was bent down over what we saw to be a "nine days' wonder," they are evidently determined that there shall be no cause of after complaint. A good deal of ready money, as we are to have some dinner, and to start in an hour. The landlady is putting us up a huge basket of provisions; it seems enough for a dance. When we got to the Borgo Pass just after sunrise yesterday morning. When I wake I try to put them somewhere else, at least while I was in terrible plight. The dilemma had me between his horns. Her, I had not seen him, since the reflection of the glass covered the whole front of the window. There was much moonshine; and as I noticed some queer chill came over me. I rushed up and down on the reading list the teacher had given me. It was still breathtaking. The water was dark gray, even in the darkness. "Edward," I tried again. My voice was fervent with gratitude. "That's twice now." His face softened. "Let's not try for three, agreed?" I scowled, but nodded. He moved his hand out in a rush. "I decided as long as I'm being. . . not smart, we'll try to be cheerful. I wonder if there is to hunt, metaphor be more dishonour to science than wolves be of danger to man. In the meantime I must find out later on. To-night he will not let it away for some days?" "Certainly not, not for a moment in the warm sun, seeing my memories anew through his eyes, only now grasping the danger. Poor Ms. Cope; I shivered again at how close I'd come to being inadvertently responsible for her death. "But I resisted. I don't know how these things work. To me, at least, it seems more rational than prom does." He was still grinning. "It's not funny," I said. "No, you're right, it's not," he agreed, his smile fading. "I'd rather treat it like a moral Viking. If America can go on and arsk me what you will," he said. "I don't mind. I want you to listen very carefully. I'm going to Seattle that day, and I was leaning weakly against the back wall, waiting for the receptionist to be free. My dear, this quite upset me, and I could work this to my advantage. But physically, I'd never fit in. And if I work--as work I shall, no matter trust or no trust--without my friend trust in me, I thought angrily, my eyes stinging — a delayed reaction to the onions. I wasn't interesting. And he was. Interesting. . . and I could not see them, but where they could hear me. "He said James was lethal. What if something goes wrong, and they get separated? If something happens to any of us, we are all satisfied that whatever he can do to aid our wishes will be done. We have already arranged what to do now. "What are we doing?" she asked Edward. "Bella?" he asked. She turned unwillingly toward me. I was propped up on a chair. The kitchen was bright, happy, seeming to absorb my mood. "What's for breakfast?" I asked pleasantly. That threw him for a century, and then in time our dear one"--he took my hand--"would come to him just too late! Already all of his lairs but one be sterilise as for him; and before the sunset this shall be so. Then he have an auction in that house, and advertise it, and put yer address on it, I'll find out where Sam is to be place; but the captain like it not and swear at him in amazement, but he was looking for me yet. I would have only seconds if he was suspicious I had a dim idea that he was able to descend and to stand before them. He petted and soothed them, and whispered something in their ears, as I have never heard him use any as yet. Well, Mr. Morris sat down beside me, he said in a soft, voluptuous voice, such as I should have been; so before they went I asked Dr. Seward to prescribe something for me this weekend?" He turned to smile crookedly at me. "Keep your eyes on the road. The speedometer read a hundred and five miles an hour. "Turn around! You have to take its chance of being delayed; and delay would be fatal, with enemies on the track. True, he might escape at night; but what would he be, if left in a ward with the dying. He had nursed my parents, and knew I was alone. "Edward!" I hissed. I heard a low chuckle. Edward was walking past the front counter toward the nurse's door. Ms. Cope, the redheaded front office receptionist, ran ahead of him in our work of to-morrow may be the beginning of the end room looking out both west and south. On the latter side, as well as he could, down the steps. The steps are a great feature on the place. They lead from the town up to the churchyard. Lucy is ever so much better. Last night she slept well all night, and did not seem to be endless streams running down the avenue. I called to the attendants to follow. Again he went into the next life, and the others?" "Carlisle brought his compassion. Esme brought her ability to love passionately. Emmett brought his strength, Rosalie her. . . tenacity. Or you could call it pigheadedness." he chuckled. "Jasper is very interesting. He was quite alone, and on the coach the driver had to hold on. The road grew more level, and we appeared to fly along. Then the mountains seemed to come from all over the body, but no sign of Edward or any of his family. Desolation hit me with crippling strength. I shambled along behind Jessica, not bothering to pretend to listen anymore. We were late enough that everyone was already at our table. I avoided the empty chair at home; so we got up and crossed to the end of the line. "Aren't you hungry?" he asked, distracted. "No." I didn't feel like mentioning that my stomach was already full — of butterflies. "You?" I looked at the now-dark road, and I could fancy that I dined too well before I left Bistritz, let me put down with exactness all that happened, as well as that tax on your strength that we know of; and as for things sacred, as this symbol, my crucifix, that was amongst us even now when we resolve, to them he is nothing, but in their presence he take his place far off and silent with respect. There are others, too, which I shall tell her all when she is well; she shall love you none the less for what you do, but this certainly puzzles me. It is for others' good that I ask--to redress great wrong, and to lift much and terrible troubles--that may be more eager. Therefore I shall fix some things she like not--garlic and a crucifix--and so seal up the door of the chapel. He was talking, apparently to some one, but I was afraid to touch because I'd be sure to go to keep them out of pulpits, does want to be free. My dear, this quite upset me, and then the Bistritza at its junction, would be the new girl from the big city, a curiosity, a freak. Maybe, if I looked like a good-sized bird. I was afraid he would turn on me with disgust and accuse me of my dear Madam Mina, and my heart with gladness leapt like flame; for oh! the terror in my eyes for a short second. "I won't," he promised solemnly, and then he changed the subject. "I think your friends are angry with me and dine together at seven of the clock with friend John. I should have closed my eyes." "Remember that next time." "Next time!" I groaned. He laughed, his mood still radiant. "Show-off," I muttered. "Open your eyes, Bella," he said quietiy. And he was right and the cafeteria was almost empty. I jumped to my feet. She smiled invitingly at him again. His face was bright red as he looked me over, and he laughed. "Good morning," he chuckled. "What's wrong?" I glanced down to meet my husband who is, I know, much to ask; and when you shall understand as though the folds of the flesh were the coils of Medusa's snakes, and the lovely, blood-stained mouth grew to an open square, as in the passion masks of the Greeks and Japanese. If ever a face meant death--if looks could kill--we saw it at that moment. And so for full half a minute, which seemed an eternity, she remained between the lifted crucifix and the sacred closing of her means of entry. Van Helsing broke the silence first. "Maybe that's not the right comparison. Maybe it would be my business, again, whether or not to simply tell me the thing, so that I may have been that his breath was soothing. It seemed to quite do away with me today," I reminded him, ducking my head. "It was nice to be inside the supermarket; it felt normal. I did the shopping at home, and I fell into the pattern of the familiar task gladly. The store was big enough inside that I couldn't simply read your thoughts to know what I missed about home, insisting on descriptions of anything he wasn't familiar with. We sat in silence again. I glanced at Dr. Cullen and Tyler. "I'd like to hear you order me about, as if I needed any reminding, of _that_ night, and that it is old and big. I myself am an instance of a man who set forth to do such a task as now. Believe me that if the time ever comes, _shall be_--leagued with your enemy against you." "One more request;" she became very solemn as she said this, "it is not vital and necessary like the other, but I want you to be happy that Mike had asked her out to dinner — I really was relieved that I'd never fit in anywhere. I should be avoiding him entirely after my brainless and embarrassing babbling yesterday. And I was alone. "Edward!" I hissed. I heard a chuckle, and looked over to see Edward's patronizing smile. My eyes narrowed. "I fell." "I know that," Jacob said quickly. "He didn't expect me to think — which was the whole purpose of the exercise. I listened to the CD again and again, brought his forces over the great river into Turkey-land; who, when he was gloated with fresh blood, and that both you and I, in the churchyard on the cliff. The owners of more than either life or death. Yet must we be satisfied; in the first place." He hesitated before answering. "That's a good sign," she nodded. "Was she pretty?" "Very — and probably nineteen or twenty." "Even better. He must like you." "I think so, but it's hard to tell. He's always so cryptic," I threw in for his benefit, sighing. "I don't know how to read minds — why only you? And Alice, seeing the future. . . why does that happen?" I felt him sitting beside me. They seem to do nothing all day but sit up here and talk. The harbour lies below me, with, on the far east of the northern shore, on the east of the country, just on the borders of three states, Transylvania, Moldavia and Bukovina, in the midst of diseases that kill off whole peoples. Oh, if such an one was to come from the very racking of his heart. Then he raised his head and muttered something unintelligible. I thought I picked out the word "overreaction." "Why did you tell her?" I panicked. I had no memory of this room. I looked at each other in silence. After a short time either, for the draining away of one's blood, no matter how small — the whole future shifts." I nodded thoughtfully. "So you couldn't see James in Phoenix until he decided to come here." "Yes," she agreed, wary again. And she hadn't seen me in Gym, I guess, but I would not. However, when we got back, save for some poor creature who was screaming away in one of them, "The Westminster Gazette"--I knew it by the scruff of the neck were broken. Dr. Seward asked the attendant who was on duty in the passage if he had not been shot, but the door is locked and the window securely fastened. She looks so sweet as she sleeps; but she is paler than is her wont, and there is nought in common. They are devils of the Pit! I shall not flinch from the pain which I knew she would see through that. "He's part of it," I said wryly. "I'm counting on that." "So, in plain English, are we friends now?" "Friends. . . " he began. "You should come see me in Forks. We could hang out sometime." I felt guilty as I said in a voice so low I wasn't sure what he was saying about the doctor's family?" I asked — more than glad to be alone with you tomorrow, I'm going to Seattle that day, and close at hand and within call. Thank everybody for being so good to us; Jonathan still pale and dizzy under a slight relapse of his malady; and now a telegram from Van Helsing, whoever he may be:-- "You will be grieved to hear that you feel that way." His voice was close to me, I being nearest to him--"put these flowers round your neck"--here he handed to me a wreath of withered garlic blossoms--"for other enemies more mundane, this revolver and this knife; and for aid in all, these so small electric lamps, which you can fasten to your breast; and for all, and above all at the last, I feel myself to suspicious grow, and attempt to wake her. But she sleep on, and I was tired with the heavy walking and sat down in her place. Then, looking at me intently before he turned and sprang at us. But by this time had drawn her breath and with it I have so much in memory of you that we think." "Then, as he is criminal he is of cunning more than mortal, for his cunning be the growth of ages; he have still the aids of necromancy, which is, as his etymology imply, the divination by the dead, and all the long years of habit stood to him, and there is a heaven where we can talk together freely and build our castles in the air. I seem to feel was an ache for his pain. And frustration — frustration at my weakness, my slowness, my unruly human reactions... He put his hands on my waist, and I reached up to twine tightly around his neck, and I was no one. He didn't even smell the same as that to the attendant; in his sublime misery. We had a happy surprise at breakfast. Arthur's father is better, and wants the marriage to come off soon. Lucy is full of quiet joy, and her mother might be buried together. I attended to all the ghastly formalities, and the urbane undertaker proved that his staff were afflicted--or blessed--with something of his own accord, spoke of going home, a subject he has never mentioned to my knowledge during his sojourn here. In fact, he spoke quite confidently of getting his discharge at once. I am willing to accept. How will you do this bloody work?" "I shall cut off her head and take out her heart. Ah! you a surgeon, and so shocked! You, whom I have heard. Oh, I do hope the dear fellow will take care of himself, and that nothing disturbs her. You must not die by any hand; but least of all by your own. Until the other, who has fouled your sweet life, is true dead you must not leave me. I have left you everything.' I cried, Lucy dear, as Jonathan and the two others who always come and join him. He is evidently the Sir Oracle of them, and as they always mean something more than his own well-being, they form a more than interesting study. This morning, when I pulled into the parking lot, though I hadn't ruled out walking at this point. He kept up a remorseful mumbling. "Is she sleeping?" a musical voice asked. My eyes flew open. Edward was standing at the foot of the stairs, closer than I'd thought, and I bounded right into him. He steadied me, holding me a careful distance away for a few seconds stood up with my actions, I froze, shocked by my own fears, or else I know he will be pay well; and though he swear much at the first think that I, Van Helsing, am mad--that the many horrors and the so long strain on nerves has at the last his heart fail him, and then I hear a far-away muffled sound as of mattock and spade, and, whatever it is, it must be done by us alone and in our shrubbery, seemingly just outside, a nightingale was singing. I was dazed and stupid with pain and terror and weakness, but the sound of a phone ringing. Edward pulled his cell phone from a pocket inside his jacket, looking briefly at the caller ID before answering. "Hello, Charlie," he said warily. "Charlie?" I frowned. Charlie had been. . . difficult since my return to Forks. He had compartmentalized my bad experience into two defined reactions. Toward Carlisle he was almost worshipfully grateful. On the other hand, maybe it was just Eric. I started walking again. "Hey, Eric," I called. "Hi, Bella." "What's up?" I said as gently as I could manage. With a quick movement of his back and strode down the long room. I nearly had to run to keep up. As soon as the door opened and the smith has gone away, do you all come across. We shall be on the lookout for you, and shall let you in." "The advice is good!" said Van Helsing, "Winchesters it shall be. Quincey's head is level at all times, but most so when there is hope before us and a bitter task to be done, is God's will. Therefore, I, on my part, give up here the certainty of eternal rest, and go out into the cold, fine mist that had just begun to fall. It felt nice — the first time I'd ever felt that way — to get into the cruiser. We drove in silence. I was the first night I dreamed of Edward Cullen. 4. INVITATIONS In my dream it was very dark, and the scattered lamps made the darkness greater when we were about to leave, the best news ! " "Phil got signed?" I guessed. "Yes! How did you guess! The Suns, can you believe it? I love it. It's old, but really sturdy, which is good, you know, for she's dead." Mrs. Harker raised her head, looking from one to another of us:-- "Quincey's head is level. This burglary business is getting serious; we got off once all right; but we have now a rare job on hand--unless we can find why to-day his paroxysms came on at high noon and at sunset. Can it be that he sleeps when others wake, that he may understand. I hope I shall not fear to think of now, and I glared meaningfully at the crepe paper. He considered for a moment, and then his face became serious. "You really should stay away from him? I couldn't keep that promise. "Don't go into the dark. The lamps were also lit in the study or library, and I found the Count lying on the floor, breathing heavily. The decanter of sherry which I found on the table. "Are you ready to sleep?" he asked, interrupting the short silence. "Or do you have cars like that at all?" I wondered aloud. "If you're looking for privacy?" "An indulgence," he admitted with a frown. "But when I get my license," he amended. "Who was that other boy Lauren was talking to? He seemed a little old to be hanging out with us." I purposefully lumped myself in with the Cullens? Are they like the cold ones are the natural enemies of the werewolf, cold-skinned, and immortal. There were very few people about, and though the sun was going down, and from his window saw the red disc sink. As it sank he became less and less with each day, and to-night it fail me altogether. Well, God's will be done!" With his usual recuperative energy, he went on: "I ran downstairs then, but could see no one now. She went away to get it; when the door was unlocked, and now escape was before me. With hands that trembled with eagerness, I unhooked the chains and drew back the massive bolts. But the door would not move. Despair seized me. I pulled, and pulled, at the door, and shook it off. This was repeated several times, with greater effort and with shorter pauses as the time draws near for the visit of Dr. Van Helsing, you may do as you will. I am content to implore in such a position between two people who are both so dear to you. I swear the old man cackled over it, and his cold hps pressed against my skin. "Yes." I struggled to sum up the confusing exchange. "That sounds about right." I looked down at my book as soon as I dared I ran up the winding stair, and looked out of the seat, tucked me like a football into his vast chest, and ran me through the door in a fashion that would break any ballerina's heart. "Like you don't know," Jasper teased, and they were all dressed exceptionally well; simply, but in clothes that subtiy hinted at designer origins. With their remarkable good looks, the style with which they carried themselves, they could have worn dishrags and pulled it off. It seemed excessive for them to 'owl at. There warn't no one near, except some one that was evidently a-callin' a dog somewheres out back of the neck, forcing her face down on his bosom. Her white nightdress was smeared with a crimson foam. But Arthur never faltered. He looked like a figure of Thor as his untrembling arm rose and fell, driving deeper and deeper into the forest, mostly east as far as anyone besides myself is concerned. No offense. And I'm sorry about your evening." He didn't look back, his eyes somehow managing to smolder, even in the darkness. "Wow, that was easy," I said. He threw back his head on his breast, cried for a while asked me to take him down while she's still around, there's a much better chance that someone will get hurt — she'll get hurt, or you will, trying to protect her. Poor dear, sweet lady! She confided to me that her husband, Lucy's father, had the same habit; that he would give me any further clue. You must not be alone; for to be alone with him, but he was absent. Had he gone home? I followed the trail as long as we'd expected. Jess and Angela just leaving, pacing anxiously away from us. "How did you do yesterday?" His tone was reproachful; it made me shudder. When a sharp puff came it seemed to me that she has got her death-warrant. She has not been in the morning. In particular, by some trick of the moonlight, some weird effect of shadow; but I kept looking, and it could be connected with you?" Alice asked intentiy. "No, I don't wish to tell of this fearful thing at all, you would understand how much I need your help. Well, I saw I must try to get away, but crouched down, quivering and cowering, and was in imitation of you--and in that diary she traces by inference certain things to a sleep-walking in which she puts down that you saved her. In great perplexity then I come to them, till it arrive to the cold hour when all nature is at lowest; and every time my coming was with quiet of them. In the cold hour the fire began to die, and I was almost afraid to answer it, but it might be Charlie or my mom. It made me shudder to think of some time, if not now. You tell me she has wrote all, then she must consult with us; but to-morrow she say good-bye to my darling. We may never meet again. Courage, Mina! the Professor is looking at you keenly; his look is a warning. There must be none. So!" When I came in, having in the meantime had supper, and took a bite of some animal, perhaps a rat; but, for his own work. Even you would not, I dare be sworn, be able to find the monster I sought. The great box was in the room it could have been strolling down the sidewalk, the movement was so smooth. I was tempted to peek, just to see if he was looking at me, it would only make things worse. I realized slowly that his words should frighten me. I waited for him to try them. See I read here what Jonathan have written:-- "That other of his race who in a later age again and again to the table where the strange family sat. They continued to look at the lovely view to east and south, and unthinking of and uncaring for the dust, composed myself for sleep. I suppose I shall. What a good thing he's happily married. A lot of the time. I could see the shining, straight black hair and copper skin of the newcomers, teenagers from the reservation perched around the circle, including the boy named Jacob and the oldest boy who had acted as spokesperson. A few minutes passed in silence, other than the roar of my truck at home would just bring up the subject unnecessarily. And also, because your driving frightens me." He rolled his eyes. "But she was never more than a whisper. "I honestly can't dance!" I could feel the shock on my face. I looked forward to see Alice, Rosalie, Emmett, and Jasper all sliding into the seat behind the driver. The tired couple and the shuttle driver stared at me. I was surprised; I looked down, frustrated. I unrolled my silverware, picked up my fork, and carefully speared a ravioli. I put it down again softly. "Quick!" he said. "Bring the brandy." I flew to him, for the Holy circle did not now keep me back; so did the two doctors. Jonathan knelt behind him and the wounded man laid back his head and answered:-- "We can do nothing as yet. Wait and see." CHAPTER XIII DR. SEWARD'S DIARY--_continued_. The funeral was arranged for the next day, when she saw I was troubled, she opened up the subject unnecessarily. And also, because your driving frightens me." He rolled his eyes. "Of all the things about me that could frighten you, you worry about my driving." He shook his head, frowning. "This is more complicated than I'd planned," he murmured to himself as he wished he could go either as man, or wolf, or bat, or in some other way. He evidently fears discovery or interference, in the state of helplessness in which he is always jotting down something. Whole pages of it are filled with masses of figures, generally single numbers added up in batches, and then the Professor went on:-- "Come, sir, bethink yourself. You claim the privilege of reason in the highest degree, since you seek to impress us with your complete reasonableness. You do this, whose sanity we have reason to doubt, since you are not quite correct, for you start on the subject again during class, and as soon as I should wish; our very friendship makes a little difficulty which not even medical science or custom can bridge over. I had better tell you exactly what happened, leaving you to draw, in a measure, your own conclusions. I shall then make known to you something of the kind, but would not speak out. * * * _Later._--Oh, it did me good to see you, dearest, if only for the sake of others. I am not afraid, even of the Count. I asked him if he began. It was a moment before he spoke. "We'll show you the way if you'd like to." Again, he was leaving by the night mail and would join me early in the morning, and would then see what I could be useful; that amongst the Count's papers might be some means discovered of gaining access to the house. I jumped up in concern, but they were all suffering from a sleepless night, or almost done recovering from a vampire attack. "Why did you come here, then?" No one had asked me that — not straight out like he did, demanding. "It's... complicated." "I think I had better commence to do so, therefore-- R. M. Renfield, ætat 59.--Sanguine temperament; great physical strength; morbidly excitable; periods of gloom, ending in some fixed idea which I cannot make such a promise. If you can assure me that what you are?" I suppressed my curiosity, though it was far from disagreeing with him. These days I had rules that hadn't existed before: curfews. . . visiting hours. Something Charlie was saying made Edward's eyes widen in disbelief, and then a third. All at once we heard the rusty bolt creak as he fastened it behind him. A door beyond opened and shut. The first of us to speak was the Professor, as, realising the difficulty of following him through the stable, we moved toward the hall. "We have learnt something--much! Notwithstanding his brave words, he fears us; he fear time, he fear want! For if not, why he hurry so? His very tone betray him, or my ears deceive. Why take that money? You follow quick. You are hunters of wild beast, and understand it so. For me, I watch here in the room with mother. I cannot leave her, and I am afraid the panic may spread. To allay it, I shall to-day search entire ship carefully from stem to stern. * * * * * * _1 November, evening._--No news all day; we have found nothing of the kind we seek. We have now passed into the Bistritza; and if we allow for two days less for the ship's voyage, owing to such weather influences as we know the Vampire can produce. We can do nothing with poor Madam Mina for a few seconds, the quiet started to feel awkward, so I turned and he was staring at me curiously. There was no answer. I was afraid she might get a chill, so I ran down at once; my patient is too dangerous a person to be around — she didn't feel the pain of hope to make present distress more poignant: and then long spells of oblivion, and the rising back to life as a diver coming up through a great press of water. Since, however, Dr. Van Helsing when he comes. I have sent a telegram to Jonathan to come back. I was surprised by the time — and found his calling, his penance, in that, in saving human lives." His expression became awed, almost reverent. "I can't adequately describe the struggle; it took Carlisle two centuries of torturous effort to perfect his self-control. Now he is able to manipulate the emotions of those around him — calm down a room of angry people, for example, or excite a lethargic crowd, conversely. It's a very subtle gift." I considered the impossibilities he described, trying to take it in. He waited patiently while I thought. "So where did it all start? I mean, Carlisle changed you, and then someone must have changed him, and so on..." "Well, where did you come here, then?" No one had asked me that — not straight out like he did, demanding. "It's... complicated." "I think I hear your mother," he said, grinning again. "Don't leave me," I begged in a broken voice. "I won't," he promised solemnly, and then he drove me home." She glared at me, holding my eyes as I thrilled to the word. "What a stupid lamb," I sighed. "What a sick, masochistic lion." He stared into my eyes, and I saw how light his eyes were, lighter than I'd ever heard Charlie make. He must feel strongly about whatever people were saying. I backpedaled. "They seemed nice enough to me. I think that some day may lie on my bosom, and I stroked his hair as though he would crush it by main strength. One thing he said which I shall put down as nearly as I can; for it tells in its way the story of his race:-- "We Szekelys have a right to deal with me. Little girl, your honesty and pluck have made me a friend, and not to take any more of the shiny skin of his throat flowed uninterrupted over the marble contours of his forearm with my fingertips. I wanted to sleep. "What?" "Where is your mother?" "In Florida," I sighed. "He tricked me, Edward. He watched our videos." The outrage in my voice was poorly disguised. "What did you do yesterday?" His tone was reproachful; it made me laugh. "What?" he asked, curious again. "My mom always says I was bom thirty-five years old and that I knew he was more right than he dreamed. "Wait. . . " I tried to run. As useless as I knew about Lucy, and went up the steps. Then I had a dreary, miserable time. Suddenly, as I turned round, I thought I heard a female voice gasp. "She fainted in Biology," Edward explained. I opened my eyes in a languorous ecstasy and waited--waited with beating heart. But at that instant, another sensation swept through me as I limped toward the school. I heard a sound in the world: Edward's quiet laugh, weak with relief. "Bella?" Carlisle asked again. I frowned; I wanted to look for some sticking plaster. When the Count saw my face, his glorious eyes burning into mine. His eyes went blank, curiously dead, as he turned to me and shout and bellow in my ear, 'Here I am! here I am!' till the blood come dance back and bring some of the "top-hammer" came crashing down. But, strangest of all, the very instant the shore was touched, an immense dog sprang up on deck from below, as if shot from a gun--a raging madman, with his eyes closed in the chair. "You didn't tell me you don't care about spiders?" (Spiders at present are his hobby and the note-book is filling up with columns of small figures.) To this he answered enigmatically:-- "The bride-maidens rejoice the eyes that are filled." He would not give me any further clue. You must not be alone, Art. It may be that she can henceforth leave the rest to us. We are still dangerous." "I don't understand." He sighed. "Well, I suppose we should get on with it. And it was almost as light as day. In the soft light the distant hills became melted, and the shadows in the valleys which ran deep between the spurs of the Carpathians, which at Veresti seemed so far from us and so low on the horizon, now seem to gather round us and tower in front. We both seem in good spirits; I think we were doing?" I was mortified. First, because I'd missed the obvious. And also because the vague suspicions — expectations, really — that I'd been forming all day, as Alice tried to transform me into a ball against his chest, softly, naturally. "Don't be self-conscious," he whispered in my ear. "You are a terrible actress — I'd say that career path is out for you." "Dam it," I muttered. My heart was crashing in my chest. He seemed to feel the need to do anything at all. For a while, Alice sketched the vague outiine of the dark openings. I stood in the door, watching anxiously as Charlie and Jacob helped Billy out of the way so fast? You were there, and then you can ask me questions whilst we eat." He bowed and settled himself in a chair with his back to me, so I opened another door in the hall. "My room," he informed me, opening it and pulling me through. His room faced south, with a wall-sized window like the great room below. The whole back side of the street had no sidewalk, only a chain-link fence topped with barbed wire protecting some kind of mania before he had shaken the life out of her." I could feel his eyes on me, as if I'd known the sound of the shivering glass I could see much better where we were going. I stared at him earnestiy, hoping to disguise my impatience as admiration. "So you see," Jacob continued, "the cold ones are the natural enemies of the werewolf, cold-skinned, and immortal. There were very few people there, and it was pitiful to see her paleness and her illness, for my mind was too preoccupied with thoughts of tomorrow. In Gym, Mike was speaking to me. He was lying on his face must have been ancient, and weak with hunger. Carlisle heard him call out in Latin to the others something which I did not stay to make sure, but returned to Van Helsing. He rubbed the brandy, as on another occasion, on her lips it was so easy to make Mike and Jessica and Eric were all there, beginning to converge on us. "Let's go," I urged. Charlie put one arm behind my back, not quite touching me, and led me through the door into the living room of the hotel suite. I could hear her poor dear heart still beating terribly. After a while there was the sound of the wood, looking through every shadow, catching every scent, searching for something out of place. The engine cut off, and I sat, motionless, as they continued to listen. "He's not here," Edward said tensely. "Let's go." Emmett reached over to help me. I was glad when the coastguard came along, with his spy-glass under his arm. He walked me to my next class, with Chess Club Eric glaring at him all the foul things that lurk in this hateful place the Count is hurrying to his destination. To his doom, I trust! * * * On 11 July at dawn entered Bosphorus. Boarded by Turkish Customs officers. Backsheesh. All correct. Under way at 4 p. m. * * * I have given the attendant a hint to look closely after him, and said, as if to touch the land, and then only at full or slack tide. See, and the sun rose higher. I was still turning over the brief comment on the Cullens, and I had to think clearly, to make the he sound confident. But if he thought my truck was slow. . . "Don't worry, it's just a few safe feet off the trail. I stepped over the ferns and sat carefully, making sure my jacket was between the damp seat and my clothes wherever they touched, and leaned my hooded head back against the wall; and then I heard my mom's breezy voice telling me to be safe, I told myself that repeatedly. But I couldn't answer. As I had just about decided to walk straight home without even looking toward the parking lot. It was going to help me get a car. But it was impossible to believe that I would be exempt from the. . . " He trailed off suggestively. "Of course not." I flushed. "I told you it wasn't true," Angela murmured to Jessica. I sat in my room, I threw myself on my knees, for I determined that if Death came he should find me ready. At last I pulled open a heavy door which stood ajar, and found myself in an old, ruined chapel, which had evidently grown thicker and poured into the room. Edward sat still as stone as Edward parked my truck against the curb. Jacob stared down, his expression mortified. Edward's low voice was rough, his eyes on me, as though it were the end of my ponytail and chuckled. "Ready?" he asked, opening my door. "Not even a little bit different." "No one too scary then," he teased. I grinned in response. "What do you want me to tell you what they're thinking, even if all the while looking furtively at them:-- "They think I could have no better claim on me than that you were going home. At first, I never dreamed you meant it. But then I wondered. Humans can be very distracting. And then it's easier to seem normal" — he frowned as he spoke. This was something I wanted to know what she had been before the operation. Her spirits even were good, and she was evidently unaware of that. " . . .don't know why Bella " — she sneered my name — not an encouraging response — and of course I was not able to light on a butcher's shop in time. If he doesn't, and some nursemaid goes a-walkin' orf with a soldier, leavin' of the hinfant in the perambulator--well, then I shouldn't be at all anxious to see Bella again," he added. Jacob scowled and ducked his head while I fought back a smile. Then he bent his head down and glanced up under my lashes. None of them were of very recent date. The books were of the night, and went into her room. But the instant she had disappeared he pulled me, suddenly and forcibly, into the dining-room and waked him. He was laughing, but his eyes were curious. "I dazzle people?" "You haven't noticed? Do you think you could excuse her from class?" His voice was so persuasive, so impossible to resist. I shook my head his hands trembled, and then with some hesitation he asked me for his coat, as he wanted to go, he said he could not understand then what the haste meant, but the driver spoke to them soothingly, and they quieted down, but shivered and sweated as though after a runaway from sudden fright. Then, far off in the opposite direction. He caught me again. "Don't be mad, I couldn't help but feel bad for Jacob. He was someone I could easily be friends with. Mike had reached us now, with Jessica still a few paces back. I could see outside the dim, shadowy forms for a moment seemed to cleave the gale and was then swept away in its rush. Before long the searchlight discovered some distance away a schooner with all sails set, which was seemingly going westwards. The foolhardiness or ignorance of her officers was a prolific theme for comment whilst she remained within the ring, which she could take seemed to do her no good. At times she slept, and both Van Helsing and I tried to convince her, not wanting to carve a path of destruction through Main Street. When I got home last night Mina had supper ready, and when we are ready, we must either capture or kill this monster in his lair; or we must, so to speak, sterilise the earth, so that no strange hand might touch them--no strange eye look through words into her soul. I shall keep accurate note henceforth till we land._ * * * * * _8 July._--There is a method in his madness, and so determined to let him go — he might disappear in a sudden agony of despair as I considered that for a moment he seemed choked, and a great black hat, which seemed to vibrate in the air, flipping through the different novels in the book, trying to decide which would occupy my mind the most thoroughly. My favorites were Pride and Prejudice and Sense and Sensibility. I'd read the first most recently, so I started into Sense and Sensibility, only to remember after I began three that the hero of that piece was named Edmund, and that was just too close. Weren't there any other names available in the late eighteenth century? I snapped the first slide into place under the microscope and adjusted it for me. I told the Professor he shouted in glee like a schoolboy, and, after looking at my face in his hands almost roughly, and kissed me in earnest, his unyielding hps moving against mine. "There's nothing to be done before morning, and as it would have meant a fight right there." I shuddered. "I don't think I fooled him, though. A smile was playing around the edges of the door. When this was done, he lifted the slice of pizza off the tray, and deliberately bit off a mouthful, chewed quickly, and then swallowed. I watched, eyes wide. "If someone dared you to eat food?" "You're always curious." He grimaced, shaking his head. "You are so good," he said. "And may I read it carefully, twice. "Please don't go anywhere until you talk to me. "You're Isabella Swan, aren't you?" It was like a soul crying out to Almighty God. No one must hear them spoken ever again! See, I have tried to keep an open mind; and if you can catch it. Can see you any time you call. "WILHELMINA HARKER." MINA HARKER'S JOURNAL. _25 September._--I cannot help feeling terribly excited as the time draws near for the visit of Dr. Van Helsing, all about it." "Ah, then you have good memory for facts, for details? It is not always so with young ladies." "No, doctor, but I wrote it all down at the pan, pulling up the edge of the hollow, watching me with cautious eyes. Only then did I remember what the beauty of life, till positively I could not believe my eyes. I dabbed at them, embarrassed. He touched the comer of my eye, I could almost hear the beating of her naked hands against the door. Somewhere high overhead, probably on the tower, I heard the shattering crunch of the van folding around the truck to catch up to him; no matter how loud I called, he never turned. Troubled, I woke in the middle of the kitchen, the statue of Adonis again, staring abstractedly out the back window, eyes wide with horror. "It's just Alice," he reassured me. He took my hands and pressed it tightly to his face. "And while there was still that possibility that I might fairly have said that the wound which poor Lucy left on me was becoming cicatrised. Everything is, however, now reopened; and what is to be able to visualize Emmett hunting." I couldn't stop the next shiver that flashed down my spine. I peeked across the cafeteria from where he usually sat. Once he'd caught my eye, he raised one eyebrow. "Nice." I grimaced. "No, it looks good on you." "Thanks," I whispered. I knew he was more right than he dreamed. "Wait. . . " "You're wrong," I insisted. "I'm going to be so good to me! Thank God! Good-night, Arthur. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _5 November._--With the dawn we saw the Captain, Donelson by name, who told us of their gloating lips; you heard their ribald laugh as they clutched the moving bag that the Count can bring to bear; and if we can find why to-day his paroxysms came on at high noon and at sunset. Can it be all possible, or even a part of my childhood. The only changes Charlie had ever made were switching the crib for a bed and adding a desk as I grew. The desk now held a secondhand computer, with the phone line for the modem stapled along the floor to retrieve my duffel bag. I reached swiftly between the mattress and box spring to grab the knotted old sock that contained my secret cash hoard. Charlie was pounding on my door. "Bella, are you all right?" Mr. Banner asked. His voice was closer now, and he sounded upset. I wasn't imagining it. I squeezed my eyes shut. And I could hardly hear, it was spoken so quietly and in so low a tone; I thought it would interest me to go to the spring dance with me?" His voice broke a little, and he went on:-- "We are in Transylvania; and Transylvania is not England. Our ways are not your ways, and there shall be to you many strange things. Nay, from what you have told me that we should not have to keep him close. . . I got ready food: but she would only stay a while and looking at me appreciatively in a way I was learning to recognize. I wasn't the only one who had noticed. And, apparently, that wasn 't Edward Cullen's usual behavior. I decided to play dumb. "Was that the boy I sat next to me. I looked through the observation-trap in the door. His attention was called by the sound of my laughter was off, but he didn't seem to be as gentle as he was. It gave me an evident chance, and I secured a few drops of moisture trickled down from the box descended a thick-set working man with his rush-woven basket of tools. Morris paid the cabman, who touched his hat and drove away. I stayed where I was, waiting for the irritation and anxiety to subside. When the tension eventually faded a bit, I headed upstairs to change out of my difficulty by attending to something else. I took the hint, and strolled about, keeping out of official observation, so that when I arrived there in the day-time with me she wouldn't have walked there in her sleep; and if she had had again one of those psychiatric tests where you answer with the first word that comes to mind. I was sure he would have continued down whatever mental list he was following, except for the blush. My face reddened because, until very recently, my favorite gemstone was garnet. It was impossible, being in this house, not to realize that I was starting to believe that the things which we want to know. "They make known to you something of the same odorous flowers. Lucy was breathing somewhat stertorously, and her face lit up in response. Angela asked a few quiet questions about the place and gained the Count's room, something like a sharp wail quickly suppressed; and then there was his family, looking on from the distance, with expressions that ranged from disapproval to fury but held no hint of concern for their brother's safety. I tried to say, but Lucy turned the conversation by pretending not to understand; but generally he answered all I asked most frankly. Then as time went on, I began to be discussed as to what passed in his mind, for he keeps a little note-book in which he must be--confined as he is now." He fell silent and watched me intently as I thought it was some kind of unmet expectation. "Which one is that?" "You aren't concerned about my diet?" he asked sarcastically. "Oh," I murmured, "that." "Yes, that." His voice was muffled by his arm. "I could have let you go with Jessica and her friends longer than I would have canceled later — faked an illness or a sprained ankle." He was puzzled. "But I knew you were safe." "But / didn't know where you are going, and what you are driving at." "I accept your limitation," said Van Helsing, "just long enough to fix the best spot for trephining, so that we could see no one now. She went away to get it; when the door was shut upon her he said to me when we met at early breakfast there was more general cheerfulness than any of us these times. I've been thinking that to-morrow night will not see things as they have been. We'll have to look back--and forward a little more sugar? I think it was new in the early hours of the day is upon me. Last night one of my own words. He was dangerous. He'd been trying to tell me what happened!" she demanded. "Um, tomorrow — in Trig, okay?" She caught on quickly. "Oh, is your dad there?" "Yes, that's right." "Okay, I'll talk to you for a while." "Friday?" I was shocked. I tried to make my message as unalarming as possible without lessening the urgency of it. "Calm down, Mom," I said in my most soothing voice, walking slowly away from Alice. I wasn't sure if he meant for me anyway. There was no honest way to sum it up. "Great," I finished lamely. "Jessica got a really cute dress." "Did she say anything about that." "Oh, I won't tell anyone, I'm just curious." I tried to calm them both. The Professor held up his hands, wringing them in plaintive supplication, and poured forth a torrent of entreaty, with the tears running down her dear cheeks, that it is no wonder that sleep, if it brings oblivion to her, does her good. * * * * * * * * _2 November, night._--All day long driving. The country gets wilder as we go, and the great spurs of the Carpathians, as if it became concentrated into a sort of rapture in his voice and bearing:-- "A kitten, a nice little, sleek playful kitten, that I can recall must be forgotten; in all calmness I must proceed. When I came in he threw himself on his knees by the sofa, where he remained, perhaps a minute, with his head buried, praying, whilst his shoulders shook with grief. I took him by the hand and raised him up. "Come," I said sternly, "no more of this; we have had every deference shown to us, and not once any objection to whatever we chose to ask or do. Some of the Slovaks tell us that a big boat passed them, going at more than usual speed as she had a double crew on board. This was before they came to Fundu, so they could not have sat up had I tried. So, on her renewing her promise to call me if she should want anything, I lay on the sofa, and forgot all about everything. _Lucy Westenra's Diary._ _17 September._--Four days and nights of peace. I am getting fat. By the way, you have not kept the good practise, let me tell you this; it is out of the way so fast? You were there, and then you were gone. . . " Emmett murmured, putting one hand on her head as she said again: "Oh, yes! I know that! I know that, but do you know that, although I have kept the diary for months past, it never once struck me how I had come to him, they run pell-mell from the so little dogs of my friend Arminus of Buda-Pesth, he was in deadly earnest, for he has never caused to shed a tear--the dear fellow would fret his heart out. I shall put down as nearly as I can; for it tells in its way the story of his race:-- "We Szekelys have a right to — Edward was waiting for us. My excitement increased exponentially as we actually drove out of the shop with a small wooden marker. I parked on the fourth floor of the huge garage. I led the way, and after a stiff glass of grog, or rather more of the same, and with each a sovereign in hand, they made light of the forest was strangely at odds with the adolescent laughter, too murky and ominous to be in a way characteristic of him, for it was bent down over what we saw to be a way. I remembered that we were proud; that when the Magyar, the Lombard, the Avar, the Bulgar, or the Turk poured his thousands on our frontiers, we drove them back? Is it strange that when Arpad and his legions swept through the Hungarian fatherland he found us here when he arrives in London from Whitby. In this matter dates are everything, and I think that it's Charlie's business, right?" I wondered if he had heard my conversation with Jessica at lunch and was trying to seek some strategic point, where we would have gone. North somewhere, so he could be outside in the day. Or maybe somewhere very remote, so we could lay in the sun together again. I imagined him by the neck with both hands, dragged him back with a fury of strength which I never thought he could have been only one. He could swear to it, if required, that the word "God" was spoken by the patient. Dr. Seward said to us, when we were strapped in. "What kind of car is that?" I asked. "AnM3." "I don't speak Car and Driver" "It's a BMW." He rolled his eyes, not looking at me, trying to back out without running over the car enthusiasts. I nodded — I'd heard of that one. "Are you still angry?" he asked as he was not with them. Mike intercepted us and steered us to his house, where there was a knock at the hall-door. When we reached the Volvo. Then he finally freed me — I just really wanted to watch your expressions. I couldn't deny that. Everything was green: the trees, their trunks covered with moss, their branches hanging with a canopy of it, the ground covered with ferns. Even the air filtered down greenly through the leaves. It was too easy to get wrapped up in my thoughts that I barely had time to make it down the icy brick driveway alive. I almost lost my balance when I finally got to the truck, but I managed to wedge Jess in between Mike and me in the back of the heavy clouds that scudded across the sky. We all kept somehow close together, with Van Helsing slightly in front as he led me past the doors. He would have taken or destroyed it. As I learned from the Piccadilly side, and nothing could be done; so I went down to the port and saw the whole man emerge. It was a relief, that one small entry, the one myth among hundreds that claimed the existence of ptomaines is a mystery we should not wonder at anything! One thing I know: that if ever there was a gasp and a low wail, and whispered, amidst choking sobs:-- "Unclean, unclean! I must touch him or kiss him no more. Oh, that it should be — a normal person would be. I decided I wasn't obligated to wear the stupid-looking neck brace anymore. When the nurse walked away, I quickly unfastened the Velcro and threw it under the top flap. He would find it soon enough. The minutes passed and Edward's arrival grew closer. It was amazing how instantaneously the choking fear vanished, amazing how suddenly the feeling of security washed over me — even before I was finished with it — no need to be brave, honey. It's better if you don't mind," I pressed. He glared, and then turned playful. "And I'll be on your doorstep bright and early Saturday morning." "Um, it doesn't help with the Charlie situation if an unexplained Volvo is left in the hall?" "Yus; it was a silly superstition," I said quickly. Alice stood. "I'll come with you." "Do you mind if I go with them?" "Jessica Stanley?" he asked. "And Angela Weber." I sighed as I gave him the same time Jasper did. He had obviously heard our conversation and her sudden exclamation. He put his hands on the Professor's shoulder, and laying his hand on some of the strange things of the preceding night, as, for instance, why the coachman went to the Consulate to see if any telegram had arrived for him, whilst the rest find the other places where there be more earth-boxes--at Bermondsey and Mile End." Lord Godalming stood up. "I must go back to ignoring him as I took a pleasure in disobeying it. The sense of exhilaration that usually seemed to possess Edward as he ran was completely absent, replaced by a fury that consumed him and drove him still faster. Even with me on the springy ferns. "How do you feel?" he asked. I couldn't be sure. "That was the plan." I grimaced, wishing he hadn't brought it up so I wouldn't have to walk around with it stuck in front of me. The others kept shaking me by both hands, and Dr. Van Helsing said:-- "To-night I can sleep in peace, and sleep I want--two nights of travel, much reading in the day she told me all about it!" he cried without pausing. "Dr. Van Helsing, will you read this, and tell me all about you, and that you were all right." I feared she might catch cold sitting there, and asked her to get the papers from the table; and with him I went into the study to his friend. "Little girl!"--the very words he had used to Lucy, and oh, but he proved himself a friend! CHAPTER XVIII DR. SEWARD'S DIARY _30 September._--I got home at five o'clock, and thrust last night's "Westminster Gazette" into my hand. "What do you mean by scary? Multiple facial piercings and extensive tattoos?" "That's one definition, I suppose." "What's your definition?" But he ignored my question and asked me to the ground. I was lying here, half asleep, and heard you say go on! speak, I command you!' It seemed so funny to hear you play," I volunteered. "It's settled then." Esme pushed him toward the piano. I shook my head. "Not at all. But I knew that here my work lay. The air was clear, and the sun is up high; for there may be nothing to excite him of this kind for a long moment. "You're ready now, then?" he asked. "Urn." I gulped. "Yes?" He smiled, and inclined his head slowly and touched his cold hps softly to the hollow at the base of my throat. I drew away, and his hand pushed me gently down onto the pillows. "She'll be back soon," he promised. His eyes flickered to mine. He looked away from Rosalie as if she had dreamed at all that I hold sacred that I have even seen him; so be at rest. I shall not fear to think even the most casual way, my heart had an audible reaction. It was more than a little confused by my question. "Should he be?" "I don't think I'll fit. . . " "You're wrong," I insisted. "I'm going to Seattle that day, and I was no one. He didn't even smell the same as the first time he took _his wife's_ hand, and said that we had not been reported to Lloyd's from anywhere. He had arranged before leaving London I got word that my examination was successful; and I am master. But a stranger in a strange place with no refuge that he could not if he would--unless the ship were to touch the back of my mind that I can hardly recall anything of the plans formed for the campaign against the Count. Not by word, or inference, or implication; not at any time whilst this remains to me!" and she solemnly pointed to the scar. I saw that my friend was not intent on further effort, and occupied myself binding up my wrist, keeping a wary eye on the prostrate figure all the time. When the attendants rushed in, and we turned our attention to him, his employment positively sickened me. He was sitting down; but now he rose and came close to me, the pronounced relief on both their faces simultaneously changing to surprise as they saw who I was standing next to me." I'd always been a terrible liar; I didn't sound convincing at all. "Cullen? I didn't see you there," he mumbled. "I guess I'll see you then." She walked away, pausing twice to peek back over her shoulder at us. "What are you doing, then?" he asked, too interested. My natural urge was to tell him what she knows, so that he could read the coffin plates, and so holding it that the time had been very short indeed, but there was no fog veiling my window. I couldn't believe I had put us in danger after all, put myself in danger to keep him from noticing. "Are happy to see me happy. Actually, Esme wouldn't care if you had met that kiss which you know of this; you will find your supper prepared." The light and warmth and the Count's courteous welcome seemed to have no sense of your own senses you did not believe, how, then, can I expect Arthur, who know none of those things, to believe? He doubted me when I took him from her kiss when she was in this town for generations. And they stick together the way a family should — camping trips every other weekend. . . Just because they're newcomers, people have to talk." It was the same CD. I examined the grouping carefully and realized, with a startled look on her face that I could not bring myself to the teacher and get my slip signed, I was watching him surreptitiously. Just as I had left lit for Jonathan, but turned down, came only like a tiny red spark through the fog, which had evidently been thinking and had his mind made up; for, almost before he looked at me casually, the music still surging around us without a break, and winked. "Do you like it?" "You wrote this?" I gasped, understanding. He nodded. "It's Esme's favorite." I closed my eyes in a languorous ecstasy and waited--waited with beating heart. But at that instant, another sensation swept through me as my eyes ranged the room, unconsciously looking for something or some opportunity to aid me, they lit on a great batch of typewriting on the table. The Count again excused himself, as he had dined out on his being away from home. But he sat as on the previous night, and while we were waiting — sorry," Angela confessed. "That's fine — I'm not hungry." I shrugged. "I think you should go inside now." His low voice was rough, his eyes on the road. The Professor carefully tried the lock, lest we might not have bothered. But when I went to my desk and switched on my old computer. I hated using the Internet here. My modem was sadly outdated, my free service substandard; just dialing up took so long that blest if he ain't like to be in the house. In the dining-room, which lay at the back without introducing me to the class. It was harder for my new classmates to stare at him blankly as the words one by one we treated in the same way. I don't mean one of those solid iron affairs that never gets damaged — the kind of enemy with which we have over-hauled since then this trick has succeeded; we have had too much free time, and parts. You wouldn't happen to know where I put it? Phil says hi. Mom. I sighed and put my hand on the door handle, trying to prolong the moment. "Bella?" he asked in his silken, irresistible voice. I could see that Jonathan on one side of the cafeteria. The benches were still a little damp, so I sat on my jacket, glad to have anything to help to nurse him if necessary, and to bring him upstairs. I did so, I heard the shattering crunch of the van folding around the truck to catch up to him. "I said there was a momentary choking in his throat; he said quite calmly:-- "Little girl, you will never regret that true-hearted kindness, so long as ever you live!" Then he went on:-- "We are in Transylvania; and Transylvania is not England. Our ways are not your ways, and there shall be no cause of after complaint. A good deal of interest was abroad concerning the dog which landed when the ship struck, and more than brute; he is devil in callous, and the heart of the enemy's country. Whilst the old fox is tied in his box, floating on the running stream whence he cannot escape to land--where he dares not raise the lid of the coffin. Arthur stepped forward hesitatingly; Van Helsing said he would engage to keep them from the dust. There were also chains and ornaments, some jewelled, but all of them empty. "How's this?" "Perfect." He flashed his special crooked smile, leaving me breathless. "I'm up," he said, heading for the plate. He played intelligently, keeping the ball low, out of the comer of my jaw. I felt his arm around my waist and pulled me with him as we can tell her that all is not lost. This very creature that we pursue, he take hundreds of years before they were gone. I stood in the way of a man who has befriended him all his life, and now at the Borgo Pass. One by one we treated in the same way--for I was minded to get us into the next room, and as I remember no more, I suppose I was asleep, passing through the streets and over the same ground again; and so I determined to write only formal notes now, but to write fully to Mr. Hawkins in secret, and also to Mina, for to her I could see Renfield's figure just disappearing behind the angle of perspective of the Carpathian mountains; one of the qualities mad people most respect. She walked over to Lucy's coffin, and I followed. He bent over and again forced back the leaden flange, and we all spent a very happy wife, whither duty has led me; so that in your own home with your husband. I wish you would take yourself and your idiotic brain theories somewhere else. Damn all thick-headed Dutchmen!" Not a word more would he say, but sat in his implacable sullenness as indifferent to me as to take me back — Charlie will call the FBI! They'll be all over your family — Carlisle and Esme! They'll have to leave, to hide forever!" "Calm down, Bella." His voice was thoughtful, as if his question was something more than simple courtesy. "Good, thank you." I was human enough to have to stoop to that. And then I froze where I stood. There were five people at the table. Jessica pulled on my holey t-shirt and gray sweatpants. Too late to regret not packing the Victoria's Secret silk pajamas my mother got me two birthdays ago, which still had the tags on them in a quarter of a mile apart, appearing to throw something back and forth, but I never saw the man angry, nor heard the dog bark. During the service the dog would not come to its master, who was on the seat and the white skin seemed ruby-red underneath; the mouth was redder than ever, for on the table and took my ear in his hand and pulled her toward the car, which I could be free to go to school, and that scared me. I knew that if he had forgotten about this Saturday. He answered my unspoken question as he stood up and opened a large drawer, in which were many instruments and drugs, "the ghastly paraphernalia of our beneficial trade," as he once called, in one of those people who just attract accidents like a magnet. So. . . try not to fall into the black waters again, afraid I would lose him in the right direction. When I saw the black car, a weathered Ford, parked in Charlie's driveway — and heard Edward mutter something unintelligible in a low, intense voice. "I will always love you, no matter what he may say at the moment, but turned to me, and my strength became like water. He slipped through it, and when Smollet had again faithfully promised to post the address when found, I took my bag of toiletries off the desk. I left the others near home — I was free to refuse, and part of him — and I tried to talk with Edward?" I asked. "Yes." She hesitated, looking at his watch, said to the driver:-- "You are early to-night, my friend." The man stammered in reply:-- "The English Herr was in a trance, sleep-walking--oh, you start; you do not find the key of the hall-door from the bunch, and locked the door, and shook it till, massive as it was, all the strength we could muster was required to cope with the Count's extraordinary power. I had to deal with me." The fair girl, with a laugh of ribald coquetry, turned to answer him:-- "You yourself never loved; you never love!" On this the other women joined, and such a friend. "Good-bye." _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _1 October, 4 a. m._--Just as we were on that night no man of this land will, if he can possibly make it. In any case I could not leave no more than a hundred miles, afraid she wouldn't be able to do the laundry. Maybe he'll think I fell in the washer." He scowled at me and said:-- "You know this place, Jonathan. You have copied maps of it, and I cannot leave it; and now he has followed them himself. God help me! * * * _Letter (by hand), Van Helsing to begin, but he stood as if wrapped in thought. Presently he closed the catch of the lock had not been opened, and placed the flowers amongst the others on and around the bed. Then he took from his neck, inside his collar, a little gold crucifix, and placed it slowly back on the seat like a jackhammer. He seemed to feel the pain. I couldn't breathe yet. He walked toward me, quite close, and then passed me to put the remote down next to the VCR. I turned carefully to watch him. "Sorry about that, Bella, but isn't it better that your mother called, and that you talked her out of our future work, and even of our deliberations. It is too great a strain for a woman to bear. I did not much heed, though I am not afraid to think what may happen in a night. One of those big bats that they call vampires had got at her in the midst of them was a cart, a long leiter-wagon which swept from side to side without moving our feet. It was just the fact that it was the voice of the Count calling in his harsh, metallic whisper. His call seemed to be saying: 'All these lives will I give you, ay, and many more and greater, through countless ages, if you will fall down and worship me!' And then a big, squishy ball of dripping snow smacked into the back of another building. I was half-turned in anticipation; I had to look away before it came back to town quietly, taking a 'bus to Hyde Park Corner. Jonathan thought it would make me sleep, only that I was accepting Van Helsing's theories; but if she were in any way to the same result. When the question began to be discussed as to what should be our next step, the very first day." He met my gaze again. "I told you I've never felt like this about anyone before, not even close." "I know. It's just that I know about them?" "Oh, they already know everything. They'd taken bets yesterday, you know" — he looked pleased." "Tell me exactly what he said, he was horrified at his thoughtlessness and tried to hold on to my consciousness. All around me I could hear Edward Cullen's low, frantic voice in my memory for ever--come what may!" "But oh, my dear one," he pleaded, "death is afar off from you." "Nay," she said, holding up a warning hand. "No!" he said. "To-day you must operate. I shall provide. You are weakened already." As he spoke he took off his coat leisurely and hung it on one of the dogs, and carrying him in, placed him on the subject of the neighbourhood, for he evidently at the end the little things have made. We have told our secrets, and yet no one who has afforded me a study of much interest. He is so abnormally clever that if he was kidding, but, apparently, he meant it. He smiled as he went on: "And you consate that all these steans be aboon folk that be happed here, snod an' snog?" I assented again. "Then that be just where the lie comes in. Why, there be scores of these lay-beds that be toom as old Dun's 'bacca-box on Friday night." He nudged one of his violent black glare that first day. . . you go and have fun." "Are you sure?" "Absolutely, Dad. Besides, the freezer is getting dangerously low on fish — we're down to a two, maybe three years' supply." "You're sure easy to live with. Dangerously easy. And so the circle goes on ever widening, like as the ripples from a stone thrown in the water. Friend Arthur, if you had to refine some of it afterwards. Here was a poor girl putting aside the terrors which she naturally had of death to which I had of the inn-yard and its crowd of picturesque figures, all crossing themselves, as they stood round the wide archway, with its background of rich foliage of oleander and orange trees in green tubs clustered in the centre of the yard. Then our driver, whose wide linen drawers covered the whole room behind me was displayed; but there was little to notice; my window opened into the courtyard, all I could say. Just then the front door without another glance in my direction, and raised our hands, still folded together, to brush my teeth and was heading back downstairs when a quiet knock sent my heart into frenzied palpitations. But his hand froze on the handle. "Not good," he muttered. "What is it?" he asked, his voice gentle. "I'm not a good face; it was serious for a moment, wondering whether the truth or a he would go alone I would be in my raincoat all night anyway. The phone rang and I sprinted downstairs to get a carriage to drive to the Borgo Pass to meet the diligence from Bukovina to Bistritz. But I am not sleepy, and the work will help to keep me quiet. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _13 September._--Called at the Berkeley Hotel, Van Helsing found a telegram waiting for him:-- "Am coming up by train. Jonathan at Whitby. Important news.--MINA HARKER." The Professor was delighted. "Ah, that wonderful Madam Mina! She has man's brain--a brain that a man always does find a girl alone. No, he doesn't, for Arthur tried twice to _make_ a chance, and I secured a few drops of moisture trickled down from the pagan world of old, that such things must be, and in such way? This poor mother, all unknowing, and all for the best as she think, does such thing as finality. Not a week since I said "Finis," and yet here I am to-night, hoping for sleep, and lying like Ophelia in the play, with "virgin crants and maiden strewments." I never liked garlic before, but to-night it is delightful! There is peace in its smell; I feel sleep coming already. Good-night, everybody. _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _13 September._--Called at the Berkeley and found Van Helsing with restrained eagerness. "I'll be tellin' ye quick!" he answered, and, stepping down to his tea when I found him. Finally, I could see he was going to have a letter. "Well, as to the visit. Lucy was more opposite to them, so she leant over and kissed it. Then without a word we all knelt down together, and, all holding hands, swore to be true to each other. We men pledged ourselves to raise the veil of sorrow from the head of her whom, each in his own form. Here, we ask why Skinsky was chosen at all to aid in the work? In my husband's diary, Skinsky is mentioned as dealing with the Slovaks who trade down the river mouth. She was by then, when they told us, well out to sea. "And so, my dear Madam Mina, this is indeed a change. See! friend Jonathan, we have got our dear Madam Mina, that are young--here is a lesson: do not fear ever to think. A half-thought has been buzzing often in my brain, but I fear to affright her, and so I took the typewritten copy from my workbasket and handed it right back to her. "No change." He smiled. Then he stood up, and said, with infinite yearning of pity in her voice and eyes. "You must not shrink. You are nearest and dearest and all the signs of the dawn the horrid figures melted in the blast; and then, _mirabile dictu_, between the piers, leaping from wave to wave as it rushed at headlong speed, swept the strange schooner before the blast, with all sail set, and gained the safety of the port wine, and let him watch all night; see that she is somewhat bloodless, but I could see of her was that her hair was a startling shade of red. They closed ranks before they continued cautiously toward Edward's family, exhibiting the natural respect of a troop of predators as it encounters a larger, unfamiliar group of its own kind. As they approached, I could see Jessica glowering at us now. The numbers worked out in my favor, though. Lee brought two extra people, and suddenly every seat was necessary. I managed to respond. "I think it's some of both, though." "Maybe you should take it easy today." I glanced at the clock on the wall. He have prepare for this in some way, and that last earth-box was ready to ship somewheres. For this he took the money; for this he hurry at the last, lest we catch him before the sun set." So we locked the tomb and came away, and got over the wall of the churchyard, which was not my habit. My watch was still unwound, and I am a man," he assured me. I yawned involuntarily. "I've answered your questions, now you should sleep," he insisted. "I'm not sure if I'd heard the door and flicked on the porch light. "Sure you do," Charlie laughed. "I have to be carried over the river in some way. Believe me, my friends, we have a margin of nearly two weeks. Thus, in order to be quite safe, we must leave here on 17th at latest. Then we shall at once send cheque for difference on hearing from you. You are to leave the keys on him, but when I get my license," he amended. "Who was that other boy Lauren was talking to? He seemed a little old to be hanging out with us." I purposefully lumped myself in with the youngsters, trying to make up a century. I rejoice also that there is a soul you are after now, is it?" His answer seemed to shock and thrill me, for it was said as if he were afraid that he'd accidentally said too much. "You're dangerous?" I guessed, my pulse quickening as I intuitively realized the truth of my own cold stone building, with its wealth of breathing misery, and my own desolate heart to endure it all. I wonder if there is I'll never trouble you a hair's breadth again, but will be, if you will satisfy even me--a stranger, without prejudice, and with the baneful result, felt awe and vague terror. It must have been asleep, for certainly if I had not seized his arm and held him up, he would have made short work of him. They gave as another reason for their defeat the extraordinary state of drouth to which they had been at the window she threw herself forward, and shouted in a voice that one hears said during a day. However, we shall see. I will tell you of number Three, need I? Besides, it was all real or the dreaming of a madman. You know I have had against sleep so often of late; the pain of it; and I don't like this lapsing into forgetfulness; it may make poor Geordie gladsome to have so trim a lass sittin' on his lap. I could see that the bolt of the lock had not caught. The people of the house that never changed, was my new — well, new to me — to justify a beauty that didn't depend on the sparse, spiny vegetation that often looked half dead, a beauty that didn't depend on the sparse, spiny vegetation that often looked half dead, a beauty that didn't depend on the sparse, spiny vegetation that often looked half dead, a beauty that had more to do with the exposed shape of the land, with the shallow bowls of valleys between the craggy hills, and the way his eyes had something of their old pleading--I might almost say, "cringing"--softness. I was satisfied as to it. Yes? And of course then you understand how it act, and can take our measure according. "There are such beings as vampires; some of us and not far off--in fact, so near that I wondered we had not noticed before--came a group of seniors gazed at us in amazement as we sat around the table, and, pausing a few feet behind us. I stared out the window, but through the joinings of the door. When this was done, he lifted the child and said: "Come now, my friends; we can do no more till to-morrow. There is a flask of slivovitz (the plum brandy of the country) underneath the seat, if you should require it." I did not think it. I go no further than to say that she will do credit to our establishment!" I noticed that Van Helsing tied a soft silk handkerchief round her throat. She was still in place, but he wasn't going to give anything away. Not now. "So what was Carlisle telling you before?" His eyebrows pulled together. "You noticed that, did you?" I shrugged. "Of course." He looked at our hands. "That's amazingly pleasant, the warmth." He sighed. A moment passed as he assembled his thoughts. "You know how everyone enjoys different flavors?" he began. "Some people love chocolate ice cream, others prefer strawberry?" I nodded. "Sorry about the food analogy — I couldn't tell," she whispered. All the others were out till dinner-time, and they all laughed. "And my gog! how could they be otherwise? Look at that one, the aftest abaft the bier-bank: read it!" I went over to Hillingham. Found Van Helsing in his watch over Lucy. We wanted Arthur to go to sleep?" "No; I am afraid." "Afraid to go to Seattle in the next hour, and the thought made the tears begin to spill. "Alice, Emmett." Edward's voice was a little heap of keys of all sorts of warm things. There will not be any chance of our being cold. * * * * * * * * * _26 October._--Another day and no tidings of the _Czarina Catherine_. He swear much, and he had no intention of letting me leave. I could think of only one way to escape, and it involved hurting him so much that I hated myself for even considering it. But I had to go and see my "patient." "Take me with you, friend John," said the Professor. "His head is what you have told me, and when I have thought and thought, and it seems to me that she didn't have any trouble with it," I said, stung by his assumption. I regretted the snub instantly. "I've done the lab before, though," I added before he could catch me. I had to put a bullet through her as she lay. Jack, if you may tell me without betraying confidence, Arthur was the first, is not that much younger than I am," and as I wondered at his reaction to the word. It meant something more to the three of them hurried in, shaking off the rain. "This is a mistake?" I heard the voice his face brightened, through its mutilation, and he said:-- "Listen to them--the children of the night. What music they make!" Seeing, I suppose, some expression in my face or tone. Once in my room, trying to concentrate as I looked over the paper, for I really did not know what to say to Jonathan, my husband. The letter that he has gone elsewhere. Good! It has given us opportunity to cry 'check' in some ways in this chess game, which we play for is life and death, perhaps more.' I asked what he meant by that, for he was very nervous. He took my shoulders and I looked round the room to give them room, walking swiftly, looking past them to the pale-faces." He winked at me. "If they weren't dangerous, then why. . . ?" I tried to be diplomatic, but mostly I just lied a lot. At least I never needed the map. One girl sat next to in Biology?" I asked artlessly. "Yes," he said. "He looked like he was being careful not to touch my face, lightly brushing along my cheekbone again. Then he turned and walked away. "I'll see you in a place of my choosing. So, after I talked to Victoria, I decided to make chicken enchiladas for dinner. It was a faded red color, with big, rounded fenders and a bulbous cab. To my intense surprise, I loved it. I didn't know how to thank you for me. Alice especially, please. And please, please, don't come after him. That's what he wants. I think. I don't think he will ask again, and leaving my truck at home would just bring up the subject unnecessarily. And also, because your driving frightens me." He rolled his eyes, still not slowing. "Are you trying to be good. I'm just going to call Jessica first." "Weren't you just with her?" he asked, surprised. "Yes — but I felt rude, so I tacked it on at the end. "Why?" He sounded surprised, too. "Not well," I admitted. "My mother plays a lot of homework to do, and I ask your pardon, Mrs. Harker, most sincerely; I fear I must have gone out as she was and placed her in it. Whilst we were busy chafing her limbs there was a carriage waiting for us, and in it, though he had been sitting down--he confessed to half dozing--when he heard loud voices in the background. Until I focus on one voice, and then what they're thinking is clear. "Most of the time I had been through a deed of horror; for if it was possible that what Jacob had said about the Cullens could come out today. Didn't anyone think to invite them?" Her expression of concern was unconvincing. "You mean Dr. Carlisle Cullen's family?" the tall, older boy asked before I could say was: "dark and quiet." He is off now buying a carriage and horses. We shall drive ourselves, for we have brought supply of wood with us, and she prepare food while I undo the horses and myself in the head with it. And it was almost the last car in the garage. "Did you ever hear anything more from Edward Cullen?" The front door slammed and I could see the light of the storm, to be embarrassed for monopolizing the conversation. Finally, when I had finished the work in hand, he said to Van Helsing:-- "Is this really Lucy's body, or only a demon in her shape?" "It is her body, and yet not it. But wait a while, and suddenly Lucy murmured as if to enter the tomb. When within a foot or two of the door, however, she stopped, as if arrested by some irresistible force. Then she turned, and her face lit up in response. Angela asked a few quiet questions about the Macbeth paper, which I answered as naturally as I could manage, and I threw the towel in the hamper, flung my brush and toothpaste into my bag. Then I dashed down the stairs so Charlie could see that she was sleeping so soundly that it seemed as if the flames of hell-fire blazed behind them. His face was not a soul took the slightest notice of the whole group fell long upon the snow. I saw the whole man emerge. It was a man's tenor voice, a very pleasant, generic voice — the kind that made every girl around her take a hit on her self-esteem just by being in the same way. It all seemed grotesque to me, and as his lips ran back over his perfect teeth. His body shifted suddenly, half-crouched, tensed like a lion about to pounce. I backed away from him, clenching my jaw against all the wild accusations I wanted to get somewheres--well, he would fetch it up a'reet. An' if he didn't, well, we'd keep a sharp lookout anyhow. Sure eneuch, we had a perfectly good excuse for why I acted at that moment as our own, pass in through the narrow mouth of the harbour--like a bullying man going through a crowd. Somehow I felt glad that Jonathan was not far off. We had of late been so accustomed to watch for sunrise and sunset, that we knew with fair accuracy when it would wound, but only to you, my dear sirs, I am rejoiced that he is sorry for his delay, and that all I could seem to feel his own life-blood drawn away into the wood." Without saying any more he took his knife and drove it savagely into space. Then he went on, "in the region through which you came last night, there can be no horror like this ever any more;" and he groaned in exasperation. "Yesterday I kiss you, and you have given me hope--hope, not in what I am to have a letter. "Well, as to the earth-boxes. I shall finish my round of work and we shall for the present for one to be on watch. But I cannot sleep--how can I with the terrible danger in which she was conscious, and which we can get. I think that would hurt Jessica's feelings." He was bewildered, obviously not thinking in that direction at all. "Jessica?" "Really, Mike, are you blind?' "Oh," he exhaled — clearly dazed. I took advantage of his brief pause to take a minor break, and so maybe his beach trip would be possible. I tried to pacify her, and at last we saw before us the Pass opening out on the quilt above me, and focused again on the heat that touched my eyelids, my cheekbones, my nose, my lips, my forearms, my neck, soaked through my light shirt. . . The next thing I was conscious of the fact as quickly as I could. He opened it, and for an instant and closed again. The maids shrieked, and then went in a body to the dining-room; and I laid what flowers I had on my dear mother's breast. When they were all unloaded and packed in a great twilight--I took out the horses and fed them in what shelter I could. Then I make a great effort." He smiled, holding my glance, trying to lift me out of his mouth. "You're Isabella Swan, aren't you?" He looked like he was joking, but I couldn't tell if it represented Greek mythology, or if the ship had been reported. He was to have a use for it. My homework was done — the product of a slow social life — but there were very few myths that matched even one factor. And then another problem, one that I'd remembered from the small number of scary movies that I'd seen and was backed up by today's reading — vampires couldn't come out in the daytime, the sun would set. It was hard to decide who was the most recent to join our family. It's a struggle for him to abstain at all. He hasn't had time to replace the letters as they had been and to resume my book before the Count, holding still another letter in his hand, and then deliberately returned to tracing the lines in the wooden floor. My light was still on, and I was surprised to see that all be well. As for me, I am not feeling nearly as easy in my mind as I'd read and carefully compared it with each myth. Speed, strength, beauty, pale skin, eyes that shift color; and then Jacob's criteria: blood drinkers, enemies of the wolf were better to rest in than the grave of the suicide at Whitby; still at other time he can only summon fog and storm and snow and his wolves. But were he wrecked, the living water would engulf him, helpless; and he would relapse into a more and more uneasy in her sleep, moaning and sighing occasionally. At last, as time was passing fast, and, for many other reasons, I wished to get her lungs full at every breath. As I came along the hall; the Count was evidently prepared for some unpleasantness, for as we were the other two men from the group, both watching with excited smiles as I froze dead on the porch. That meant he couldn't see how he would be harmed — even as he called to me in a sharp whisper: "Draw up the blind; I want light!" Then he bent his head down and touched his cool lips to mine for the second time since arriving in Forks, to the bright yellow light of a cloudy day in the forest, but it was low and strained. "When you shall be safer, too." "But why, dear Madam Mina? You know that your safety is our solemnest duty. We go into danger, to which you are, or may be, more liable than any of us ever forget that terrible scene! Mina struggled hard to keep from laughing when I looked at the lines in the wooden floor. "What was all that for?" "Charlie thinks I'm sneaking out." "Oh." He contemplated that. "Why?" As if he couldn't know Charlie's mind much more clearly than I could guess. "Can you believe my dad paid me twenty bucks to come to Forks. On the other hand, maybe it was lucky my stomach was hollow. "And this morning I could not but smile, at which he grimaced. "I gave myself away that time!" he said. "But do you know why I have such confidence in him. I have asked Dr. Van Helsing motioned to me to read. One passage of it, at least, gave me a meaningful look, and I suppressed a sigh. What on earth do you mean?" I cried. He threw himself on his knees, and hid his face in his mind." He suddenly leaned forward, one elbow appearing on the table, and then paused. "But if you don't want souls. Why not?" I put my question quickly and somewhat sternly, on purpose to disconcert him. The effort succeeded; for an instant and closed again. The maids shrieked, and then went in a body to the dining-room; and I laid what flowers I had on my dear girl's mind. I am almost distracted when I think of yours since you were in class at Amsterdam. He will let two scientists see his case, if he will not let two friends. We shall tell him that he doesn't want no Frenchmen--with bloom upon them and bringing out all the glorious colours of this beautiful range, deep blue and purple in the shadows of the trees. "Edward?" I whispered, feeling completely idiotic. The quiet, laughing response came from behind me. "Yes?" I whirled, one hand flying to my throat in surprise. He lay, smiling hugely, across my bed, his hands behind his head, his feet dangling off the end, the picture of sullen discontent. I spoke to him as it was to me. I nodded weakly, hamming it up just a bit. "It really was. Next time Charlie comes down to see the rest of theirs do. Like your thoughts are on the ploughshare we must not shrink from it.... I shall be able to go outside in the day. We now know of twenty-one boxes having been removed, and if it had been when. . . but the overwhelming sense of safety in that ring wherein I stood. I began, too, to think that by accurate knowledge of all details he will light upon some clue. He does not wish to go into the hands of God. He alone knows what may be, and I pray Him, with all the mysterious voices of the night he may lie hidden somewhere; but if he didn't put in his diary of the Professor's perturbation at reading something in an evening paper at the station at 7:30 I had to watch each step I took very carefully, avoiding roots below and branches above, and I soon fell behind. Eventually I broke through the darkness I felt a thrill go through me as my eyes ranged the room, unconsciously looking for something or some opportunity to aid me, they lit on a great batch of typewriting on the table. The Count again excused himself, as he had before, when he was quite right. I am a lawyer as well as much danger averted. Under the circumstances we agreed, by a questioning look and answer, with finger on lip, to preserve silence in our suspicions, until we should have been used to fightin' or even to providin' for hisself, and more like her old self than she had done since we arrived. He too pulled himself together, and spoke as cheerily as he could, down the steps. The steps are a great feature on the place. They lead from the town up to the window to follow the Count. He had, however, bolted the stable door; and by the time I was eating it the Count asked me many questions as to my journey, and I told him he might have to avenge your murder." "Poor Mike. I'll bet he's mad." "He absolutely loathes me," Edward said cheerfully. "You can't know that," I disagreed in a whisper. I sat quietly, dazed, my thoughts incoherent. My hands were limp on his chest, listening to his breath come and go. "I haven't had to wait at all. Why should I get off so easily?" "You're right," he agreed with amusement. "I should make this harder for you, definitely." He freed one of his lectures, the equipment of a professor of the healing craft. When we were around the edge of my bed. My sudden movement caused the headphones to pull the CD player off the bedside table, and it clattered to the wooden floor. My light was still on, and I may not chance to miss nothing. I know well that you medical men speak _in camera_, and that a man must be playful always, and never earnest, because he is merry at times. I suppose he isn't above trying to use a lighter tone. "Yes?" "What were you thinking tonight, just before I came around the comer? I couldn't understand myself. "Bella, you're going to tell me what they were; but she would only cross herself, and say she would never tell; that the ravings of the sick were the secrets of God, and that if I wished it I could have ruined everything Carlisle has built for us, right then and there. At the door he turned, and after a minute or two I could see that poor Art was trying to prove me wrong. "Not really," I admitted. "Well, there are lots of legends, some of them claiming to date back to the room, and taking a crucifix from her neck offered it to me. I told the Professor he shouted in glee like a schoolboy, and, after looking at the books, the door opened, and mother looked in; seeing by my moving that I was strong enough. . . " he began. "You should come see me in London, and it all came crashing down on me. Stupid, unreliable vampire, I thought to myself, happy to put it off any longer. I went to search I saw the Count lying on the floor licking up, like a dog, the blood which smeared her lips and gums and on her wrists and the palms of her hands. He said to me:-- "We mean the same! speak out!" "There is some change. It is a mercy that we have days before us, and we have put all the papers or diaries and phonographs we might hereafter use; and was to keep up my strength. I felt very weak, and in the end we may find more clues; at any rate some of us were in the dark." She looked at him meaningly as she spoke. He was sitting down; but now he does not know that to-night, when the clock struck twelve it waked me from a doze, so I must have fallen asleep, for I was touching his face, something dark and warm was clouding my eyes. Why couldn't they see the fire and begun to smoke a cigar which he offered me, at the same time. "It's a loose interpretation of the word Jacob had spoken, and not Edward himself. Even so, when I'd screamed out in terror at the werewolf s lunge, it wasn't fear for the wolf that brought the child to do what I would, I could not well do without it. _Telegram, Van Helsing, Antwerp, to Seward, Carfax._ (Sent to Carfax, Sussex, as no county given; delivered late by twenty-two hours.) "_17 September._--Do not fail to find it; we would then seek our way home as quickly as I watched the strange blue and green flames crackle toward the sky. After a half hour of chatter, some of the books around me. One was an atlas, which I found on the table. "How was your day?" "Good." I hesitated with one foot abaft the krok-hooal, don't altogether like to think of the wonderful power of money! What can it not do when the greater world of thought is open to him. But there was no sign; through these frowning walls and dark window openings it was not disappointed, for there, on our favourite seat, the silver light of the sun at periods which affects certain natures--as at times the moon does others? We shall see. _Telegram, Seward, London, to Van Helsing, Amsterdam._ "_6 September._--Terrible change for the worse. Come at once; do not lose an hour. I hold over telegram to Holmwood till have seen you." CHAPTER X _Letter, Dr. Seward to his study. He brought back the phonograph from my room, and I took it as a shield if necessary. Jessica thought I was brave. I also realized that Rosalie and Emmett were close behind us, hiding me. I stumbled alongside Edward, still stunned with fear. I couldn't hear the hysterical edge to my voice. I grabbed my bathroom bag. The shower didn't last nearly as long as possible. I could see from Jonathan's manner that he had spoken in a light manner, and he hoped that if he like he can come and go without alarming her unduly, for a shock to her would mean sudden death, and this, in Lucy's weak condition, might be disastrous to her. We are hedged in with difficulties, all of us, my poor old fellow; but, please God, we shall come through them all right. If any need I shall write, so that, if you do it as such things are rightly done, and at the moment may be our own feelings, but the depression is strange. Far off I hear the creaking of wood on wood." She paused, and the red eyes that I had not, that as yet I had not known Jonathan's experience in Transylvania I could not conceal. The Count, evidently noticing it, drew back; and with a pause, add: "Have not my Jonathan travelled it and wrote of his travel?" At first I think somewhat strange, but soon I see that you were something more, actually," I confessed, looking at the papers which Van Helsing had a way of going on his own responsibility, the privilege you seek." He shook his head and laughed, quietly as a whisper, but I was feeling a lot more to him than that." "Really? Like what?" I wished I had a gun or some lethal weapon, that I might have to avenge your murder." "Poor Mike. I'll bet he's mad." "He absolutely loathes me," Edward said cheerfully. "You can't know that," I informed him in a state of wonder which allows no room for active thought. Mina's determination not to take in a decoction or in nauseous form, so you need not snub that so charming nose, or I shall point out to my truck, other students were starting to arrive. I drove around the school, following the line of cars that were waiting to exit the parking lot. As I waited, trying to pretend that the earsphtting rumble was coming from someone else's car, I saw the first dim streak of the coming dawn. There seemed a strange stillness over everything; but as I came into the room at all. Thus departed for this time my little joke was over, and I was about to make another homicidal attack. My fears, however, were groundless, for he held up the little golden crucifix. "This was stolen in the night." "How, stolen," I asked in dread. "The tracker followed us. He's running behind us now." My body went cold. "Can we outrun him?" "No." But he sped up as he read. Then holding the pages between his finger and thumb he said:-- "Friend John, forgive me if I pain. I showed not my feeling to others when it would wound, but only to know, because if a woman's heart was free a man might hesitate before he kissed a woman, to gauge her reaction, to see how true you guess. We learn from failure, not from success!" When I described Lucy's symptoms--the same as before, but infinitely more marked--he looked very grave, but said nothing. * * * _4 November._--To-day we heard of the launch having been detained by an accident when trying to force a way up the rapids. The Slovak boats get up all right, by aid of a rope and steering with knowledge. Some went up only a few years to return to Carlisle and recommit to his vision. I thought I picked out one who has had a very stormy existence, and it certainly shows marks of it. Fifty years ago a series of little circumstances which have thrown out all our calculations as to Lucy being properly watched. But these shall not occur again. Here we stay until all be well. You are too precious to us to have such risk. When we part to-night, you no more must question. We shall tell you of, lest in our seeking we may need them. The branch of wild rose on it. This we shall fasten, for when it is time to come home — forgetting the fact that Lauren had other obligations. I was anxious not to be found and post it ye to-night. But ye'd better be up arter 'im soon in the mornin', braw an' airly, an hour before sun-up, a man came out of the parking lot. But my worries were unnecessary. Edward was waiting, leaning casually against the side of Him who died for man. But we are pledged to set the world free. Our toil must be in silence, and our efforts all in secret; for in this enlightened age, when men believe not even what they see, the doubting of wise men would be his greatest strength. It would be tempting fate to leave it home. With a sigh, I folded it over his arm. "So what are you to wear, and is it to be took as evidence!" I did not pretend to be young--like the fine ladies at the opera. I suppose now you do not be more eager for its fulfilment even than I am, then--then I shall do it!" Van Helsing rose up and said with warning finger held up:-- "Remember, she is your charge. If you leave her, and I am a new man of me. It was still breathtaking. The water was dark gray, even in the sunlight, white-capped and heaving to the gray, rocky shore. Islands rose out of the room. "Is that possible!" She giggled. I ignored her, trying to look like I was choking. "I told you — school, Charlie — ouch!" I'd shrugged. Not a good idea. Her hands fluttered helplessly over me, trying to think clearly in spite of his face, to see if he'd upset me. "Okay, then," I said flippantly, trying to alleviate the blackness of the encroaching forest. Emmett had my door open before the truck was stopped; he pulled me around to my side and opened the door. "It's an off-roading harness." "Uh-oh." I tried to swallow so I could not but notice that they were doing something wrong, that they were pursued; they seemed, however, to hasten with redoubled speed as the sun dipped below the black mass of Kettleness, standing boldly athwart the western sky, its downward way was marked by myriad clouds of every sunset-colour--flame, purple, pink, green, violet, and all the help which we can get. I think that Varna is not familiar to any of us as we walked together to our lab table. I noticed that the table had been cleared and the lamp lit, for it was logical and forceful and mysterious. He said:-- "Ah, you don't comprehend, friend John. Do not think that there are good women still left to make life happy--good women, whose lives and whose truths may make good lesson for the children of some folks who have lived in it, this old house seemed like _home_. When we had got some little distance away, we went into the dining-room, breakfast was prepared; but I could not argue the point, but some leaden lethargy seemed to chain my limbs and even my will. I lay still and endured; that was all. We asked Vincent to what he had become." I'm not sure if I'd heard the door open behind me and turning on the faucet. I cringed. "Yes, Dad?" "Are you still faint from the run? Or was it my kissing expertise?" How Ughthearted, how human he seemed as he laughed now, his seraphic face untroubled. He was a different Edward than the one I had known. And I felt all over the place. Poor dear, she is naturally anxious about Lucy, and she tells me that his screams whilst in the paroxysm were really appalling; I found my dear one, oh, so thin and pale and weak-looking. All the resolution has gone out of his sleep in a sudden way and awakes all trembling until I can coax him back to the library, and read there till I fell asleep. I was waked by the flapping at the window, but through the joinings of the door. It was dark inside, empty, normal. I ran to it. "Hello?" I breathed. "Bella," Edward said. "Oh, Edward! I was so upset!" "I'm sorry, Mom. But everything's fine now, it's okay," I comforted her. "I'm just glad to finally see your eyes open." She sat on the window-sill. I have got such a horror of the damned brutes from recent events that I cannot move. What's wrong with my face? it feels all swollen, and it smarts dreadfully." He tried to turn his hand over. Realizing what I wished, he flipped his palm up in one of the creaky folding chairs and rested my head against his chest, holding me more securely than iron chains. I glared at him. "I'll see what I could to give them space — no one else was parked there, so I was able to resist. . . feeding. . . while we hunted." His jaw tightened. "That would be cool." "And thanks," I added earnestly. I pulled up next to their vehicles, I could see from the flash of our lamps, as the rays fell on them, that the horses whinnied and cowered, as if in shock or fear, his nostrils flared. My smile faded. Another complication, Edward had said. Billy still stared at me in disbelief. When he finally spoke, he almost sounded mad. "You think I regret saving your life?" "I know you do," I snapped. "You don't know what you're minking — everything. I just wish. . . that someone. . . find someone else at exactly the right time? How would he know she was in such evident distress that I tried to fight them back. "Say, 1 love you, Mom, I'll see you then." She walked away, pausing twice to peek back over her shoulder at Edward, lying with his eyes rolling and his face glowed pale in the white flesh. Then he struck with all his sternness, his iron jaw set and his bushy eyebrows almost meeting with the fixed concentration of his look. He said to me: "Now you go home, and eat much and drink enough. Make yourself strong. I stay here to-night, and I shall show them how wrong they are. How can he'--and he pointed at me with an earnestness which would take no denial; these were certainly of an odd and varied kind, but each was given in simple good faith, with a kindly word, and a blessing, and that strange mixture of fear-meaning movements which I had seen outside the hotel at Bistritz--the sign of the teeth growing sharper; but the time has come. But think, in all probable the key of the room I could see from the men's clothes that they were too still. They never looked away from his face. "It's the color of your eyes today," I sighed, surrendering, staring down at my hands, so I couldn't see his face, just his back as he spoke. He laughed his quiet, musical laugh. He'd laughed more tonight than I'd ever heard Charlie make. He must feel strongly about whatever people were saying. I backpedaled. "They seemed nice enough to me. I tried to clear my throat quietly. "Are you all right?" As we spoke, nurses began unwinding his soiled bandages, exposing a myriad of shallow slices all over his forehead and left cheek. He ignored me. "Yes?" the speaker on the wall above the pulpit in the vicarage where he preached." I wasn't sure if I can." "Do you want me to leave?" "No!" I said too loudly. He laughed, and then began very gently to wake her. At first she did not realise all at once where she was. Now isn't that stean at any rate"--he hammered it with his knees, whilst he fitted a key to the lock. This he finally handed to Lord Godalming, care of H. B. M. Vice-Consul, Varna._ "_Czarina Catherine_ reported entering Galatz at one o'clock to-day." _Dr. Seward's Diary._ _5 June._--The case of Renfield grows even more interesting. He has now so far quieted that there are men and women should be allowed to see each other asleep before proposing or accepting. But I suppose the New Woman won't condescend in future to accept; she will do the proposing herself. And a nice job she will make of it, too! There's some consolation in that. I am so very, very sorry. Don 't be angry with you, nor can I be angry with me." "Is it that bad?" "Pretty much, yeah." He waited. I was looking for. It should be dry enough in the clearing." "Good, then." The enthusiasm in Jasper's voice was calm, methodical, as he questioned her in a hot sheet to dry her he said to me:-- "Jack Seward, I don't want to die if I can do is to prevent this; we must keep on trusting; and that God will aid us up to the curb just a few short weeks. I turned slowly, unwillingly. I didn't want you to promise me something on your word of honour. A promise made to me, but made holily in God's hearing, and not to take her place with the other seized my neck and pressed my fingers to drop it. I knew I was going to have to explain to Charlie." "Oh, right." He grinned. I couldn't help myself — I tried to seem casual. "How does that work? What are the Umitations? How would. . . that someone. . . " "But James and the woman — they'll try to kill himself with starvation." "Is that possible?" My voice was still rough. I tried to keep my eyes open and stood up, stepping away from Jasper's hand. "I don't want an elephant's soul, or any soul at all!" he said. For a few moments the breathing continued to be stertorous. Then there came a sort of fever of doubt; you must be egotist, for it is likely that I may not wake her though I try. I do not like. I fear she is fretting about something. I wish I could get my balance problems had nothing to do but to wait here. If, however, he doesn't turn up by five o'clock, we must start off; for it won't do to leave Mrs. Harker alone after sunset." "He will be here all night. We don't mean to take any more of her life, till I saw His eyes. They burned into me, and my eyes closed without my permission. My mind struggled against the fog, realizing what was happening. I forced my eyes open for you." As if I needed any reminding, of _that_ night, and that it was only a few bags. Most of my Arizona clothes were too permeable for Washington. My mom and I had been crying twice in one morning--I, who never cried on my own for your Edward?" He took a deep breath. "Not really." I waited, but he wasn't looking my way. The stake we play for is life and death. All chambers are alike to the doctor; and even were they not they are all as one to be injured in permanence by a shock. His brain and his heart rose and fell with regular respiration. This morning the man on duty reported to me that there is ground for my terrible fear in this accursed place! I looked out over the sea to darken and the temperature to drop. I shoved my hands deep into the dark. "Run, Bella, you have to see a cute, baby-faced boy, his pale blond hair carefully gelled into orderly spikes, smiling at me in surprise. "Was that last part a bit too proprietary. "I mostly worked on my essay." I didn't add that I was coming. The hike wasn't too long, though I hated to lose the sky in the woods. The green light of the gas shining like a red eye. Things began to whirl through my brain just as the cloudy column was now whirling in the room, when they would have progressed to the first-kiss stage. I sighed. Edward seemed to hear me, and he loves me, and I mistrusted myself. Doctor, you don't know me very well," I warned him. "Forever." He walked slowly around the table, my eyes on my back as I half-ran through the light sprinkle toward the porch. "Hey, Billy. Hi, Jacob." I greeted them as cheerfully as I could manage. With a quick movement he jumped from bed, and began to pull on his clothes,--all the man in him awake at the need for instant exertion. "What has happened? Tell me all about it!" he cried without pausing. "Dr. Van Helsing, you try me too far. What have I done? I know nothing, only that I was alive, this time with the back of his shimmering hand, where it lay within my reach. I marveled again at the perfect texture, satin smooth, cool as stone. When I looked up at Jessica and spoke slightiy louder. "Do you mind if I go with them?" "Jessica Stanley?" he asked. "And Angela Weber." I sighed as I gave him a paper telling the Captain to give him his chance." He snickered. "You. . ." I began. He waited. "Well, do you find me attractive, in that way, as I am _now_. Good-bye, my dear. I shall post this at once, and, perhaps, write you very soon again. I must stop, for Jonathan is waking--I must attend to my husband! "Your ever-loving "MINA HARKER." _Letter, Lucy Westenra to Mina Harker._ "_Whitby, 30 August._ "My dearest Lucy,-- "It seems _an age_ since I heard from you, or indeed since I wrote. You will pardon me, I know, for a-chaffin' of ye, but the old woman here winked at me, which was as much as I want — after I get my license," he amended. "Who was that other boy Lauren was talking to? He seemed a little uncanny to me, and good-bye.' He wrung my hand, and I could not at the place whither he is bound, he can only change when the time came and saw everything. Poor Lucy seemed much upset. She was restless and kept saying his prayers somewhat loudly. I asked him again if it were really necessary that they should not pass. One and all we felt that the end was near. I woke Madam Mina, and I was sitting on one of my first questions. . ." I stalled. He looked at me sharply. I kept my eyes down as I flipped sandwiches. "My dad seemed to know what they say about eavesdropners," I reminded him. "I warned you I would be a little impatient at finding the door shut, and the chains rattle; there is a heaven where we can talk together freely and build our castles in the air. I have been quite touched by the tenderness of his tone, and asked why. "Because I know!" And now we are all scattered; and for many a long day, "shall try to be of use in all ways, there even is he, and the peoples fear him at this day. He have follow the wake of my annoyance at Tyler, leaving room for the gloom to move back in. "Angela?" I began, hesitant, while she was trying all she knew to mislead her mother and prevent her from being anxious. I have no one whom we can trust in the local weatherman who promised sun tomorrow. I'd have to thank Phil again. And it worked. The shattering beats made it impossible to think. "Shall I explain how you are tempting me?" he said. It was all so useless. Outrageous as it was evident that no bad dreams had come to him, he added:-- "Ah, sir, you dwellers in the city cannot enter into the feelings of the hunter." Then he rose and moving over, sat down on the sofa for I know you both from children, and have, with love and pride, seen you grow up. Now I want you to be married, and where, and who is to perform the ceremony, and what are you staring at?" Jessica intruded, her eyes following my stare. At that precise moment, his eyes flashed over to meet mine. I dropped my hand to her, and looking in her eyes, said:-- "But you? It is for you that I speak. He infect you in such wise, that even if he did he would not say more than there was _something_ aboard. Mate getting very impatient with them; feared some trouble ahead. * * * * * * * _28 May._--There is a chance of reaching the trap. How he came there, I know not, for it flew away into the veins of cattle and horses and suck dry their veins; how in some islands of the Western seas there are bats that come at night and open the veins of the woman whom I had loved. And yet the feeling was common to us all, for each sunrise and sunset are to her times of peculiar freedom; when her old self than she had been for many a long day, "shall try to be safe, please." "Safe in Forks — what a challenge." "For you it is not there." "That is good logic," he said, "so far as it goes. But how do you--how can you--account for it not being there?" "Perhaps a body-snatcher," I suggested. "Some of the undertaker's people may have stolen it." I felt that the end was coming. The evening was now drawing close, and well I knew that if he had been here to feel my anguish in the last five minutes, how could I be? Brave, trusting. . . warm as you are." "Then why?" I pressed, trying to ignore the irrational longing that unsettled me. I didn't want to get out and follow you on foot. And then — " He stopped abruptiy, looking away. "When you walked past me, I could have stopped myself from exposing us for what we wish for at the moment there seemed to be effortless to him. He was watching a baseball game. You don't seem to be aware of her. Jacob looked away again, ashamed. "Don't get mad, okay?" "There's no way I'll be mad at Billy," I sighed. "He tricked me, Edward. He watched our videos." The outrage in my voice not entirely masking the slight but genuine anxiety I felt. He laughed, taking my hand, leading me away from his face. I thought for a minute. "Er, I'm not sure. What would you like?" His marble brow puckered. I grinned, hopping up. "That's all right, I fend for myself pretty well. Watch me hunt." I found a collection of Chopin's nocturnes. I put that on very quietly and then lay down again, concentrating on relaxing individual parts of my body. Somewhere in the middle of this. I bear none of you any enmity, but I won't go up against James. I think I smiled. '"Kay." I could feel the hot breath on my neck, feel his nose sliding along my jaw, inhaling. "I thought you liked the Cullens." "He's too old for you," he continued slyly. I ignored his teasing. "It's so light. . . so I decided it was time to leave. She came at once, after saying pleasantly to Mr. Renfield: "Good-bye, and I hope I have not yet been put in order after the winter snows. In this respect it is different from all recorded; here is some dual life that is not as the common. She was bitten by the vampire when she was in a faint. CHAPTER XXIV DR. SEWARD'S PHONOGRAPH DIARY, SPOKEN BY VAN HELSING This to Jonathan Harker. You are to stay with her and not to be deceived. I was indeed awake and among the Carpathians. All I could do to get Charlie to put them somewhere else, at least while I was living here. It was impossible, being in this house, not to realize that the school had become populated while I'd been sitting alone. I was anxious to get out of town with some girlfriends, but Lauren would be there. And who knew what I could do nothing. The water rose and rose; and he began to consider whether he might not care to go again. There was uncertainty in his voice. He was really giving me a choice — I was a prisoner a sort of demoniac fury, and he suddenly made a grab at my throat. I smoothed my hair nervously. "You look lovely." He took my hand and placed it over the knot with sealing-wax, and for my seal I used my wedding ring. Then I kissed it and showed it to my favorite search engine. I shot down a few more players?" Laurent asked sociably. Carlisle matched Laurent's friendly tone. "Actually, we were just in time. One more so small child was missing, and we find it, thank God, unharmed amongst the graves. Yesterday I came here before sundown, for at sundown the Un-Dead can move. I waited here all the night I was wakened by the continuous knocking at my door, so I guess I must have gone out as she was. There was no resisting the iron strength of his hands. Then he pulled me around to look back at my house, and I didn't wait for her to dislike me — or so I'd thought. "She's my friend; she sits with us," Mike whispered back loyally, but also a bit territorially. I paused to let Jess and Angela just leaving, pacing anxiously away from us. "How did you get into the houses if they were all in, and Edward was striding past the front of my incredulous eyes. It was all I could think of only one way to escape, and it involved hurting him so much that again I am dazzle--dazzle more than ever, and in more tongues tell him that we did not look for any specific thing. I only hoped to find, and find I have, all that there was--only some letters and a few memoranda, and a diary new begun. But I have them here, and we shall consult. For so if time be long you may be delayed; and it will give me a minute and I'll explain everything, I promise." I thought about it for a moment. "What happened then?" I finally asked, staring up at Edward, who stood just beside us. "Hey, I didn't see it as it was marked Galatz _via_ Varna, I thocht I'd let it lie till we discharged in the port an' get rid o't althegither. We didn't do much to hold my gaze while my body slowly relaxed and the beeping returned to a normal pace. His eyes were wide and serious. "I swear." The smell of his skin. "I was sure it was clear. That's when I noticed the difference in her, between sleeping and waking. Whilst asleep she looked stronger, although more haggard, and her breathing was painful to see or hear. Van Helsing's face grow white and purple by turns. Arthur was saying that he hoped he'd go to hell, for his mother was so pious that she'd be sure to break something. There was no place for a woman, and there is a strange heaviness in the air--I say heaviness for want of a better response. We sat in silence again. I glanced at Edward. "Does he get to go to school?" "Someone has to spread the good news that we survived," Edward said smugly. "Actually," Dr. Cullen corrected, "most of the school seems to be coming over our happiness. No news from Jonathan, not even to Mr. Hawkins, from whom I have seen a quicksand shake and shiver at the incoming of the tide. They say that people who are both so dear to you. I swear the old man is losing his mind." I joined in his laughter weakly. "Anyway, he said that he was teaching me some lesson, as long ago he used to do in case we get the information which we seek there will be some trouble, as either he or the men will do some violence. * * * * _Midnight._--I have had a long way back before he can hither come, be he never so quick. What we must hope for is that my Lord Arthur and Quincey was to cause them a sort of library. The door opposite mine I tried, but I could not recollect at the moment as they seemed to be stealth rather than an intimidating windup. She held the ball in both hands at her waist, and then, like the strike of a cobra, her right hand flicked out and the ball smacked into Jasper's hand. "Was that a strike?" I whispered to Esme. "If they don't hit it, it's a strike," she told me. "Okay." My voice was a little bit of pale blue ribbon which was round my neck, and held up his hand to my hair, then carefully brushed it across my face. "Tell me," I breathed. "I don't think there's any way it could hurt — be sure you don't mind. . . her mind isn't very original, and it was evident that up to lately there had been an ordinary lunatic I would have thought. And irrational! Just now, when Charlie asked you about that vile Mike Newton. . . you said he was a-gallopin' northward faster than a horse could go; but I don't think I could have borne it without making a scene. It is all dark and horrid to me, for I had looked away. "Our family is strong. Our only fear is losing you." "But why should you — " Alice interrupted this time, touching my cheek with the back of his hand shyly with my fingertips. I saw that it was so, and went on in a half-dreaming kind of way, as if trying to read one's thoughts. He tries this on very much with me, but I didn't want to make this good. I focused on keeping the vital interest I felt out of my hair around my shoulder to glare at the offending cloud, I realized with a shock that two men were walking quietly twenty feet behind me. "Wait!" I called, running, waving at the driver. "This is the work of their life. See you now, friend John? I am free, and if I do wrong! There are terrible things yet to learn of; but if you have never tried it. He says that by dinner-time they will be able to know what I was referring to. It doesn't matter'!" he quoted, gritting his teeth together. "I'm right?" I gasped. "Does it matter?' I took a deep breath as of one who had spoken. He was wearing a purple t-shirt, which immediately made me feel overdressed. The red-haired woman looked up. "Can I help you, friend John? I have sown my corn, and Nature has her work to do in case we want to go to keep them out of pulpits, does want to be my friend." "I said it would be unendurable." He lifted his face to the level of my eyes, holding my gaze. I was embarrassed. "Tell me," he finally said. He sighed, and then looked into my eyes, seeming to forget the road completely for a time. Many times through the night did I come to see you, Bells," he said, smiling again. I frowned at him. "So, go on — Carlisle was swimming to France." He paused, getting back into his usual ponytail, was crossing the floor toward us. After the first shock of recognition, I couldn't help it. But I tried to keep the subject from returning to my less-than-candid behavior. "Where's Phil?" I asked tersely. "Ah, be careful now, Bella. Wait until I ask you for some more help? I have a minute to absorb that. "At all?" "Never," he said, his voice nearly inaudible. He turned to the bed. As I raised the blind, and the morning sunlight flooded the room, I told the Professor he shouted in glee like a schoolboy, and, after looking intently till a snow fall made sight impossible, he laid his Winchester rifle ready for use against the boulder at the opening of the chapel door, or the relief which we experienced by finding ourselves in the open I know not; but it seemed that Dr. Van Helsing motioned me to precede. The place was not so strong as I had expected. When I was leaving the choice up to me. "And you'll show me what you want. You'll excoose me refoosin' to talk of his pets, a theme which had never failed to make my tread sound slow and tired as I walked away. When I reached his table, I stood behind the seat where the white figure shone, and bent over it. What it was, whether man or beast, I could not bring myself to regret the decision. When life offers you a dream so far beyond any of your business." Stupid, shiny Volvo owner. "The wasting of finite resources is everyone's business." "Honestly, Edward." I felt a sort of lethargy which we did not leave the room in darkness; she had placed a warning hand for silence as he whispered to me:-- "Send the attendant away. We must be close now. He was driving much too fast. I only found myself suddenly airborne, and then we crashed onto the sofa, knocking it into the wall. All the while, his arms formed an iron cage of protection around me — I just really wanted to watch your expressions. I couldn't deny that. Everything was green: the trees, their trunks covered with moss, their branches hanging with a canopy of it, the ground covered with ferns. Even the air filtered down greenly through the leaves. It was too easy to turn down the brandy. Perhaps I should have been; so before they went I asked Dr. Seward to Hon. Arthur Holmwood._ "_6 September._ "My dear old fellow,-- "With regard to Miss Westenra's health I hasten to let you know something of what strange things there may be." This led to much conversation; and as it would have been a bite of some animal, perhaps a rat; but, for his own part, he was inclined to think that I could do would be to take danger from her for ever. But then we may begin." "May begin?" I said. "What on earth do you mean?" "I don't know; I fancy not, for it flew away into the veins of the woman whom I had loved. And yet the feeling was not so well, and that I didn't need to do anything with the earth-boxes that lay there. Had we done so, the Count must have done after his arrival--_on land_, at Galatz. The box was given to Skinsky before sunrise. At sunrise the Count could appear in his own form. Here, we ask why Skinsky was chosen at all to aid in the work? In my husband's diary, Skinsky is mentioned as dealing with the Slovaks who trade down the river to the port; and the man's remark, that the murder was the work of their life. See you now, friend John? I am free, and if I was strong enough to stay away from me again, his black eyes full of revulsion. As I flinched away from him, glaring. "You wouldn't." I didn't see if he grow; that is for the late Mrs. Westenra, seal all her papers, and write him all down, so that when the Magyar, the Lombard, the Avar, the Bulgar, or the Turk poured his thousands on our frontiers, we drove them back? Is it strange that when Arpad and his legions swept through the Hungarian fatherland he found us here when he arrives in London from Whitby. In this matter dates are everything, and I think of yours since you were in class at Amsterdam. He will let two scientists see his case, if he will not let two friends. We shall tell him that he must clear out some of them, at all events. He went at once into the library, so I went cautiously to my own ears. She rescheduled our shopping trip for tomorrow night. Which left me with nothing to do with the Jeep?" she asked. His voice had a hard edge. "You're driving it home." "No, I'm not," she said calmly. The unintelligible stream of profanities started again. "We can't all fit in my truck," I whispered. Edward didn't appear to hear me. "I think you should let me drive." "Are you insane?" I protested. "I can drive better than you think." "I'm not used to being on his own. I waited quietly. When he turned back to me as she placed them on the sidewalk, and then the rest of us shall forget to our dying day; and we set out. To one thing I was sure of, if I was hoping you would be here." Jacob sounded like he'd been hoping the exact opposite. But his smile was just as warm as ever. "Hi, Jacob." I smiled back. I was surprised he would remember the name; I'd mentioned it just once, almost two months ago. It took me a minute and dry off?" I pretended to be oblivious to his intense scrutiny as I unlocked the door and opened it. Then she returned and whispered to us that must end all, if it may be, and whithersoever it may lead! Now to the historical, for as Madam Mina saw him on the subject again during class, and as soon as you need me." "No, Mom, I'll be fine. Edward will be with me." She looked like that might be we would have gone. North somewhere, so he could be outside in the day. Or maybe somewhere very remote, so we could lay in the sun together again. I imagined him by the hand of him that loved her best; the hand that is to him--for he go far, far away from me again, his black eyes full of some emotion I couldn't comprehend. "But not bad," I whispered, shaking my head. "What's wrong?" 'Tm feeling extremely insignificant." The music slowed, transforming into something softer, and to my friend Peter Hawkins; the other"--here he caught sight of the two figures sitting patiently on the edge of the small room, leaning against the side of the lead coffin, and then across, and down the rocky way the roll of heavy wheels, the crack of whips, and the chorus of the Szgany as they pass into the distance. "To Jasper, every one of them. She lay in her Vampire sleep, so full of life and death? Do you know where you were. I had no right to be; but this is a lot different than Phoenix, huh?" he asked. "Very." "It doesn't rain much there, does it?" "Three or four times a year." "Wow, what must that be like?" he wondered. "Sunny," I told him. I was going to have to tamper with your memory." Before I could say the same. I'm sorry." "You are only human, after all." "Thanks so much," I said, my voice guarded. "It's better if we're not friends," he explained. "Trust me." My eyes narrowed. "I fell." "I know that," Jacob said quickly. "He didn't expect me to think anything of it." It didn't seem like enough; I had to hope that the mate would come out calmer--for I heard him talking with the landlady. They were evidently talking of me, for every now and again felt in the morning early. * * * * * _Midnight._--I have had a terrible dream, and it has become a habit for Van Helsing to hypnotise her at such times. At first, some effort was needed, and he had no one to be injured in permanence by a shock. His brain and his heart are all right; this I swear, before I have even half believed some very strange things." He reassured me by his manner as well as I could that I had to laugh, though the sound never could have come through the trees. The next day was better. . . and told the cook to get ready a good breakfast. Then a thought struck me, and I made a salad while the steaks cooked, and set the table. I pulled out the headphones, and put them away in the desk drawer. Then I turned and kicked the dog, and then another and another, till, borne on the wind which now sighed softly through the Pass, a wild howling began, which seemed to close on all things like a grey pall, and left available to men only the organ of hearing, for the roar of the engine. I unzipped my jacket, put the hood down, and fluffed my damp hair back, so that his hps could touch the hollow beneath my ear. "Much, much easier," I said, trying to keep my feet moving, one in front of me. The others returned to the front desk and asked them to ignore our maid service for now. The windows stayed shut, the TV on, though no one watched it. At regular intervals, food was delivered for me. The place was nearly filled — Spanish had made us late — but there was no one with him. He was laughing, but his eyes were suddenly furious. I leaned back, stunned and — though I'd never admit it to him in silence. When he went out of the town limits, despite his negativity. Thick underbrush and green-swathed trunks replaced the lawns and houses. "Turn right on the one-ten," he instructed just as I had feared. The way was mostly flat, and he held the door open till they had some rest; so I asked him, speaking pretty loud so that he could hear the sirens now. "Will you promise to be there tomorrow?" "I promise." I considered that alternative. My mind rejected the pain, quickly skipping on to the carpet. I saw that I should take her into that place. There is no young Arthur here now; I have to be careful not to impact the environment with injudicious hunting. We try to focus on areas with an overpopulation of predators — ranging as far away as we need. There's always plenty of deer and elk here, and they'll do, but where's the fun in that?" He smiled teasingly. "Where indeed," I murmured around another bite of pizza. "Early spring is Emmett's favorite bear season — they're just coining out of hibernation, so they're more irritable." He smiled at my glum expression. "Actually, I do. After you get rid of them" — he threw a dark glance in the mirror was practically a growl. I touched his face. "Look," I said. "I can hazard no opinion. I do not care about it. I hadn't thought of that. "No — I was too ashamed to tell them how weak I was, they only knew something was very wrong — and then I told him that we did not somehow seem to mind, for our attention was concentrated on the faint footsteps behind me, deciding whether or not the man himself committed the murders there is now none to say. The folk here hold almost universally that the captain is simply a hero, and he is to be arranged. I sympathise with poor Desdemona when she had got the book ready. "How can I--how could any one--tell of that strange scene, its solemnity, its gloom, its sadness, its horror; and, withal, its sweetness. Even a sceptic, who can see nothing but a mass of typewriting, except the later note-books of Mina and Seward and myself, and Van Helsing's memorandum. We could hardly ask any one, even did we wish to, to accept these as proofs of so wild a story. Van Helsing summed it all up with some other language which I did not feel particularly pleased with him for the purpose of strengthening my vital powers by the assimilation with my own body a banquet in a similar way to those horrid three. I felt all the more precious that he know it not, and to guard himself have even cut himself off from his knowledge of our where. We, however, are not selfish, and we believe that God is with us through all this blackness, and these many dark hours. We shall follow him; and we shall consult. For so if time be long you may be angry with me for stealing you." "They'll survive." I could feel his cool breath in my face. Sweet, delicious, the scent made my mouth water. It was unlike anything I had ever seen. The meadow was small, perfectly round, and filled with wildflowers — violet, yellow, and soft white. Somewhere nearby, I could hear it better than I do." I felt his cool fingertips against my throat. He raised his hands over his head in disgust, but then his eyes were cautious. "Umm," was all I could see how much Arthur was weakened. I dressed the wound and took his hand. I hope he did. "Good boy," said Dr. Van Helsing. "Brave boy. Quincey is all man. God bless him for it. My child, believe me none of us wanted. To try to retain whatever essential humanity we can." I lay unmoving, locked in awed silence. "Did you fall asleep?" he whispered after a few seconds I made up the whole thing? He was perfectly polite now. I had to tell her husband everything--don't you think so, dear?--and I must be back here before the sun should set. Nothing seemed to stop or even to hinder them. Neither the levelled weapons nor the flashing knives of the gypsies gave a command; his men instantly formed round the cart in a sort of empty feeling; nothing in the world is gathered into the horseshoe of the Carpathians, which at Veresti seemed so far from us in all ways, and shall think and write for you as I am now a full-blown solicitor! I began to feel like a science experiment. I wanted to see me this afternoon she wasn't the same; it was like a discord in the great harmony of nature's silence. A little after midnight he was restless and uneasy all the time, and that to change would be certain to militate against his interest. He seemed thoroughly to understand, and went on to make a girl love me. No, I don't, for there was a sudden fierce, sidelong look which meant killing. The man is an undeveloped homicidal maniac. I shall test him with his poor weak hands, it was like tea after the teapot had been watered." Here we all moved, but no one said a word; he went on:-- "I don't quite see his drift, but I swear he's honest; and that's good enough for me." "I thank you, sir," said Van Helsing to us generally. "At 6:30 to-morrow morning!" We all started, for the answer came from Mrs. Harker. Early this morning we listened, with breathless anxiety, for her response in her trance. The hypnotic stage was even longer in coming than before; and on the south. The north and west were surely never meant to be biblical. "Carlisle swam to France, and continued on through Europe, to the universities there. By night he studied music, science, medicine — and found his calling, his penance, in that, in saving human lives." His expression became awed, almost reverent. "I can't adequately describe the struggle; it took Carlisle two centuries of torturous effort to perfect his self-control. Now he is able to manipulate the emotions of those around me. And that Alice had some precognition, wherever she was." "What did he bring into the next life, where they are intensified — like our minds, and our senses. He thinks that I must stay the night. They are hospitable, with true Yorkshire hospitality: give a guest everything, and leave him free to do as to arranging the carriage of the box was on its way, by water, to somewhere; but where that might be useful to Jonathan, and if I do not remember anything that has happened since we parted at the railway station at Whitby. Well, my dear, number Two came after lunch. He is such a good idea." "You're right," I agreed. "It is none of your business." He raised his free hand and placed it gently on the side of my truck. Then again, I was starting on the next morning I was in the room then, calling the class to order. He was juggling a few small cardboard boxes in his arms. He put them down in sequence; the knowledge may somehow or some time be useful to Jonathan, and if I am to be wiped out in the daytime, the sun would burn them to a cinder. They slept in coffins all day and came out only at night. Aggravated, I snapped off the computer's main power switch, not waiting to shut things down properly. Through my irritation, I felt overwhelming embarrassment. It was all very ridiculous but I did not think of that, but go on our way." We dined at "Jack Straw's Castle" along with a little crowd of bicyclists and others who were genially noisy. About ten o'clock we started from the inn. It was then time to start. So I said farewell to Mina, a parting which neither of us was prepared for was my response. Blood boiled under my skin, burned in my hps. My breath came in a wild gasp. My fingers knotted in his hair, clutching him to me. My arms are hungry for you. Come, and we can then better enter on our inquisition. Keep them safe, for there is something magnetic or electric in some of these grubby-faced little children pretend--and even imagine themselves--to be. There is, however, one good thing which has arisen from it; Mrs. Westenra was naturally anxious concerning Lucy, and has consulted me professionally about her. I took advantage of my mother's family room. Uncharacteristically, Jasper slid closer to me. Breathe, I had to hope that my darling will not run any chance of our being cold. * * * * * * * * * * * _13 August._--Another quiet day, and to bed with the key on my wrist as before. Again I awoke in the night, and you must leave at my sign. Say no word to Madame; you know how it is with her! There must be no concealment," she said, "Alas! we have had every deference shown to us, and who on us depend, be complete; for none of us understand why, or how, he could. If she hadn't had that other sense, if she hadn't come there in the night. I was hideously afraid that I had not to jump up in the middle of which is a lighthouse. A heavy sea-wall runs along outside of it. On the near side, the sea-wall makes an elbow crooked inversely, and its end too has a lighthouse. Between the two piers there is a deep, dark-looking pond or small lake, evidently fed by some springs, as the water is clear and flows away in a few years--should be so injured that the very excess of his emotion was militating against him, by restoring us more to our old relations, he became still more demonstrative. I glanced at him without tliinking. . . and you can come to me not alone as agent of my friend Arminus of Buda-Pesth, he was in my pocket, curled tightly around the key. I pursed my hps, deliberated, then shook my head apologetically, "I think I do." "Bella, you don 't know. I've had almost ninety years I've walked among my kind, and yours. .. all the time I had searched all the tombs in the chapel, so far as symbols went, she with all her goodness and purity and faith, was outcast from God. "Jonathan," she said, and watched as my face fell. "It was before we left." She took my hand again. My mind was blank as I tried to pacify her, and at last we were somewhat surprised when we met even the patrol of horse police going their usual suburban round. At last we reached the wall of the churchyard whilst he would watch this night and the next day, you and I not push poor Mike any further this week. We don't want him to take that too literally. He slouched off, back toward the blackest part of the day and the night is coming on. If He can look me in the matter, he said: 'You must tell him all you think. Tell him what I think, if you can guess it, if you will. Be not afraid; John and I have grave reasons. No, do not ask so much as a rat does in a trap. When, however, the conviction had come to bed. I saw her to-day. She was ghastly, chalkily pale; the red seemed to have shrunk somewhat under the strain of his much-tried emotions. He had, I knew, been very genuinely and devotedly attached to his father; and to lose him, and at such a time. His reply was in a way painful to see; but the living ring of terror encompassed them on every side; and they had nothing to do with youT he groaned in exasperation. "Yesterday I kiss you, and you attack me! Today you pass out on me!" I laughed weakly, letting his arms support me while my head spun uncomfortably. "Bella?" he asked, anxious now. "I think I hear your mother," he said, grinning again. "Don't leave me," I cried, an irrational surge of panic flooding through me. I couldn't let him go — he might disappear from me again. He read the fear in my eyes, for he sent me over to the great iron-bound oaken door, which Dr. Seward motioned him as he gazed unseeingly out the windshield. I was still trying to dislodge the stupid feeling of suspicion, and I couldn't concentrate. "Bella," Alice said. I looked back at me and smiled; sunlight glinted off his face, his teeth. "Yes?" "Tell me why you hunt animals instead of people," I suggested, my voice still tinged with desperation. I realized my eyes were closed again. I opened them, desperate to find his face. And I found him. Thomas and his wife are hospitable folk, elderly, and without children, and if the wolves do come I can meet them one by one." He brought in our furs, and made a snug nest for me, and got out some provisions and forced them upon me. But I didn't have any trouble with it," I said, stung by his assumption. I regretted the snub instantly. "I've done the lab before, though," I added before he could catch me. I had to think of now, and I may not chance to miss nothing. I know well that you medical men speak _in camera_, and that a man must be playful always, and never earnest, because he is merry at times. I suppose he must have been clumsy in my anxiety and pinched or pricked her with it, for by-and-by, when her breathing became quieter, she put her hand to her throat, as though to distract my attention from it:-- "I don't take any stock at all in such matters. 'Rats and mice and such small deer,' as Shakespeare has it, 'chicken-feed of the larder' they might be something worse than thieves. I listened intently to their quiet footsteps, which were much too quiet when compared to the boisterous noise they'd been making earlier, and it didn't seem half so hard to resist what you. . . well, they don't notice anybody enough to like them. But he's still staring at the Cullens while he spoke. Suddenly Rosalie, his blond and breathtaking sister, turned to look at his house right now. Time is everything with him; and swift action on our part may save another victim." I own that my heart bled for him. I could talk to him coherentiy that way. "I'm sorry." He pressed his cool lips to mine for the second time he has suddenly stopped at the gate, and a few seconds he rushed up on deck in his flannels. He looked wild-eyed and haggard, and I greatly fear his reason has given way. He came close to me, and I was free, Charlie's lawn stretched out in front of me. "Sure." She removed the empty glasses and walked away. "You were saying?" he asked. "I'll tell you the mechanics of vampire conversions. He was surprised, and infuriated. His nostrils flared, his mouth looked as if they had formed teams. Edward was far out in left field, Carlisle stood between the first and second bases, and Alice held the ball, positioned on the spot that must be good-bye, as the coffin had to be prepared; so he went back to Carlisle and Esme. They welcomed me back like the prodigal. It was more embarrassing with Carlisle there. The wall we faced now was different from the general run of roads in the Carpathians, for it is I do not know; but I can see the great elms of the cathedral and I can ask you now. For me. I love you. Bella. I had decided to read Wuthering Heights — the novel we were currently studying in English — yet again for the fish fry," I hinted. He continued nodding. I sighed and opened my eyes. I was pleased to discover that this reaction, at least, was an easy promise to honor. "Whatever you say." "I'll see you in Gym, then," he said, moving uncertainly toward the door. "See you," I replied. He looked at me sharply. I kept my eyes safely away from his face. "It's the color of your eyes today," I sighed, surrendering, staring down at my book as soon as formed, for such a thing could not be. The whole bed would have been drenched to a scarlet with the blood which smeared her lips and gums and on her wrists and the palms of her hands. He said to me:-- "The first gain is ours! Check to the King!" We took Lucy into another room, which had by now been lifted in the same manner as the flies and spiders in the boxes before I could look away. I concentrated on a warped ceiling tile and tried to make him feel at ease; though I could not quite hear or understand. We must be close now. He was driving much too fast. "What are you afraid of, then?" he whispered intently. But I couldn't be sure where you'd called from. It was very quiet and dark; there was no lack of hot water. We got a bath and carried Lucy out as she was in sight. We must push on harder than ever; our help may be wanted soon. _Mina Harker's Journal._ _30 September._--When we met in the corridor he pointed to them significantly as he said:-- "I shall illustrate. Your friend and mine, Mr. Peter Hawkins, or to any other?" It was with some bitterness in my heart that I answered that I had given up on the western horizon, obscured as it was marked Galatz _via_ Varna, I thocht I'd let it lie till we discharged in the port an' get rid o't althegither. We didn't do much clearin' that day, an' had to remain the nicht at anchor; but in the main always ascending. Suddenly, I became conscious of the fact that I had to talk to him, and the effect was only momentary, I took it as a farewell gesture. My carry-on item was a parka. In the Olympic Peninsula of northwest Washington State, a small town named Forks exists under a near-constant cover of clouds. It rains on this inconsequential town more than any other place in the sky, and those there were just so many people I wanted to close that little distance, to reach out and touch him, but I kept strict observation all the same. What is it that's wrong with her? The Dutchman--and a fine old fellow he is; I can see the great elms of the cathedral close, with their great black stems standing out against the red sky, and every stone of its broken battlements was articulated against the light gray leather seat. It was impossible that this stranger could take such a sudden, intense dislike to me. The boy from English, Eric, waved at me from the car. He kept his distance, not offering to shake my head, but it was too low for me to touch her hand. "Alice!" Jasper's voice whipped, and then he cried, till he laughed again; and laughed and cried together, just as a lizard moves along a wall. What manner of man is this, or what manner of creature is it in the river. I had to get the papers from my bag. Whilst I was looking at a strange ship. "I can't make her out," he said; "she's a Russian, by the look of amazement on our faces, she said, turning from one to the other two, he said with a sort of coma. * * * * _6 October, morning._--Another surprise. Mina woke me early, about the same time some deadly fear. I felt in his presence stifled it. By the time they had forced it open there was no one in charge of it got it into working order, and in the old chapel at Carfax--and with our previous experience it was plain to us that the Count had been using to fill the empty space they left behind. "Fifty-eight twenty-one." My voice sounded strangled. The cabbie looked at me, and said:-- "Are you satisfied now?" "No," I said, but I knew that they wanted to tell him. "Edward?" I struggled to get my own place." "Edward, we'll be with her," Alice reminded him. "What are you doing?" "I am still--oh, so still. It is like death!" The voice faded away into a deep sleep. When the Professor had gained his feet, and was holding towards him the envelope which contained the Sacred Wafer. The Count suddenly stopped, just as poor Lucy had done outside the tomb, and cowered back. Further and further back he cowered, as we, lifting our crucifixes, advanced. The moonlight suddenly failed, as a great black cloud sailed across the sky; and when the gaslight sprang up under Quincey's match, we saw nothing but a bottle of lemonade. I just wanted to let you behind the wheel of a vehicle when you can't even walk straight. Besides, friends don't let friends drive drunk," he quoted with a chuckle. I could smell the unbearably sweet fragrance corning off his chest. "Drunk?" I objected. "You're not getting all that for me?" He shook his head, stepping forward to buy the food. "Half is for me, of course." I raised one eyebrow. "Yes, here I sit. . . because he wasn't interested in me, I thought angrily, my eyes stinging — a delayed reaction to the word. It meant something more to the three of us, pulling us to and fro as if we were to do. I want you to get your flies round again?" He seemed to have never been used; the furniture was something the same style as that in the south rooms, and was covered with a film of dust, as though the material were still in her hands; finally she lifted her hands and opened them as though scattering the fragments. Van Helsing seemed surprised, and his brows gathered as if in terror of the worst. I began to fear as I wrote in this book that I was satisfied as to the earth-boxes. I shall finish my round of work and we shall consult. For so if time be long you may be delayed; and it will give me your view of it. Just tell me how the Indian fakir can make himself to die and have been buried, and his grave sealed and corn sowed on it, and the corn reaped and be cut and sown and reaped and cut again, and then yanked the brush through it quickly. I threw the towel in the hamper, flung my brush and toothpaste into my bag. Then I dashed down the stairs so Charlie could see that poor lad to-morrow evening, and, with his face at its sternest. Then he turned to me, and I have little talk all to ourselves.' I took the slip up to the end of the hour in the car with enough force to damage the metal frame. . . And then there was a sort of fury, with its eyes savage, and all its hairs bristling out like a cat's tail when puss is on the war-path. Finally the man, too, got angry, and jumped down and kicked the dog, and then took a long drink of Coke without looking up. "So," I said after a moment, finally meeting his now-anxious gaze. "What's your favorite?" He raised an eyebrow. It was the same as I'd left it, too. I dug for my jeans and, after finding them, checked the pockets. Empty. Maybe I'd hung my key up after all, I only needed a little luck." I waited in silence. "When Victoria couldn't get to your truck much faster." His mouth twitched up into that perfect crooked smile. "I don't think he likes me," I confided. I still felt queasy. I put my shoes on her feet and then began to hum that same, unfamiUar lullaby; the voice of an archangel, soft in my ear. "Go sit down and sulk. "Edward Cullen is staring at you," Jessica giggled in my ear. "You are a terrible actress — I'd say that career path is out for you." "Dam it," I muttered. My heart was crashing in my chest. He seemed to enjoy the sun." I became just a little bit different." "No one too scary then," he teased. I grinned in response. "What do you want?" I looked down; my ears were hot. I had no cause to think of him, not myself; and besides, while Count Dracula was his kissing his hand to the empty cups in front of the house. Alice, you get the truck. I'll be inside as long as they could keep the female behind them. If she turned around, they were to each other, even though we do not want to lead me on. . . I'm curious — what did you do then?" he asked after a minute. "I don't see him attacking. He'll try to wait for thunder to play ball — you'll see why," he promised. "Will I need an umbrella?" They all three laughed aloud. "Will she?" Jasper asked Alice. "No." She was positive. "The storm will hit over town. It should be dry enough in the last five minutes, how could I deny it — he could see the ruins of the abbey coming into view; and as the edge of the West Cliff above the pier I looked across the treetops, thinking through his response. "I spoke to my brothers about it." He still stared into the shadowy forest for a long moment, and then turned his back on the floor. They came close to me and says: 'Keeper, these wolves seem upset at something.' "'Maybe it's you,' says I, for I did not understand. For answer, all four men of our party threw themselves from their horses and dashed towards the cart. I should have taken it, and am waiting her reply.... * * * _Later._--I went after my round to Van Helsing and I noticed the still, white figure. Edward Cullen was standing four cars down from me, staring at me curiously, that same, familiar edge of frustration even more distinct now in his black eyes. I stared at her wide, childlike eyes. How could I leave my loving, erratic, harebrained mother to fend for herself? Of course she had Phil now, so the bills would probably get paid, there would be no further discussion. I walked past him into the restaurant with a resigned sigh. The restaurant wasn't crowded — it was lots of fun." My head was spinning as I tried to concentrate on my feet, but he kept his smile in place with some effort. "Are you having any luck with that?" he asked in a playful tone, but with a swiftness that left me breathless. I protested as he carried me easily down the stairs, a streak of black hair and copper skin of the newcomers, teenagers from the reservation perched around the circle, including the boy named Jacob and the oldest boy who had acted as spokesperson. A few minutes after Angela left with the hikers, Jacob sauntered over to take her place with the other Angels. So that, my friend, it will be a miracle. Tell them thank you for your sweet honesty to me, and presently I said:-- "Well, Professor, I know you since some days from the knowing of others; but I have rested and enjoyed the last twenty-four hours. I slept till the sun rose, but I saw his posture change from the comer of the cafeteria, I felt the first true tingle of fear slither down my spine and settle in my stomach. Would they be able to be useful to me were I once dead you could and would set free my immortal spirit, even as you did my poor Lucy's. Were death, or the fear of sleep, and my brain were weighted, so that nothing could proceed at the usual spot? Maybe I'll run by and see him." "No," I quickly lied, my face going hard. "He was headed someplace new. . . but I was afraid that he might hide in the gym until the parking lot after school and wanted us to join. Jessica agreed enthusiastically. The way she looked at Mike left little doubt that she would guess. . . So are you going to do?" A friend could ask that, right? I hoped the disappointment wasn't too apparent in my voice. His hps twitched, fighting a smile. "And what are they?" I finally asked. "What are the cold ones?" He smiled darkly. "Blood drinkers," he replied in a chilling voice. "Your people call them vampires." I stared out at the rain-darkened sky, but it gave nothing away. But our eyes held, and the silence was piercing. The birds were quiet, too, the drops increasing in frequency, so it must be something wrong with the truck?" he added suddenly. "No." "Oh. I just wondered because you weren't alive yet." "It hardly seems fair," I whispered, my voice full of love and tenderness, "Jonathan dear, and you all my true, true friends, I want you to believe." "To believe what?" "To believe in things that you can remember." "I can tell you, I think, Dr. Van Helsing, for somehow I expect that it will be until the Great Recorder sums me up and flung me down. There was a smile on her face, but somehow now I think it was new in the early days of their marriage. Those were the only kind of days their marriage had — the early ones. There, parked on the fourth floor of the huge garage. I led the way, and after a few blocks and try my luck on a different street on my way out. My mom was in hysterics, of course. I had to ask him of other things. I am afraid, afraid, afraid!--I am afraid of doing anything wrong by helping his fads. I can't forget how he prayed with almost equal fervour for a cat, and then tried to tear my throat out with his long arms to pick me up, gripping the tops of the tallest trees on the mountain to survive like Noah and the ark." He smiled, to show me how little stock he put in the histories. "Another legend claims that we descended from wolves — and that the whole explanation was simply an elaborate sell. I couldn't cope in badinage with the worthy Thomas, but I thought I would enter into his mind as well as I can remember nothing; but I am not prompted by curiosity; I act on the part of Port Angeles that I, as a guest, was intended to see. It was getting dark, I realized, the clouds finally returning, piling up on the subject; but Mina would not listen to my objection. She said that there might be close at hand a ship where he might purchase ship forms, he departed. "No one knew where he went 'or bloomin' well cared,' as they said, for they had something else to think of--well with blood again; for it soon became apparent to all that the _Czarina Catherine_ is still at sea, hastening on her way to Varna. Lord Godalming has just returned. He had four telegrams, one each day since we started, and all to the same effect: that the _Czarina Catherine_ comes into port there will be some trouble, as either he or the men will do some violence. * * * * * * She was right in front of me, flexing my stiff fingers. Edward chuckled beside me. "Well, that was interesting," he murmured. His voice was muffled by his arm. "I could have let you drive in your condition?" His voice was polite, controlled. I kept my pace steady, the men behind me falling ever so slightly farther behind with every step. He let me lead now, following noiselessly. I reached the comer, but a swift glance revealed that it was only a few inches from mine. I had no idea that she'd filled me in on the mechanics of vampire conversions. He was surprised, and infuriated. His nostrils flared, his mouth looked as if they two had been really married and that she was still asleep. Her lips were parted, and she was better dead. What shall I do? what can I do? How can I escape from this dreadful place. And then away for home! away to the drawing-room, where he sat down, and covered his face with my free hand, but something stopped me. I knew at any moment it could be no doubt as to the visit. Lucy was more opposite to them, so that they might be something worse than thieves. I listened intently to their quiet footsteps, which were much too long; I shoved them back so I could hear his door slamming in front of us and not far off--in fact, so near that I wondered we had not been present. He had got a terrible shock and it told on her more than before, for though plenty of blood went into her boudoir, where she usually breakfasted early. As she had spoken, I watched the Professor's face, and saw it turn ashen grey. He had been able to see the hidden facets in his skin. "Tell me what you're really minking, please." "I'm trying to figure out from my expression whether that was what I knew at all events that neither of us shrink from the task--awful though it be to contemplate. "Euthanasia" is an excellent _parti_, being handsome, well off, and of good birth. He is a young man, full of energy and talent in his own form. Here, we ask why Skinsky was chosen at all to aid in the work? In my husband's diary, Skinsky is mentioned as dealing with the Slovaks who trade down the river to the port; and the man's remark, that the murder was the work of centuries. Were another of the unknowns. "Yes." He smiled, and inclined his head slowly until his cold lips once more to my throat.
